Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 7 April 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statements by the President
I would like to start by making a few comments .
Today we are celebrating Europe Day .
I have spent most of the day in Florence which , as you know , is the home of the European University Institute and where the Festival of Europe is taking place .
A conference on the subject of the state of the European Union took place there too , and I met students from the European University Institute .
We are celebrating the 61st anniversary of Robert Schuman 's momentous declaration which paved the way for the creation of the European Union , and we have now achieved a great deal together .
Robert Schuman would have been proud of our accomplishments .
Our founding fathers knew that crises exist in order to be overcome and to help us build solid foundations for the future , so today , 9 May , remembering the past , we are working on the present and looking forward to the future with hope .
Secondly , the European Union is , today , a full participant in international affairs .
This was confirmed on 3 May by the United Nations General Assembly , which accepted the participation of the European Union in the work of the United Nations by an overwhelming majority .
Representatives of the European Union will be able to speak at the General Assembly and submit amendments agreed by the Member States of the EU .
This is a joint achievement of the Member States , the Commission and Council , but also of the European Parliament .
Our voice and actions must remain united .
Our joint action is particularly important , as we face the need to decide on further action in North Africa , where tensions are rising , as well as in Syria and Bahrain .
Item three : on 17 May , we will be observing the International Day Against Homophobia in the European Union .
The European Union is fighting discrimination on all fronts , in Europe as well as beyond .
Homophobia is not an exception .
Unfortunately , people all over the world are still being persecuted , tortured and even killed .
The obligation to protect the discriminated is embodied in our most important legal acts - in the Treaty and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We will keep to this obligation .
And finally , item number four : the European Parliament totally condemns the execution of one of the men sentenced to death by the army tribunal in the Gaza Strip for cooperation with Israel .
The European Union is always against the death penalty .
A return to carrying out executions undermines efforts for a lasting reconciliation in Palestine .
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity
Now for some administrative announcements .
Mr de Magistris has submitted two requests for the exercise of immunity and privileges in two court cases in which he is involved in Cosenza and Milan respectively .
Mr Uspaskich has submitted a request for the exercise of immunity and privileges in a court case in which he is currently involved in Vilnius .
Mr Tudor has submitted a request for the exercise of immunity and privileges .
Pursuant to Rule 6 ( 3 ) , these requests will be sent to the committee responsible , the Committee on Legal Affairs .

( IT ) Mr President , this is not a point of order ; I simply could not understand what you just said .
If I am right , Mr de Magistris has requested the defence of his immunity .
There must be some misunderstanding .
Since Mr de Magistris is the champion of the battle against immunity in my country , it was probably misinterpreted .
I think it unlikely that Mr de Magistris would have requested the defence of his immunity .
I must have misunderstood and I should therefore like some clarification on this matter .
As I said , it was a request to defend his immunity .
It will be decided by our committee as usual , pursuant to Rule 6 ( 3 ) .
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes

( ES ) Mr President , I am sure this is because of how recent it is , but you have not mentioned yesterday 's serious event in Cuba : it seems that a Cuban dissident , Juan Wilfredo Soto García , was murdered by the police in a public park in Santa Clara , Cuba .
Mr President , I believe , given Parliament 's sensitivity to the issue of human rights , that you should demand , at the very least , an independent investigation to shed light on the murder of this Cuban dissident .
Thank you for your remark .
If such an event has indeed taken place , we will adopt the same position as you have suggested .
Thank you for calling attention to this .
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at a meeting on Thursday , 5 May 2011 , pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
[ Wednesday ] :
There is an amendment which will shortly be presented by Mr Speroni .
Regarding the debate on foreign , security and defence policy , the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group has requested that the statement on the situation in Syria and Camp Ashraf by the High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission should include the Coptic Christian community in Egypt .
This is an amendment for Wednesday , for the morning session at 09 : 00 when Mrs Ashton will be present .
Mr Speroni will now present the amendment .
Thank you .

Mr President , we did not want to fundamentally change - or rather propose to fundamentally change - the order of business by adding or replacing an item ; we are simply asking to expand the topic on which the Vice-President will be reporting .
We are simply asking that Syria , Camp Ashraf and the matter of the Christian minority , and , above all , the Coptic minority , in Egypt , be added to the topic under discussion .
We are talking about a sensitive area and a topic that concerns the protection of minorities , which is why I ask my fellow Members to approve this proposal .
( FR ) Mr President , I fully support that request but I asked you for the floor in order to speak about Tuesday 's order of business .
I do not know whether you can give me the floor now or whether you wish to give it to me after the decision on Mr Speroni 's proposal .
We must now close our initial discussion on the point regarding Wednesday .

( IT ) Mr President , I am taking the floor in order to support Mr Speroni 's request , precisely because the situation dominated by clashes involving the Coptic community is an illustration of the risks associated with what is happening in Egypt .
I therefore call for this request to be supported , precisely because this is not a question of defending the Coptic community 's demonstration of its identity .
Rather , it is proof of the complex situation in Egypt .
I therefore believe that close monitoring by the European Parliament - especially through Commissioner Ashton 's statement - is absolutely necessary .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone has been shocked at what has happened in Egypt .
We have to be sensible , though .
Six points are going to be discussed with Baroness Ashton .
You have Syria , Ashraf , you have the Gualtieri report , the Albertini report , you have the problem of Europe as a global actor in the United Nations .
It really does not make sense .
I believe that we should ask the Committee on Foreign Affairs to discuss the situation in Egypt , including everything that has gone on between the minorities , to draft an own-initiative report , and then simply to hold a debate on Egypt with Baroness Ashton one month later .
We need a proper debate on what is happening in Egypt .
If you add a sixth point , one person will discuss it , and the other people will discuss something else .
You will not focus the debate on Egypt by discussing six points with Baroness Ashton .
Therefore , I understand your emotion , but to add something that will not be discussed on Wednesday morning anyway is not the solution .
( FR ) Mr President , I shall be brief : the Conference of Presidents has scheduled a vote on the possible lifting of my parliamentary immunity for tomorrow , Tuesday .
I do not wish to elaborate on the matter but , on the specific issue of the order of business , I would even so like to say that I am a little shocked - to put it mildly - that , as no debate has been scheduled , I cannot present my point of view to the House , even for two or three minutes .
I believe there is a case for presenting it , because it seems to me that the rapporteur has recycled the argument cited last time by Mrs Wallis , who concluded that my parliamentary immunity should be lifted , something that the Court of Justice condemned in very clear terms .
( The President cut off the speaker )
That is not a point of order .
( FR ) Mr President , I call for a debate , I call for two or three minutes ' speaking time .
That is an item on the order of business as far as I am aware .
Two or three minutes to defend an MEP 's honour : that is all that I am asking for .
Is it possible that , one day , this Parliament might respect the right of defence of one of its Members , and not just in Guatemala or Indonesia , but inside this Chamber ?

Mr Gollnisch , we are acting in accordance with Rule 7 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure , and it states there quite clearly how to proceed in such matters .
Any comments that you may have concerning the order of business must be submitted at least one hour before the session which we have just opened .
I repeat , this is in Rule 7 ( 8 ) of our Rules of Procedure .
( FR ) Mr President , the Conference of Presidents has scheduled a debate on Wednesday afternoon on the Italian and French Governments ' proposal to cast aside the Schengen agreements .
Please excuse me , it is actually scheduled for Tuesday afternoon , at 15 : 00 .
The Conference of Presidents decided that Mr Barroso should attend , and I should like to know from the information available whether he will be there .
Why is this very important to us ?
It is important because the first person to have adopted a position after the summit meeting between Mr Sarkozy and Mr Berlusconi was the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , whereas the Commissioners subsequently expressed a different view .
Given that it is actually the job of the Commission President to represent the Commission , we are anxious for Mr Barroso to be present at 15 : 00 on Tuesday afternoon .
I apologise for having mixed up Tuesday and Wednesday .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , thank you for your remarks .
I will check it .
I have no other information right now but I can check it for you .
A special gesture !
I declare the order of business for the week adopted .
European fisheries sector crisis due to rise in oil prices ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission on the crisis in the European fisheries sector arising from higher fuel prices , by João Ferreira and Patrick Le Hyaric , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left - B7-0306 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the European fisheries sector crisis due to the rise in oil prices , by Alain Cadec , Antonello Antinoro , Jim Higgins , Jarosław Leszek Wałęsa , Maria do Céu Patrão Neves , Werner Kuhn , Ioannis A. Tsoukalas , Crescenzio Rivellini , Rareş-Lucian Niculescu , Vito Bonsignore and Salvador Garriga Polledo , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - B7-0307 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the crisis in the European fisheries sector owing to higher oil prices , by Philippe de Villiers and Juozas Imbrasas , on behalf of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group - B7-0308 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the European fisheries sector crisis due to the rise in oil prices , by Britta Reimers , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - B7-0310 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on rising oil prices and support for fishers , by Josefa Andrés Barea , Kriton Arsenis , Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , Estelle Grelier , Iliana Malinova Iotova , Guido Milana , Ulrike Rodust , Antolín Sánchez Presedo and Catherine Trautmann , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament - B7-0311 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the crisis in the European fisheries sector due to the rise in oil prices , by Isabella Lövin , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - B7-0313 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , Parliament has only one seat : Strasbourg !
Since February 2011 , the price of oil has been steadily rising , and has recently exceeded the USD 100 mark .
Fishermen in every European coastal region are being hit hard by this oil price rise .
Indeed , fishing operating costs are soaring while the price of oil is rising .
Small-scale fishing , in particular , is severely affected .
Fishermen 's incomes are also dependent on the price of oil .
Professionals everywhere are telling me that they are concerned about the rise in oil prices .
I want us to act together to ensure that businesses can carry out their work despite the rise in operating costs .
With this question and the resolution that will follow , I call on the Member States to help fishing professionals , where necessary , to continue their work without distorting competition .
Hence , I am calling for the de minimis aid threshold to be increased from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 per firm .
This in no way means increasing Parliament 's budget or the European budget .
De minimis aid is aid that the Member States may grant to their businesses if they believe it will not distort competition .
I am calling for a little more flexibility for the Member States .
I am also calling for the Commission to analyse my request thoroughly and to understand the concerns of an entire sector , which must be preserved and developed .
The fishing community consists of men and women who need a decent income , whom we must support .
As a result , among other things , of the rise in imported fishery and aquaculture products on the European market , that sector is becoming increasingly fragile .
This is not just about economic profit .
It is in our interests to preserve this activity ; by doing so , we can develop our territory and coastal regions , ensure the European Union 's food security and safeguard jobs in the sector .
Mr President , the situation in the fisheries sector is very serious .
The fuel price is high , yet the price of fish is low , at a record low , in fact .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would draw your attention to the fishing of plaice .
Plaice fishing is important for my country , the Netherlands , but also for France , Belgium , England and Denmark .
A few years ago , plaice stocks were very low , as a result of which duty-free importation of other flatfish was permitted .
Cheap alternatives , less tasty too , but that is beside the point .
However , today we have enough plaice and yet , the duty-free importation of cheap flatfish is continuing .
As a result , fresh plaice is sold at far below the cost price or withdrawn from the market and auctioned off .
What a regrettable situation !
The duty-free importation of plaice fillets must stop , Mr President .
It is not only fishermen , but also the processing industry and the market who want that .
Why ?
The survival of fishermen is essential for traders , otherwise traders will not be able to offer plaice in their range in the future .
Ladies and gentlemen , we urgently need concrete measures .
This crisis demands that Europe take decisive action .
I call on you to vote for such action .

( DE ) ( The speaker directs a blue card question to Mr Cadec under Rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure ) Mr President , I have a question for Mr Cadec regarding his opening remarks , namely , with regard to the supposed single seat of the European Parliament .
Mr Cadec , you might perhaps have noticed that Parliament sometimes meets in Brussels too , that committees have their meetings in Brussels , or that administration is , to a certain extent , carried out in Luxembourg .
I merely wanted to make you aware of the fact that this situation is perhaps not quite as you imagine it to be .

Mr President , I just wanted to point out that the Treaties are clear on this issue : the seat of the European Parliament , of this Chamber in which we find ourselves today and throughout this week , is Strasbourg and only Strasbourg .
Of course , we work in Brussels .
I am there two weeks a month and like you , ladies and gentlemen , I have a good time there and I do a lot of work there .
However , the seat of Parliament - of this Chamber - is Strasbourg , and it must remain so .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for many companies in the European Union , the continual rise in fuel prices represents an additional burden .
European fishermen in particular are suffering as a result of this price rise because they cannot simply compensate for the additional costs by increasing their catch or by charging better prices .
The current political situation in North Africa and the Middle East has exacerbated the problem .
We therefore need to investigate the effects of the rise in fuel prices on the economy and employment in the EU .
Which sectors are particularly at risk and what sort of support could be provided without it distorting competition ?
We therefore call on the Commission to look into this .
It is important that we support the European fishing industry , among other things , in order not to increase our dependence on imports from third countries .
We are on the verge of reforming the common fisheries policy and therefore , we are under a particular obligation to be cautious and not to act prematurely with regard to this matter either .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , European fisheries are in a state of deep crisis , as my fellow Members have said .
Fishermen in all European seas complain about the painful drop in income , which may be severe enough to threaten their existence .
Yet , why is the income of our fishermen decreasing ?
As far as I can see , there are three reasons for this .
Firstly , there is the decline in fish stocks ; secondly , the general fall in prices in precisely the area where fish stocks are healthy and supply is too high ; and thirdly - and this is what we are concerned about today - operating costs are higher as a result of rising crude oil prices .
We politicians need to step in here .
We must do what we can to help .
I would stress that we can only do what we can .
The motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) promises more than we can deliver .
It demands an increase of 100 % in the de minimis aid ceiling from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 , which is to be used to fund fuel subsidies .
However , fuel subsidies are something that many Member States really cannot afford .
Therefore , most fishermen would not be helped by this at all .
Moreover , the other two problems would still remain : firstly , overfishing would actually increase and , secondly , it would not solve the problem of market prices .
Where financial support for fisheries is concerned , I can see a much greater problem .
The Member States do not use the resources of the European Fisheries Fund , although the European Union pays 50 % .
Something urgently needs to change in this regard in the interests of our fishermen .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us work together to produce a differentiated text by Thursday and jointly come up with a sensible , sustainable and less showy fisheries policy .

author . - Mr President , I would also like to thank my colleague , Mr Cadec , for giving us the opportunity to discuss very fundamental questions .
First of all , when it comes to the increase in oil prices , there are actually two sectors which are exempt from all energy taxes already and those are aviation and shipping - including fisheries .
So , compared to all other sectors in the European Union , fisheries are proportionally less affected by the rise in oil prices since they are already exempt from all the taxation .
This is already a hidden subsidy which has contributed to making it possible for European fisheries to go on fishing depleted fish stocks ; and the segments in the fisheries sector which have the highest consumption of fossil fuels are , in fact , the most destructive ones , such as beam trawlers and bottom trawlers .
So the de minimis has already been increased tenfold in 2008 ; this is also a large subsidiary to the sector .
Yet , at the same time , we are making lots of promises in the international arena to reduce CO2 emissions , in fact , by 80-95 % by 2050 ; we have also promised in Nagoya to eliminate environmentally harmful subsidies by 2020 ; in the WTO negotiation context , we are also focusing on how to eliminate the distortion of fishery subsidies .
I would think that , if the EU were to introduce an increased de minimis at this point in time , it is likely to undermine the EU leadership in the ongoing negotiation process , sending a signal round the world that other countries , too , could increase their fishery subsidies on fuel , which would lead to a vicious circle , increasing the pressure on the world 's fish stocks .
This is absolutely not what we need at this time : we need to turn around the trend , and this would send completely the wrong signal .
The market must take the increase in prices , and this is what the Commission must focus on in the CFP reform .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is aware of the current situation in the fishing sector .
Fuel prices are one reason for the problems we have , but they are not the only reason .
With reference to fuel prices , in order to address this situation , the Commission encourages the Member States to use fully the possibilities offered by the European Fisheries Fund .
We have not used those possibilities .
Up to now , the Member States have used less than 20 % of the overall allocation .
The high fuel prices could be best addressed by the use of those EFF measures that help to restructure the fishing fleet and add more value to fisheries products , thus improving prices .
It is likely that fuel prices will remain high in the coming years .
Of course , last week the prices fell , but nevertheless we can expect prices to remain high .
Therefore , the Commission is reflecting , in the framework of the reform of the common fisheries policy and the Financial Regulation , on how to further incentivise less fuel-intensive fishing .
The objective will be to encourage the adjustment of the sector and to increase its resilience to fuel prices .
However , such an approach needs to respect the principle that financial assistance may not , under any circumstances , increase fishing effort .
The best way to increase the resilience of the fisheries sector to fuel prices is to ensure that fishing levels are in line with maximum sustainable yield .
This will lead to more abundant fish stocks in the mid-term .
More fish mean more fishing opportunities , and that means higher revenues for the sector in general .
With reference to the increase of the de minimis threshold , this is not a new issue .
The Commission conducted a study , back in 2008 , analysing the effect of moving from the ceiling of EUR 30 000 to EUR 100 000 per beneficiary .
The study concluded that we could not accept this proposal , mainly for three reasons .
First , because such an increase would distort fishing operations towards more fuel-intensive technologies with greater negative impact on the marine environment .
Second , because larger and more fuel-intensive vessels would receive more funding than smaller and less fuel-intensive vessels .
I do not think that anybody here would like to encourage the bigger vessels to use more fuel .
The third reason is much more important , and some Members of Parliament have already mentioned it .
Many Member States are now forced to implement austerity measures .
Therefore , there would only be limited political support from Member States for a proposal that could lead to an increase in public expenditure .
Even if the de minimis threshold was increased , many Member States would not have the money to actually exploit this new opportunity to spend taxpayers ' money .
If only some Member States paid higher de minimis aid , this would distort competition and result in an uneven playing field for the fleets of different Member States .
This is the most important reason of all .
As to the reduction of the fuel tax exemption of the fishing industry raised by the Greens , we cannot accept that .
This issue cannot be tackled appropriately by EU legislation alone , but needs to be discussed at a global level .
Taxing fuel taken up in EU ports alone would lead to massive competitive distortions , to the detriment of EU fleets .
It would also harm EU ports , as many vessels would simply buy fuel outside the European Union .
That is why we urge the Member States to use our Funds .
Mr President , while we are waiting for proposed reforms of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) wishes to express its alarm , once again , at the economic state of the fisheries sector .
Until the proposal for its new common organisation of markets is tabled , the sector will continue to have almost no room for manoeuvre when setting prices .
The rules on imports , many of which originate with illegal fishing , remain unfair competition for EU production : new monitoring obligations require companies to mobilise more of their resources and the general crisis does not exactly encourage increased consumption of quality products .
To this must be added the upward trend in fuel prices , which is once again threatening companies that have already managed to survive the crisis of 2008 .
Far-reaching reforms of the CFP are envisaged and , in light of that , and in a context of ever decreasing structural aid , many companies could need liquidity to restructure or adapt themselves with a view to 2013 .
That is why we have tabled this oral question and this motion for a resolution before the House , given that this aid does not cost the EU budget anything and that , furthermore , the increase in aid being requested falls far short of the de minimis aid received by other sectors , such as transport or agriculture .
We do not want to see ourselves in a situation like that in 2008 , when we debated the package of measures adopted in extremis by Commissioner Borg .
I would also like to say something to you , Commissioner : it is true that there are some Member States that will and others that will not be able to give this aid , and that , according to you , this will create disparity .
However , greater disparity is created by the fact that some Member States do not cofinance the European Fisheries Fund , and that is something that is generally accepted .
What needs to be proposed is aid , and any Member States wishing to defend their sectors will also be able to defend them .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fishermen have told us that it is becoming harder for them to make a living from their work .
On top of the particularly painful situation for them of a reduction in fishing quotas and plans for exit from the fleet , there is now the added problem of soaring oil prices .
Although the price has fallen slightly , it continues to fluctuate , and for two years now , this situation has been affecting the daily lives of all our European fishermen , in particular , in the small-scale and coastal fishing sector .
This situation is extremely worrying , and we are anxious to show fishermen that we are fully behind them .
To do so , we call on the European Commission to raise the threshold of de minimis aid that can be granted to them to help them cope with this crisis .
This is simply a temporary measure , justified by an urgent situation .
The Commission already reacted to a similar phenomenon in 2007 , and in the face of this new peak , we wish to know what concrete measures - you have already given details of some of them - it intends to take .
We also feel it is crucial , as Mrs Fraga Estévez said , to verify that the Member States are using all of the funds currently set aside by the regulation .
At a time when the future common fisheries policy appears to be taking shape , I believe that our fishermen are not resistant to change ; quite the contrary .
Many of them told me that they were willing to make an effort , particularly in terms of preserving stocks .
This is , in fact , a collective responsibility .
In order to make that effort , they must not fall victim to factors outside their work over which they have absolutely no control .
A swift and effective response by you , Commissioner , on this point would send a signal that would also help strengthen what we know are historically fragile links between the Commission and the profession .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , today , the call is for subsidies for fishermen because of the increase in fuel prices , tomorrow , it will be farmers and , after that , lorry drivers and then airline operators , and then what about the owners of petrol stations ?
Their profits have gone down because fuel prices have gone up .
All of us are suffering because fuel prices have gone up .
Let us subsidise each other !
This is all nonsense .
It is American pork-barrel politics - special pleading for sectoral interests - brought into the European Parliament .
But what this debate does reveal is that , while everyone says we should have sustainable fishing policies , in practice , when it comes down to it , some people do not understand the word ' sustainability ' .
They do not actually know what it means .
The Commission has made it quite clear that they understand that the fishing industry is not economically viable in some respects , but that is not the result of extra fuel prices .
It is because of the unsustainable fishing practices of decades .
If the market is constrained , if fishermen are not able to directly pass on the costs of fish to their consumers , then that is something that we should investigate .
We should ensure that there is a direct link between the price of fish and the cost to consumers , but simply subsidising unsustainable practices is not the way to reduce the over-fishing which has caused the economic problems in the first place .
The Commissioner told Parliament 's committee one month ago , when Mr Cadec put this question to her , that she was not mindful to support subsidies to compensate for the extra cost of fuel .
She has repeated that today and I , for one , am delighted to hear her words .
Mr President , a common fisheries policy primarily based on the protection of the environment must allow the management and development of European fisheries to be maintained at a sustainable level .
Fishing is a particularly important part of the economy , but it should also be stressed that fishing has a cultural value , which is passed on from generation to generation .
Therefore , retaining this value should become an aim of the common fisheries policy .
From an economic point of view , it is essential for maintaining appropriate economic balance .
With regard to the drastic increase in fuel prices in Europe which has contributed to the collapse of the industry , the common fisheries policy should include a mechanism which would protect fishermen against an uncontrolled rise in prices in situations like these .
The European Union cannot allow another branch of the European maritime industry to migrate to the Far East , as in the case of shipbuilding and maritime transport .
We should note that Iceland - precisely because it has reservations concerning CFP - does not want to join the European Union .
In view of the above , we should speed up the reform of CFP considerably and act in order to protect the environment and ensure appropriate protection for fishermen .
Once again , the question arises whether we should introduce regionalisation for the fisheries industry , and exert more influence on CFP on the part of individual states , albeit in a balanced way .
Once again , it should be stressed that as a result of the crisis and economic instability , CFP will no longer function and will leave the fishermen to their fate .
Mr President , I have to say that I am fairly satisfied with Mrs Damanaki 's response on this issue of the consequences of rising oil prices for fishermen .
This is really about political consistency within the European Union , and about a serious structural trend , namely , the rise in the price of oil on account of its scarcity - and every one of us here knows that it is here to stay .
We therefore cannot provide a short-term , circumstantial solution by increasing subsidies in line with the fluctuations in oil prices .
This is a question of political logic .
The European Union must remain firm with regard to the principles and objectives it has set itself ; namely , combating global warming as a priority issue and reducing greenhouse gas emissions caused by fossil fuels .
It should therefore avoid sending the opposite signal and conducting a contradictory policy .
Ensuring the survival of a doomed energy system will not help fishermen ; they , too , will inevitably be doomed as a result of it .
Instead , they should be given the opportunity to redeploy their fisheries resources and to refocus their factors of production on energy-saving tools .
Subsidies should be channelled into these areas and not into short-term support determined by fluctuating oil prices .
( PL ) Mr President , today we are facing an issue which we have already tackled once , in 2008 .
At the time , the European Parliament expressed its solidarity with the fishermen and called on the Commission to draw up specific proposals with the intention of relieving the situation in regions which relied mostly on fishing .
Statistics clearly show that from 2003 , the cost of fishing in the European Union has increased more than threefold , and the sudden jump in fuel costs means that fishermen currently have to invest 40 % more of their funds so that fresh fish can reach their customers as quickly as possible .
The phenomenon of the sudden increase in fuel costs on world markets in the past few months is , without question , the most significant reason for the sudden deterioration in the situation .
The increase in fuel prices translates directly into a fall in fishermen 's profits , as the fishermen 's boats are driven by diesel engines .
So we have a vicious circle .
The fishermen , in trying to make up for the increase in fuel prices , are increasing the volume of their catches and sailing further to fishing grounds , which , in turn , means that their boats use more fuel .
This is why there is an urgent need for the European Commission to take further steps and to lift the de minimis aid ceiling , as my political group proposes , from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 per firm for the three-year period .
This is a sensible proposal which , in the current situation , would guarantee help for a sector wrestling with financial difficulties , and ensure social and economic development .
( ES ) Mr President , the fact that we have found time for this issue during this sitting , whose agenda is hardly short of matters to debate , gives an idea of the importance that this House attaches to the increase in oil prices and how it affects the fisheries sector .
The price per barrel has increased by 63 % since 2007 ; it is true that it has decreased today , but I do not think it has fallen enough to be sustainable .
We in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament are concerned by the crisis affecting the sector , and we are convinced that the solution involves an EU response including actions that Members and the governments of the various Member States had already been demanding .
We therefore call for this situation to be tackled using an effective and impartial mechanism enabling emergency measures at EU level .
In 2007 , de minimis measures were adopted .
We are not just asking you for de minimis measures , Commissioner Damanaki : we ask that you look into opening up the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , and that you allow it to become more flexible , because of the inability - which you have acknowledged - of some Member States to contribute money and solve the problem .
Let us hope that the Commission is able to explore new avenues , concrete proposals , so as to be able to use the EFF to help the hardest-hit sections of the fleet , which are small-scale and artisanal coastal fishers , and those operating from remote ports .
I would ask , Commissioner , that you study the possibility of introducing to the CFP , as you have proposed , new measures limiting fishing 's fuel dependence , which is excessive .
I would also ask you to commit to the necessary improvement in product sales .
All this must be viewed from the sustainability standpoint you have been talking about , as well as from the environmental and social standpoints , but must also be viewed from the other side , which is also important : that is , the human side , for fishers who are suffering enormously .
We believe that this is an emergency measure and we think that short-term flexibility measures could give a breathing space to a sector that has been hit quite hard .
( ES ) Mr President , there is an urgent need for concrete measures to reduce the impact that the increase in fuel prices is having on the fisheries sector .
This sector is working with increasingly scarce resources , receives increasingly low prices , and is faced with significant competition from third countries , which definitely distort the market .
I therefore support any necessary measures that do not incur any cost to European budgets .
However , given the sector 's dependence on fossil fuels , and with a view to the new reform , consideration should be given to efforts accompanied by an innovation policy , in addition to the efforts already made to date , so as to make the fishing fleet more energy efficient .
This is because supporting investigation in this area is also a commitment to profitability and an opportunity for sectors linked to the energy market , such as shipbuilding , to have a future and be able to reinvent themselves .
( RO ) Mr President , we must realise that high crude oil prices are here to stay and that we will never go back to the days of USD 30-40 per barrel .
The era of cheap crude oil has gone .
In 2011 , the minimum average price is still going to be USD 80-100 per barrel .
In these circumstances , the adverse impact on the economy is expected to continue .
New measures need to be implemented in the fisheries sector , bearing in mind , in particular , that European fishermen are facing strong global competition .
Fishing is the only viable economic activity in many regions and is important in terms of maintaining the number of jobs .
As I have indicated , we must expect oil prices to remain high and this economic climate to affect primarily those involved in small-scale fishing .
This context raises the following important question : what future do the common fisheries policy and European Fisheries Fund have ?
If this fund is not being used very much , it means that it needs to be reviewed and reformed .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there will indeed be no fisheries unless we stop the collapse in our fisheries , in our fish stocks .
However , it is also important for us to look at what is currently happening as regards our fishermen .
It is true that small-scale fishermen , coastal fishermen , are suffering greatly at the moment .
We are discussing extending a measure to which , in practice , they rarely have access .
As a result of the economic crisis , most Mediterranean countries will be unable to use de minimis aid .
This is a fact .
On the other hand , we need to see how we can use the European Fisheries Fund to support and help the countries which are in the throes of serious economic crisis to overcome these problems , so that they can help their fishermen .
I personally am in favour of extending de minimis aid on certain conditions : we must focus on small-scale fishermen , on small-scale and coastal fisheries ; we must focus on fishermen who apply proper , sustainable fishing practices ; and finally , we must focus on ensuring that financing does not result in an increase in fishing effort and these measures do not put the environmental and social viability of European fisheries at risk .
We must also focus on ensuring that European fisheries are not discouraged from becoming more efficient .
I agree with you Commissioner ; we must see how we can make greater use of the European Fisheries Fund and , in particular , how we can help countries which no longer have the funds to make their own contribution make a more active contribution .
( BG ) Mr President , we laid down a number of conditions and demands for ensuring sustainable , responsible fishing in the new common fisheries policy .
At the same time , fishermen are dependent on the vagaries of the weather and unfair competition .
During recent years , they have also been faced with another huge problem - ever-rising oil prices .
All these factors have made it almost impossible to pursue this form of employment .
The de minimis principle is intended to apply until 2013 .
It is time to review it , if we are really thinking about the prospects ahead for the sector .
Fuel prices have trebled , which has naturally raised the question whether EU legislation is adequate and suitable for the economic reality and meets European fishermen 's needs .
In this regard , I am waiting for the Commission to review the current applicable ceiling of EUR 30 000 and to increase its amount significantly .
However , there is also another issue at stake .
The Commission must also abandon its pure control functions relating to the granting of State aid and actively encourage Member States to use it .
Why is this important ?
Some countries in the European Union prefer not to mention this facility because it means an additional burden on their domestic budgets .
On the other hand , when they exert pressure on the fisheries sector , they use Brussels to justify themselves .
Just a cursory analysis indicates that Bulgaria 's fishermen do not even know that such a facility and regulation exist .
Organisations from the sector have made a number of requests for State aid to be granted in support of the sector , but they are completely unaware of the de minimis regulation .
States are concerned about granting this facility now when the blow from high oil prices needs to be softened , which raises the question not only about high prices , but also about the sector 's survival in general .
On the other hand , there is also the problem with the onerous procedures involved with using European funds , including under the de minimis regulation .
This is why I want to add my question to those raised by my fellow Members , and I thank Mr Cadec for initiating this debate today : how will the European Commission encourage Member States to use the facilities under the de minimis regulation ?
What measures is the Commission thinking of taking to achieve a balance between control over the use of the funds and the accessibility of these funds to European fishermen ?
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , rising oil prices is a structural trend resulting from production limits coming up against increasing global demand .
Its volatility in recent years has hit hard and made it difficult to adjust gradually .
We therefore need a response to put a stop to cost increases in the area of fisheries , which are often sudden , and to the deterioration of the sector 's already complicated situation .
When the regulation introducing de minimis aid was adopted in 2007 , it was thought that it would not affect trade or distort competition .
There is a need to evaluate these aspects and to move toward a more ambitious solution , created with the Marine Strategy Framework Directive and the Europe 2020 strategy in mind , and as part of the process of reforming the common fisheries policy .
I believe that a coherent response should increase the sector 's capacity for structural adjustment and , at the same time , help its most vulnerable members , particularly small and medium-sized producers .
Relieving the sector 's situation in the short term , with measures like that proposed by the Commissioner of mobilising and encouraging the mobilisation of the European Fisheries Fund , seems positive to me , and I believe it should be compatible with other measures and long-term action toward greater stability .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , EU fishermen are , as we know , confronted with three major problems : firstly , the very complex , unpopular quota system has forced them to adopt very restrictive practices .
Secondly , the lack of training opportunities and the profession 's perceived loss of prestige are causing significant recruitment problems .
Thirdly , and this is the issue we are discussing today , the rise in oil prices is making operating conditions in this crisis-hit sector even more difficult .
Between 2008 and 2010 , French fishermen , for example , lost EUR 100-200 in income per week as a result of fluctuating oil prices , even though their turnover remained the same .
As an elected representative from a port town , I strongly support my fellow Members in demanding that the Commission authorise an increase in the de minimis aid ceilings .
This measure would relieve the pressure on fishermen , thereby enabling them to make a decent living from their work .
However , contrary to what has also been said , it would not affect the replenishment of stocks .
The future reform of the common fisheries policy will have to seek the support of fishermen . To show them today , on Europe Day in particular , that the European Union is alert to their needs would already be a good start , Commissioner .
Mr President , Commissioner , the significant rises in fuel prices have seriously exacerbated the crisis faced by the fisheries sector , not least its economic viability , and the already scant incomes of those working in the sector have been significantly reduced .
The current sales dynamic does not permit fluctuations in the cost of factors of production , including fuel , to impact on fish prices , and current import policy , inter alia , contributes to this .
Average first-sale prices have stagnated or declined over several years , without this being reflected in reduced prices for end consumers .
The current common organisation of the market ( COM ) for fisheries products has not contributed sufficiently to improving first-sale prices , nor towards better distribution of added value across the sector 's value chain .
The economic situation of a large number of companies has deteriorated in recent years , leading to many of them going out of business , with a real risk that thousands of fishing businesses will go under and that thousands of jobs will be lost because of the rise in fuel prices .
The coastal and small-scale fishing sectors are particularly vulnerable , and represent more than 90 % of the fleet in some Member States , such as Portugal .
Under these circumstances , the Commission 's attitude of inertia and its refusal to take the necessary measures - a stance you have confirmed here today , Commissioner - is absolutely disgraceful .
The Commission can only think of one solution for the problems facing the fisheries sector : indiscriminately cutting the number of ships , which amounts to curing the illness by killing the patient .
It is important to say that when such cuts were made in the past , without taking into account fleets ' particularities , the state of fish stocks in each case and each country 's consumption needs , they did not solve any of the problems with which the sector is now faced .
It merely caused EU-level concentration of ownership and activity in the sector .
Emergency measures therefore need to be adopted that give an immediate and suitable response to the sector 's socio-economic needs , such as the creation of a guarantee fund , paid for at Union level , that ensures the stability of fuel prices and the use of all financial possibilities and margins of the EU budget to finance extraordinary support measures for the sector .
However , taking into account the structural trend of oil price increases and , on the other hand , the demands of environmental sustainability , there is also a need for measures ensuring the medium- and long-term viability of the sector .
Mechanisms are needed to improve first-sale prices , and to promote fair and appropriate distribution of added value across the sector 's value chain .
The European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) needs to effectively and substantially support the renewal and modernisation of fishing fleets , not least by making the different types of fishing more selective , and by replacing engines for reasons of safety , of environmental protection and of fuel efficiency .
As well as any tax measures that could be adopted at Member State level , EU-level solutions are needed so as not to exacerbate the inequalities that already exist today between Member States and which are increasing because of the serious social and economic crisis , which is hitting the most vulnerable economies particularly hard .
( ES ) Mr President , the best thing about asking a question is that you get an answer , even if , in this case , it could be considered disappointing in some ways .
The fisheries sector is clearly in crisis : fishers ' incomes are lower every day , making it difficult to continue working in this field in many cases .
We are not talking about stealth subsidies or unsustainable practices : we are talking about problems that require our full support .
We suggest it time and again , and reiterating a fair demand , as Mr Cadec has done , cannot be reproached : he is being consistent .
Nobody has suggested increasing fishing efforts .
We do not understand why measures that are immediately relevant to exceptional situations have to be rejected .
We are just suggesting that the Commission not turn its back on a sector that urgently needs aid , and this aid can , today , be an increase in de minimis aid .
( PT ) I also want to add my voice to all those here who have expressed concerns with fishers ' low incomes , exacerbated by the historic high in fuel prices , particularly over the last few months .
As has rightly been mentioned here , fuel costs have a very acute impact on the survival of our small and medium-sized shipping companies , seriously exacerbating already fragile incomes from fishing , in particular .
Spiralling fuel prices are also having profoundly negative effects on us : reduced numbers of voyages ; penury-level incomes for fishers , exacerbated by low first-sale prices ; increased imports to Europe of shellfish and seafood products from third countries ; and people ceasing to work in the sector because of the resulting financial difficulties , leading to further job losses .
In order to prevent this crisis becoming any worse , therefore , we need to take action regarding the fisheries sector 's problems ; swift and far-reaching action .
The Commission should , therefore , respond positively , with short- and long-term measures , to tackle the adverse conditions faced by the sector and the serious losses in income being experienced by our fishers .
Mr President , let us be clear : there is an urgent need for the European fishing fleets to restructure so as to move away from energy-intensive , environmentally destructive fishing vessels and gear and to adopt more benign practices that require less energy and are more sustainable in the long-term : environmentally , socially and economically .
This is why I think that granting more public money to the fisheries sector in response to increased fuel prices would send the wrong signal during the reform of the common fisheries policy and would provide an incentive for vessel owners to use more powerful and more fuel-consuming engines .
This is why I think it is a huge mistake .
It has already been explained that there is no conjunctural or structural problem , and - let us be clear on this point too - current figures show that 70 % of European fish stocks are overfished , so any measure we can take to reduce this overfishing would be a good measure .
Any measure that has the opposite effect would be an extremely bad measure to take .
( FR ) Mr President , I have just heard two of my fellow Members address issues to do with the problem of sustainability and with the fact that we need to subsidise some professions because they cannot earn enough to survive .
Yet we must do the exact opposite .
Fishermen are asking for only one thing : to be able to make a living from their work and to be able to do their job .
Therefore , if oil is a periodic problem now , it will be so in the future too .
We need to invest in research into cheaper engines that consume less oil .
The reform under way today , though , involves destroying all the small fishermen , all those who consume less oil , so as to make the richest even richer .
So true is this that , reform after reform , we are seeing a steady fall in the price of fish , even though , in the fishmonger 's , it has never been so dear , with some types of fish actually being out of the price range of consumers .
The important thing is to reform the quota system , but also to reform and examine practices within the profession that mean that small operators are endlessly suffering while large operators are becoming ever richer !
Mr President , the rise in fuel prices has created yet another problem for fishermen but it is only the latest problem , not the first .
For the British fishing fleet , the biggest problem is membership of the EU .
The UK provides the EU with 70 % of its fishing but is allowed only 13 % of its quotas .
Would it not be fair for the UK to receive a more proportionate share ?
In particular , the weight of cod landed in Britain has fallen from 300 000 tonnes , before joining what was then the EEC , to just 7 000 tonnes today .
British fishermen are facing further losses in the number of days at sea and are slowly being driven out of business .
In the long term , British fishermen want withdrawal from the EU ; in the short term , they demand fair treatment under the common fisheries policy .
British fishermen , as representatives of the host country , must have an increase in the number of days at sea .
We have heard of unsustainable fishing , but British waters are not being overfished by British fleets ; the problem is that British waters have been thrown open to all .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I can say in replying to the Members that I can understand all your concerns .
I share your concerns about the poor income of our fishermen , especially of the owners of small vessels in coastal regions .
But is this problem caused by the increase in fuel prices ?
Are you sure about that ?
We have discussed this problem again and again and we recognised that we had this problem even before prices were raised .
Of course I can understand that the increase in fuel prices could worsen the problem , but the main reason for the problem has always been overfishing - the fishing over the set limits which cannot leave stocks in a healthy state .
We have discussed it and this is the main problem we have to solve through our CFP reform .
Of course , now we are discussing fuel prices .
This is a problem and we must discuss how we can face it .
The only way to face this problem on a permanent basis is to improve the resilience of our sector to the increase in fuel prices .
This is the only way , because we cannot be sure about the evolution of fuel prices .
Let me give you an example of what could happen : in Belgium , they improved the engines in their fleet after the last crisis and now they have reduced spending on fuel in their fleets by 20 percent .
So this is the way to go and this is what we are trying to do .
Nevertheless , referring to your proposals , there is a proposal to the Commission to increase the de minimis ceiling .
Let us look at this problem .
What is this ceiling ?
This is the ceiling of the aid that Member States can give to their sector .
If the Commission now increases this ceiling , it means that only the Member States with a healthy budget can give this .
So this would result in creating an uneven playing field in our sector , favouring the richest countries .
Let me put it clearly so that we understand the situation .
Also , if we increase the ceiling , only the bigger vessels will gain any advantage from it .
I am surprised that some Members of Parliament - who I would not have expected to say this - are asking me to increase this ceiling .
The Member States can give their own State aid .
The richer Member States can already give it now .
Regarding the funds , let me explain .
The Member States use only 20 % of our funding .
Some Members of Parliament say to me that our funding is the problem because they cannot use it in the way they want ; but we have flexibility ; the Member States can reallocate their funding - every Member State can do this .
Only Italy has asked us for a reallocation and we approved it .
So why do you not try to persuade the Member States - the governments of your countries - to use the funds properly ?
If we really want to help , and if there is a problem with absorption of the funding , I am here to facilitate it for everybody , but until now , no such effort has been made .
To answer the questions in a very direct way : yes , the funding is there ; yes , the Member States can use it ; and , yes , the Member States can give from their own resources to this de minimis ceiling .
So if I change the situation , the only result it will have is to distort fair competition between the Member States and between the small and bigger vessels .
We have to understand this .
Of course there is a problem in general and , referring to our reform , we can discuss what we can do to help our small-scale fisheries , in particular .
We can also discuss every other proposal , but this proposal to increase the de minimis ceiling is one that cannot help .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon on Thursday , 12 May 2011 .
European fishers , and especially those who live in the Member States facing the greatest financial difficulties , like Portugal , are in a difficult economic situation which has been exacerbated by the rise in fuel prices .
In order to tackle this situation , the Commission needs to adopt emergency measures to help fishers .
To this end , the Commission should allow the subsidies that the Member States can award fishers to be increased temporarily , for three years , from EUR 30 000 to 60 000 .
Further to this , the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) should award grants to fishers , in particular , in order to make fishing techniques more selective and to replace engines , for reasons of safety , of environmental protection and / or of fuel efficiency .
These measures should pay particular attention to small-scale and coastal fishing .
Finally , it is crucial that there be regulation mechanisms to improve first-sale prices , and to promote the fair and appropriate distribution of added value along the fisheries sector value chain , in a way that acknowledges the prices paid to producers .
, in writing . - The current high oil prices have had a severe impact on operating costs of fishermen , even forcing some to stop work .
Following the adoption of a motion this week , I am delighted that the Parliament calls on the Commission to introduce emergency measures , including raising the current ceiling for State aid from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 per company for a transitional period of three years .
Radio spectrum policy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Gunnar Hökmark , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on radio spectrum policy - C7-0270 / 2010 - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this report is about making Europe number one , so it is quite appropriate that we are having this discussion here tonight .
In 1950 , when Schuman proposed the founding of this Union , it was about coal and steel ; today , it is about information technology and knowledge that will be crucial for the future of Europe .
I am happy to say that the report we are presenting here today has emerged from extremely good cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs , Ms Trautmann , Mr Rohde , Mr Chichester and Mr Lamberts , who have supported the proposal .

I am very grateful for this because we are discussing today a proposal that can enable Europe to recover the lead in mobile telephony , mobile Internet and modern information technology .
For me , the discussion about the various proposals in this report is about the choice of whether Europe is to be number one or number three .
For me , the choice is simple .
Sometimes , when we talk about the world 's biggest economies , we talk about the US and China , all of us forgetting that the European Union is the biggest economy , although we do not have the biggest markets .
It is up to us today to discuss whether we are going to take the steps that can make a change .
If we are to do so , then , in order to secure the lead in area after area with regard to telecoms and the development of broadband , I want Europe to have the best broadband capacity and the highest speeds , because then we will be home to the development of all the new services that will be crucial to the modern economy and to our competitiveness .
I want Europe to be home to the next generation of Googles , Yahoos , Apples and all other companies that are manifestations of both competitiveness and innovation .
We can be that , but it is also possible that other economies like America , China , or India will take the lead , so we have a choice to make .
In this report , I have proposed that we stick to the date of 2013 with regard to the 800 MHz band .
In addition , I have proposed that we be more ambitious and say that the European Union should free up 1 200 MHz in the 1.5 GHz band and the 2.3 GHz band , and that we should also start the discussion about the 700 MHz band - because if we do not start it now , we will not have the opportunity to take decisions in the future - and we should use the 5 GHz band for common licence-free use for all short-distance mobile Internet communications .
Here we have the proposal .
I would like the strongest possible support from Parliament because then , we can discuss this with the Member States and raise with them the issue of whether they all want to be number one or whether they are happy to be number three .
I think that choice is simple and I am looking forward to this debate and to the vote on Wednesday .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , this is a clear wake-up call and I think that this is really the language that Europe needs .
I must say a word of thanks from my side , in particular , to the rapporteur , Mr Hökmark , for the hard work that he has done on the first radio spectrum policy programme .
This is about information and technology and it is about making up your mind what position Europe should take : the far East , the far West , in between , there are a couple of important players in this game , but Europe can indeed be the number one .
The programme is essential for a digital Europe and for the European economy and for our society as a whole .
It is quite clear from this report that Parliament shares the Commission 's view on the importance of a coordinated and effective spectrum policy to meet broadband targets .
And indeed it is vital to maintain and improve Europe 's economic and competitive position and to maximise its social and cultural impact by enabling innovative services for the benefit of citizens .
And I would like to add the term ' cultural ' impact , as this is quite important .
If we are talking about the Internet , it is one of the main instruments to give more opportunities to the members of Europe 's community to have the inside knowledge and inside view of cultural impact .
What was rightly mentioned is that this is a moment of choice .
It is not any more a question of nice words , but now is the moment of truth and now we have to take our responsibilities .
You cannot get a number one position , which is indeed the leader 's role , if you are not taking the choices that need to be taken .
Talking about the cultural aspects , it is that cultural element that I want to emphasise first because I know that this has been a significant preoccupation of Members of your Parliament .
By the way , I see a lot of synergies between the use of spectrum for the distribution of content and culture , especially talking about audiovisual media content and for wireless broadband .
Digital television and wireless broadband can develop successfully in parallel and we should not forget that broadband Internet access also offers high cultural and social value .
In addition , wireless is essential in areas currently deprived of such access .
The proposal not only protects the existence , but also ensures the future development , of those valuable cultural and economic services which , by the way , produce rich media content and feed future data highways with attractive cultural offerings .
Of course , remaining obstacles such as interference on air or on cable TV will have to be solved ; there is no doubt about that .
We are all aware that broadcasting knows no borders .
European Union policies will need appropriate support in international negotiations and Member States may also need assistance to negotiate with neighbouring non-EU countries .
Just through preparing the whole debate , I am , of course , already in contact with certain ministers in certain Member States that are even more confronted with the neighbouring country aspects .
Turning to the content of the report , the Commission can support , sometimes subject to small modifications , almost all of Parliament 's approach .
The Commission particularly welcomes and agrees with the position taken in the report on a couple of issues .
Firstly , the importance of spectrum for the Digital Agenda to provide all citizens with high broadband access .
No doubt about that , we are completely on your side .
Number two : keeping under review the possibilities for additional spectrum to meet the growing consumer demand for wireless broadband .
Completely on your side and , even if your speed is perhaps a little bit higher , be assured that we are aware that that is the next step .
Thirdly , confirming 2013 as the date to free the 800 MHz digital dividend band , while recognising the need for derogations until 2015 .
So 2013 is the goal , but with a possibility of derogations until 2015 , in exceptional technical circumstances as well as further derogations due to coordination issues with third countries , which I was touching upon earlier .
Fourthly , the coverage of other important Union policies beyond electronic communications : here , I am talking about the environment , transport or research and the need to make a substantial amount of spectrum available .
Fifthly , the importance of an efficient inventory of spectrum use , which is an essential part of building an effective and forward-looking policy programme .
Sixthly , the need to coordinate the promotion of EU policies at an international level and to support the Member States in their negotiations with non-EU countries .
There are a number of other important issues where the report is supportive or reinforces the Commission proposal , and that is encouraging .
On certain amendments , however , the Commission has to be a bit more nuanced .
On restructuring , the presentation of principles and objectives should not reduce the visibility of the principle of efficient use of spectrum , which should apply to all sectors to the greatest extent possible .
Another nuanced issue : while I understand the addition of the need to ensure sufficient spectrum for audiovisual services , that should not single out specific modes of delivery .
Another nuance between the Commission and the rapporteur 's report concerns competition .
Reserving spectrum for new entrants may be an appropriate tool in certain cases , but with a view to avoiding unnecessary procedures ; we would then be close to each other .
Another issue again involving just a nuance : while the compensation of migration costs by Member States is a very important issue - no doubt about that - it must be in conformity with State aid rules .
I think there is no difference between our points of view ; it is something that has to be mentioned .
The Commission has slight difficulties in accepting just two proposals .
Number one : for spectrum already technically harmonised , an obligation to authorise its use by 2012 should not be replaced by the softer obligation to make such spectrum available .
Existing positions already require this , and we need to move to effective licensing of the spectrum : going forward and not going backward .
A second issue that is different and that we have difficulty in accepting concerns spectrum for broadband satellite access ; the Commission wants to be able to actually ensure its availability .
On both of those issues - to authorise and to ensure availability on both of those issues - there must be a solution to be found and I am certain that it could be found .
Just a couple of remarks to conclude .
Both Parliament and Commission recognise that an early adoption of the proposal is desirable , considering the importance of the work ahead to implement this programme .
A clear statement is needed , the sooner the better .
The Commission will do its best to support the process and I am absolutely confident that Parliament will engage in an early dialogue with the Council to reach a rapid and a successful conclusion .
Time is running out .
Time is not our friend in this and , at the end of the day , if we want to have a solution and if we are backing the number one position called for by Mr Hökmark , then we need to go as quickly as possible in that direction .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , political initiatives for developing fast Internet connections across the board are , in principle , to be welcomed .
However , the spectrum is a scarce resource and , above all , it is a public good .
It was therefore a particular concern of the Committee on Culture and Education that it be made clear that the spectrum is , and remains , essential for the fulfilment of a wide range of societal , cultural and social functions .
For this reason , it was particularly important to us that the requirements of the telecoms package for safeguarding media pluralism and cultural diversity were not thrown out by the back door .
Both public and private broadcasting are essential guarantors of media pluralism and diversity of opinion in Europe .
We must ensure that they can continue to fulfil their vital functions unimpeded in future , too .
The Committee on Culture and Education had therefore proposed that the 790 band not be opened in the first instance , but unfortunately , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy did not follow our suggestion .
Although it is mentioned in several places that the interests of broadcasting are to be taken into consideration , the Committee on Culture and Education would have liked there to have been much clearer wording in this regard .
It was particularly important to us that , before spectrum allocation , clear regulations be laid down to prevent theatres and anyone using wireless microphones , for example , from being saddled with the cost of paying for a frequency change or for new technology .
We are all called on to continue to ensure a fair balance of interests for all parties concerned .
I hope that we will succeed in doing so in future , too .

Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , our colleague , Mr Hökmark , because his work is excellent and , in addition to being excellent , it has great vision for the future , which I think makes it particularly valuable .
However , please also allow me to thank , as he did , all the shadow rapporteurs .
The result of all this work was the unanimous backing that this report received in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Of course , the report before us is guided by an objective , which is none other than a way of making the European economy more competitive in a global world .
That is the key objective of this report and I therefore believe that it is extraordinarily appropriate .
I am not going to go into the details , but I would like to focus on two or three aspects that I consider key .
First of all , we are in a situation - and this report points this out - in which wireless broadband through the 800 MHz allocation for mobile communications across Europe will be a reality .
However the report goes much further : it is thinking more about the future .
We are talking about the 700 MHz frequency band , which also has an extraordinary capacity for mobile telephony and its development .
I believe that is why we also have to view and evaluate the proposals made in the report very positively .
It is not a trivial issue : the spectrum relating to economic activities currently represents 3 % of European gross domestic product ( GDP ) and that is just the start .
I should like to mention the importance of video 's exponential growth as an element of communication between different people , and between different institutions and companies .
Right now , video represents 40 % of world traffic and that is only the start : by 2014 , it will represent 91 % of end-user traffic .
As such , the report positions itself realistically in a vision of an extraordinary future , so I believe that we should give it our full support the day after tomorrow .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are going to give our verdict at first reading on the draft radio spectrum policy programme , and I should like to thank the Commission for having supported and transformed this proposal , which was first tabled during our debates on the telecoms package .
I should also like to commend our rapporteur , Mr Hökmark , as well as my fellow shadow rapporteurs , for our good cooperation on a report which reveals some major political issues hidden behind its highly technical aspects .
We have had numerous debates , which have really made me see that Parliament and the Commission do , quite naturally , share the same opinion and ambition .
The opinion is that spectrum is a scarce resource that does not recognise borders .
Everyone seems to agree on this point .
However , it is on the solutions to be found to improve its management and on the general ambition that some differences can be observed , in particular with the Member States , which I do not deny have historically had a certain sovereign responsibility .
Although not all the compromises tabled and adopted in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy are as balanced as I personally would have liked , I support very sincerely the general move to develop a spectrum management approach that is more integrated , realistic and responsive to the social , cultural and economic needs of our fellow citizens .
This is a common thread in all the positions adopted by our Parliament , Commissioner , be it on the own-initiative report by my colleague , Mrs Toia , or on the proposals that I myself defended as one of the rapporteurs for the telecoms package .
With regard to the radio spectrum policy programme , my group and I placed particular emphasis on several points in our amendments .
They include , therefore , introducing transparency so as to learn how spectrum is currently allocated and managed - that is , the inventory principle - and also finding innovative and original solutions to the electronic communications sector 's growing demand for use of frequencies .
They need to be qualitative , not just quantitative , solutions .
By emphasising spectral efficiency , we will remedy this situation without limiting the diversity of services available on the spectrum .
In doing so , we are also using spectrum as a vehicle for bridging the digital divide and developing new services that are within the reach not only of large telecommunications companies but also of SMEs and start-ups , which will need them .
I believe that this economic dimension is essential .
To conclude , I should like to say a few words about the next stage .
As you said yourself , it was clear from the start that a first-reading agreement was out of the question , but it is imperative that we reach an agreement by the end of the year .
This is essential for our public services , for meeting consumers ' expectations , and for developing the Internet regardless of the infrastructure in place .
It is also essential for planning the economic recovery of our European Union thanks to this resource .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , better and less expensive data transmission through high-speed broadband for all in 2020 : that is an ambitious policy target , I must say , and I fully support it .
But let us face it : it will not come easily .
Nevertheless , I believe that with the Parliament 's first-reading position , we will be able to take a big first step towards this goal .
And let us be clear : broadband for all is not only about making sure that everyone has a Facebook profile .
It is about ensuring Europe 's place in the world as a leading knowledge-based economy .
If we manage to connect 500 million people , our citizens and businesses will be able to reap all of the benefits and opportunities of the digital economy .
Two things , especially , need to change if Europe is to get there .
Firstly , we need a well-functioning pro-competition telecommunications market at European level .
That is why we have introduced rules on competition-proofing .
Member States should not be allowed to allocate newly freed-up spectrum to a specific market player if that would diminish or distort competition in the market .
Secondly , we need a more efficient allocation of spectrum : an allocation that also more actively reflects today 's diverse demands and needs for spectrum .
That is why we are gearing this policy programme not only to free up the 800 MHz band , but also to free up additional bands amounting to at least 1 200 MHz by 2015 .
Let me finish by thanking the Commission , the Commissioner , the rapporteur and my fellow shadows for their extraordinarily good cooperation ; without it , this level of ambition would not have been possible .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , first of all , may I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Hökmark , on skilfully piloting this report through the committee and achieving a very broad measure of consensus .
I join with the other shadow rapporteurs in thanking him for his work .
I very much support his desire to legislate so as to see Europe meet the technological challenges in this sector and maintain a leading position in the world .
This is cutting-edge technology , and it is very important .
The key point is getting the right balance between the different interests involved - the incumbent broadcasters , the mobile operators , broadband provision and the official users , including the military and civil emergency services .
I just want to sound the slight warning note that we must respect subsidiarity and national competences in this area and in this process .
Legislating in this field of policy is particularly difficult because the technologies involved change and advance so rapidly and so much , which means that we are always playing catch-up rather than legislating ahead of the game .
Nevertheless , I think we must act to clear the way for the new technology , for its exploitation and utilisation of spectrum , and I hope that this proposal and this report will do just that .
Madam President , I should like to continue by responding to a number of things that have been said , and I will start with what Mrs Trautmann said .
We were told - and it is true - that radio spectrum is a scarce resource .
I should like , first of all , to stress that it is a shared asset .
It is an asset of which no one can claim exclusive ownership .
As far as we are concerned , then , no stakeholder , whoever he or she may be , can claim to have a kind of pre-emptive right , a kind of vested right , over spectrum , and I believe that this is something that is established in this report .
Being both a shared and a rare asset , we need to have a good understanding , firstly , of how spectrum is used today , hence , this idea of a wide-ranging , comprehensive study on how spectrum is currently being used by all stakeholders , including those whom Mr Chichester just singled out , namely , civil protection services , for example , and even military services .
It really is important to understand how this scarce resource is actually being used today , because we do not feel it is being used optimally - far from it .
Secondly , we need to have a transparent process for allocating this scarce resource , but it must also be dynamic enough to prevent any idea of vested rights emerging again .
I should also like us to pay attention to the principles of allocating and auctioning spectrum , because it is not necessarily used in every case for commercial purposes and , hence , to generate profit .
I am , of course , thinking of the cultural dimension , which has been pointed out , but also of spectrum use for public service purposes - we should actually have a discussion about civil protection services - and indeed for military purposes .
If we take a purely market-based approach , then we are clearly in danger of giving priority - or excessive rights in any case - to market players which we know are able to distort the market on account of their size ; in other words , we know that small operators cannot always compete with them .
Lastly , I should like to draw attention to the fact that the exponential use of the radio spectrum has public health implications , too .
I know that this is not the subject of the report , but I believe that we will have to monitor this issue very closely because our fellow citizens are affected .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Kroes , the spectrum is a valuable and limited resource that must be managed with care and foresight , taking into account society as a whole .
The radio spectrum policy programme is therefore of particular importance .
The spectrum must be utilised efficiently , taking into account economic , social and cultural aspects .
To this end , we must fully utilise the technical means available to us in all bands to achieve the greatest possible efficiency .
The telecoms package adopted last year must form the basis of our radio spectrum policy because it also stipulates that the spectrum management of the EU and its Member States must take equal account of cultural , social and economic interests .
This must be taken into consideration , in particular , in connection with the harmonisation of spectrum use in the EU .
In this regard , I would like to point out that implementation of the first digital dividend in the Member States has so far been progressing at very different rates .
Further opening of the UHF band , particularly below 800 MHz , should therefore only be considered after taking into account our experience with white spaces in this band .
There are many technical and financial questions that are yet to be definitively resolved .
In particular , the problem of interference and the question of cost offsetting for cultural facilities and local authorities in connection with technical retrofitting , with regard to radio microphones for example , have not yet been satisfactorily resolved .
When allocating frequency bands , the various different interests must be weighed against each other in a responsible manner .
On the one hand , provision of mobile broadband networks across the board is a basic requirement that is in the interests of European citizens , but , on the other hand , development in the area of public and private broadcasting must be taken into consideration as an important instrument for cultural diversity and the provision of information .
We must set the correct course for technical development and for Europe 's position in the area of digital information technology and cultural diversity .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , we should certainly congratulate ourselves today on holding this debate .
Too often , we have heard that spectrum planning and management is a technical issue that is the exclusive competence of the Member States .
Today , thanks to Parliament 's determination during the negotiation of the telecommunications package , conducted so magnificently by our fellow Member , Mrs Trautmann , this discussion on spectrum is taking place where it should be : in the political sphere of the European Union .
The fact that it is a scarce public resource and its cross-border scale make our intervention as EU legislators worthwhile , but we should not couch this process as a confrontation between the various uses that we could assign frequency bands .
Incessant technological progress means that we are increasingly able to transmit more data using less of the spectrum and with less interference .
Our goal must be to establish the bases of dynamic planning that uses technological progress to enable the various groups of users to be made more compatible , thereby obtaining greater economic and social output from this valuable resource .
We do not want there to be winners or losers from this process , but rather operators committed to a process of continuously improving spectrum use and allocation , and for it to be oriented , above all , toward the public 's social and economic development .


( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Kroes , Mr Hökmark , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating my friend , Mr Hökmark , on his excellent report and on the spirit of openness that he has shown throughout these debates .
This draft report broadly supports the European Commission 's proposal , in particular , on the need to make available , by 1 January 2013 , the 800 MHz band freed up by the changeover to digital television and the complete cessation of analogue television broadcasting .
As a result of the digitisation of terrestrial television broadcasting , a large number of frequencies , referred to as digital dividends , are being made available .
The qualities that these frequencies possess in terms of coverage and penetration of buildings are universally recognised : they are called golden frequencies .
It is in this context that the European Commission is proposing a first programme to develop an approach , for the years 2011-2015 , to the strategic radio spectrum issues facing the European Union .
Nevertheless , I would like to highlight two aspects that I feel are important , Mrs Kroes , Mr Hökmark .
Firstly , I believe that we should create the inventory proposed in Article 8 ; it is preferable to rely on a precise , expertly prepared inventory so as to identify new bands before explicitly mentioning harmonised frequency bands .
If the aim of finding more frequencies for wireless broadband communications is to be pursued and encouraged , it would seem appropriate to proceed on the basis of this inventory - without anticipating the result - by selecting , without any prior technical expertise , one or more specific frequency bands .
The final point that I should like to discuss concerns the use of frequency bands that are currently used for military purposes .
The Commission certainly has no authority to explore the scope for sharing spectrum with military uses .
I am therefore opposed to the amendment to Article 7 ( 3 ) , which deals with the radio frequency needs of specific EU policies and which proposes using civil frequencies for military purposes .
( RO ) Madam President , the decision being debated today marks the launch of the first European radio spectrum policy programme .
Its aim is strategic planning and harmonisation of the use of radio spectrum to ensure the functioning of the internal market .
In practical terms , the programme will facilitate spectrum availability , maximise the flexibility and increase the efficiency of its use based on general authorisations , avoid distortion of competition and avoid harmful interference and disturbance , as well as harmonise technical conditions and protect health .
In keeping with the decision , the Commission , together with Member States , will produce an inventory of existing spectrum use and of possible future spectrum requirements in the Union , in particular , in the range from 300 MHz to 3 GHz .
We used the amendments tabled to request a bridging of the digital divide so that all EU citizens have access to the broadband communications infrastructure at no less than 30 Mbps by 2020 , and that opportunities are secured for both the commercial sector and public services by means of increased broadband capacities .
We have also asked to ensure that new consumer devices and technologies are accessible so as to secure consumer endorsement for the transition to digital technology and efficient use of the digital dividend .
I welcome the importance attached to ensuring that the required radio spectrum is available for monitoring the atmosphere and the Earth 's surface .
This enables space applications to be developed and utilised and transport systems to be improved , especially for the Galileo and GMS systems , as well as for smart safety and management systems for the transport sector .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that one point that we all agree on and have established is that this programme for frequency harmonisation and coordinated spectrum use can serve a dual purpose .
I believe that this is a key point to be remembered at all times ; in other words , through the programme , we can develop the great potential for economic exploitation of this field by the telecommunications sector , the audiovisual sector and new services , while , at the same time , giving a boost to economic development and to other sectors linked to the telecommunications sector .
We can also develop the potential for cultural and social development that this dual purpose permits and requires .
Commissioner , in my opinion this programme should also be seen as an opportunity , so that we respect and uphold certain fundamental principles through the choices we make .
Firstly , the principle of media pluralism .
The review of the system for managing radio frequencies at European level is very important , and I believe that we must clearly prevent the accumulation of frequency rights and the creation of monopolies and oligopolies , which unfortunately exist in some European countries and which are becoming stronger and gaining a foothold in the broadcasting sector .
Secondly , the principle of balance between the liberalisation and opening up of the market to new operators , and fairness , so that the commitments entered into with those operators who have provided substantial investment can also be promoted , supported and maintained on the market .
Lastly , transparency and the guarantee of well-managed and well-administered frequency allocations .
We are talking about auctions not only to focus on an aspect of the market that should be reconciled with all the possible social uses for spectrum , but also to say that discretion should not be used and unfair advantages should not be given with regard to radio frequencies .
This point also deserves close attention .
To conclude , unfortunately I do not have the time to expand on the social aspects , but they have been discussed at great length by all the members of my group .
( NL ) Madam President , Mrs Kroes , today we are celebrating Europe Day .
Europe is eagerly looking for particular things which matter to our citizens and which also bring with them prosperity and well-being to the European community .
This topic , this report by Mr Hökmark , fits that brief perfectly .
It is specific and it puts us more in the picture about the social and the economic dimensions .
Public airways , which are in short supply , will be freed up and that is badly needed if we are to meet the demand for ever more and ever faster wireless Internet connections .
Good coordination at European level is an obvious requirement in this respect .
In 2013 , 800 MHz will be freed up , in 2015 , 1 200 MHz , and that is badly needed if Europe wants to remain amongst the global frontrunners .
These services have a huge financial value : EUR 200 million annually , which is to say , that around 3 to 4 % of economic growth depends on there being enough spectrum .
And that percentage is only going to keep growing .
Just look , for example , at the GSM standard which we jointly brought about in the 1990s ; that , too , was the right move at the right time .
Let me tell you , those advantages of scale are clocking up .
Every year , they can make a difference of EUR 80 billion .
The Netherlands , my native country , which I and the other Dutch MEPs have a mandate to represent here , is ready for it ; we have already freed up space for the fourth generation mobile Internet .
In a nutshell , both the problems faced by auxiliary services , TV stations , public service broadcasters and the continuing problems concerning interferences that could arise , that is , problems with local microphones , will be a thing of the past .
I therefore sincerely hope that , on the basis of this excellent and promising report , we will be able to reach agreement with the Commission as early as the first reading .
Good luck with it !
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to apologise for the fact that Members are currently leaving the Chamber .
However , a vote is taking place in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy at the same time as this debate and we have not yet invented a way of dividing people in two .
Mr Hökmark has found a good compromise here .
However , with regard to this matter , we must always take into account the performance level that we want to see in the future , on the one hand , for the first generation network and , on the other , for the cable operators and everyone else with an interest in the spectrum , particularly the blue light organisations .
This performance level must be defined .
The most important aspect with regard to this data is the quantity of data .
The next most important aspect is the time it takes for it to be transmitted , the strength with which it is transmitted in order also to enable coexistence here , and , finally , the priorities that are established by means of the software .
For the future , we need a detailed report in this regard in order to significantly increase the speed of the GSM first generation network .
Cable network operators already achieve very high speeds of up to 100 megabits / s , which is very respectable and can be increased further in future .
However , we have major problems when it comes to the price level , particularly with regard to data roaming .
In some Member States , it is currently possible to buy one gigabyte for less than EUR 1 .
I have just looked at my mobile phone to see how much it costs me .
At home , one gigabyte costs me EUR 1 .
When I am here , one gigabyte costs me EUR 9 900 , and when I travel to another Member State , it can cost EUR 14 900 .
We urgently need to take action in this regard .
I would ask you , Commissioner , to ensure that this decision takes account not only of performance range and performance level , but that , above all , we also establish a common European market with regard to price level that enables people to use data services even when they are not in their own Member State .
We have urgent priorities to address in this regard .
( DE ) Madam President , Europe will only be able to defend its leading role as the largest economic area in the world if it takes the lead in the development and use of new technologies .
Broadband technology is undoubtedly an important part of this .
Our new radio spectrum policy must ensure large transmission capacities and high transmission speeds .
Overarching frequency planning and management at European level is , without doubt , less appropriate for achieving this goal , as the Commission itself also stresses that this can be carried out well and efficiently in the individual Member States .
A coordinating role would certainly be desirable , however .
Despite the high costs , the provision of optical fibre networks should , in my opinion , be encouraged .
The European Union is currently lagging behind its competitors , the United States and China .
That is probably a consequence of irresolute policy and too much bureaucracy .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur , Mr Hökmark , that we absolutely must stick to the timetable that has been set for freeing up the spectrum .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all those who were involved in this fascinating debate , for , although the issue may seem to be a very technical one , at the end of the day , it is a mainstream issue because radio spectrum is like water or fresh air .
It is , as Catherine Trautmann has said , a scarce good , it is a public good , and it is also an essential good .
The rapporteur and his shadows have succeeded in making the issue quite clear , and simply putting before us what has to be done to achieve a positive outcome .
Of course , this is a democracy : we are debating the issue and it is an attractive debate .
Not so long ago , however , we discussed the Digital Agenda ; we all agree on the Digital Agenda ; and this issue is a major one for the Digital Agenda .
For if we do not assume our responsibility and take a clear line , then we can forget what was said earlier by Ms Toia : we need to be aware that in 2020 - and we set this out in the Digital Agenda - every European should be able to pursue his or her interests via what are ultimately spectrum opportunities .
We have also talked about creating digital opportunities for every European by 2013 .
If that is what we have in mind , then we need to be consistent and we need to be in a position to assume the consequences of being consistent .
I would like to thank all those Members who have spoken in clear language , stating priorities while , at the end of the day , agreeing on exactly what we have to do in a strategic approach to regulation with regard to the management of radio spectrum .
There are still hurdles to be overcome , no doubt about that .
Given what is at stake , however , I am confident those hurdles will be taken successfully .
We fully respect the use of spectrum for broadcasting and cultural activities : let there be no misunderstanding on that .
We will tackle that point if there is still any hesitation to be overcome .
With regard to additional spectrum for broadband and the second digital dividend , I think everybody is aware that sooner or later - and most of the Members of Parliament will probably think sooner - we will have to tackle that point , too .
This is a win-win situation , and in freeing the 800 MHz band , we took the option which affected the least amount of spectrum , so we can see that as step one on our journey .
To look backwards for a moment : who could have imagined 15 years ago what is at stake today ?
Had we waited 15 years ago , and hesitated in taking decisions as politicians , we would have failed .
In that event , what we would be discussing now is not whether we want the number one position or the number three position , but whether we want to avoid the last position .
Spectrum is a national competence : I am aware of that .
The Commission agrees , and the inventory is a matter for the Member States .
However , we all agree that spectrum is a very valuable resource and we need to recognise that talking about a digital single market also gives us the opportunity and the responsibility to think along cross-border lines - and , if there is one area in which we ought to think cross-border , it is spectrum policy .
With regard to deadlines and what has been and is at stake , it is clear , to me at least , that 2013 is not too early .
We should also be aware that derogations are proposed for two types of situation : in the case of difficulties with neighbouring countries and in the case of circumstances that no one could have foreseen .
I believe , however , that we have to take the line that time is not on our side and that derogations should not be misused .
All in all , I am looking forward to discussions with the Council members , I am looking forward to the result of your voting and I am looking with confidence to the future , in the hope that one of the pillars we have talked about will be finalised before the end of the year .
I should like to conclude by thanking , once again , not only the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs , but also the members of the various committees involved , for their constructive and very positive efforts .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I think we need to be aware that we are talking about a part of society which is developing extremely rapidly .
The pace of change has been , and will continue to be , extremely rapid .
We are really talking about how we want things to be in the year 2020 .
That is why it is important to make the point that , in discussing the 700 MHz band , we are not saying anything more than that we shall have the opportunity to take decisions later on the best way of using it .
As has been said , spectrum is a scarce resource , but it is also a public good , and we have the responsibility to use it as well and as efficiently as possible - a point that Ms Trautmann also made .
I would also like to emphasise that there is no conflict between cultural and commercial use .
I want us to have ambitions of a kind that will enable us to bring culture into this new technology , rather than reserving the technology for commercial use , which will be the outcome if we are not sufficiently ambitious .
In that case , culture will be left behind , and I do not think that culture in Europe will have the best opportunities if it is closed into the old technologies .
I believe it is possible not only to secure broadcasting as of today but also to create new opportunities for a new time .
However , we need to be able to take decisions .
I must say - without irony and with a high level of satisfaction - that no one here tonight has questioned the fact that we need to be number one .
In the global world of competition and knowledge , the only way to win is to be number one , and that should be our aim .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 11 May 2011 .
Emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan ( debate )
Τhe next item is the report by Vital Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council introducing emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan - C7-0322 / 2010 - .
Madam President , this report was , in fact , not written by me .
I am an accidental rapporteur , who came in at the last minute because the original rapporteur stopped working on this report .
Therefore , as chair of the committee , I took over , in line with the Rules of Procedure .
As well as being an accidental rapporteur , I am also a reluctant one because , in truth , I did not vote for this report and have deep objections to its content .
Nevertheless , things are as they are and it falls to me to gallantly accept the duties I have been given .
As we know , this report on the exceptional trade preferences conceded to Pakistan originated with a European Council decision , which mandated the Commission to make a proposal to Parliament and to the Council .
As these are exceptional preferences that are not compatible with the positive or negative non-discrimination rule of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , it is necessary to obtain a WTO waiver before awarding these trade preferences .
Despite everything , the Commission tabled the proposal before Parliament and the Committee on International Trade , which I chair , decided to go ahead with the debate and vote on this report , of which I am the accidental rapporteur .
It is the result of this vote which we are bringing to the Chamber .
The issue , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , has proved rather contentious in Parliament 's Committee on International Trade , as regards whether - and this was the pretext for this Commission proposal - we should use trade preferences as a means of emergency aid to a given country ; as regards the duration and extension of those trade preferences ; and , finally , as regards what conditions would be imposed on the beneficiary , Pakistan in this instance .
Although a majority in the committee voted for the Commission proposal to award Pakistan these exceptional preferences , in fact , the Committee on International Trade also voted for several amendments aimed at limiting the impact of these trade advantages awarded to Pakistan , including , inter alia , the adoption of a safeguard clause , in case imports from Pakistan increase too much because of the reduction or removal of trade tariffs .
Other amendments relate to , for example , requirements that Pakistan not create or abolish the restrictions it has on exporting commodities .
In conclusion , it is important to take into account that our efforts here could turn out to be completely in vain if the WTO waiver is not obtained ; we do not presently know when , or if , it will end up being granted .
In any case , even if our efforts turn out to be in vain , it will , at least , be an excellent opportunity to debate how sensible it is to use exceptional trade advantages as a means of emergency aid - or , as in this case , as a means of political repayment for a given country - and what limits such usage has .
We therefore run the risk of setting dangerous precedents or , worse still , of making political use of trade preferences that should perhaps follow criteria that are rather more objective , and rather less discretionary and contextual than in this case .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , today we are discussing a legislative proposal for emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan .
This proposal was tabled by the Commission at the express request of the European Council in the immediate aftermath of the floods that hit Pakistan in the summer of last year and brought widespread devastation to the country and to its people .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Committee on International Trade for their hard work and their support for the proposal .
The Commission proposal aims at the introduction of a unilateral and temporary suspension of import duties on 75 export items from Pakistan . These trade preferences would liberalise about a quarter of Pakistani imports to the EU and be available for two years , with a possible extension for another year .
The European Union is aware that such trade concessions , especially in sensitive sectors such as textiles , might have an impact on EU industry , and therefore we have ensured that a balance is kept between the needs of Pakistan and the interests of our own industry and other supplier countries .
The number of products selected is limited .
We have set a ceiling on the liberalisation of very sensitive items , and liberalisation would only be of limited duration .
In the meantime , we have also requested the World Trade Organisation to grant us a waiver of the applicable WTO rules to enable us to implement the proposed measures .
As you know , we are still discussing this issue with other WTO members and hope to come to a solution soon .
The images of people having lost their livelihoods might not be present any more in everyone 's mind , but we should not forget the immense cost of those devastating floods , both in terms of humanitarian needs and economic devastation .
These trade measures are not ' stand-alone ' , and come on top of the significant humanitarian and development assistance - amounting to EUR 480 million - that the EU has granted to Pakistan .
However , ambitious trade measures are essential for the sustained economic recovery of Pakistan 's economy and should be part of our medium-term response to those unprecedented natural disasters .
I therefore hope that Parliament will support the proposal .
Let me now turn to some of the amendments that have been proposed .
I will not go into detail on all of them , but let me highlight the most important ones .
I know that there are requests for making the granting of autonomous trade preferences conditional upon Pakistan respecting certain fundamental principles .
I understand the concerns that may exist in that respect , and you are aware that human rights issues are an integral element of our long-term relationship with Pakistan .
However , given the temporary nature of the waiver to address an emergency situation , the Commission believes those conditionalities would not be appropriate .
Our human rights dialogue , in the context of our Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Pakistan , is the appropriate forum to address such issues with Pakistan and reach sustainable solutions .
As regards provisions that would oblige Pakistan to abstain from maintaining , introducing or increasing duties or charges having equivalent effect , or any other restriction on the export or import of certain products , I believe that such conditions would seriously undermine the granting of the preferences and are contrary to the spirit , the nature and the purpose of our regulation .
Moreover , we cannot prohibit Pakistan , through this regulation , from implementing measures that are consistent with its international obligations .
On the other hand , we could agree to the introduction of a mechanism allowing the imposition of limits to duty-free imports for Pakistan tariff rate quotas where volumes of imports of products liberalised increase beyond certain levels .
I also agree that preferences should be removed for any product causing or threatening to cause serious difficulties to a Union producer of like or directly competing products , as determined by an investigation carried out by the Commission .
We could also agree with mechanisms to establish customs surveillance on imports covered by the regulation , linked with quarterly reporting .
However , a prior surveillance mechanism would create an undue burden in terms of administrations ' licensing requirements .
I note , finally , that there are requests to limit the duration of the trade preferences to one year from the date on which the waiver takes effect .
I think that would be very problematic .
The Commission initially proposed applying exceptional measures for a period of three years .
In its compromise proposal , which was reflected in the WTO waiver request , the Council limited the duration to two years , with the possibility of extending it by one more year .
However , to limit the duration even further to one year would erode the advantages of the autonomous trade preferences measure , and they would become meaningless .
Let me also point out that a compromise reached in the Council on 10 November was based on subjecting seven textile and clothing products to tariff rate quotas rather than full liberalisation .
This compromise became the basis for the subsequent request for a WTO waiver .
However , this is not reflected in the European Parliament amendments , and as a result of the consultation with WTO members , it might be necessary to subject a few more products to tariff rate quotas .
The waiver , if granted , would constitute a maximum of preferences the EU could grant to Pakistan on those terms and , as a consequence , the regulation will have to reflect the content of the WTO waiver once it is agreed in the WTO .
Let me also reassure you that the Commission will conduct an annual impact assessment on the autonomous trade preferences granted to Pakistan and present it to Parliament and the Council , and that is another reason not to reduce the duration of application of this instrument .
I thank the European Parliament for its cooperation on this sensitive issue .
The Commission stands ready to work closely with Parliament in order to have this proposal adopted and show the EU 's determination to act responsibly towards countries in need .
Mr President , I believe that it is an appropriate time for us to discuss this report from Mr Moreira .
Why ?
The reason is because we are currently awaiting a decision on the waiver requested by the European Union from the World Trade Organisation on the topic actually being discussed .
My personal view is that it is important , in this context , for us to convey a clear message to the European Union 's other trade partners .
The Union must continue to be determined to supplement the emergency humanitarian aid which it generously granted to Pakistan during an initial phase with trade measures aimed at bringing about the Pakistani economy 's sustainable recovery .
Diplomatic consultations with the World Trade Organisation definitely require time because the concerns of the Union 's trade partners must be taken into account .
The outcome of these consultations is currently uncertain .
However , as the recent events remind us , it is clear that we need a stable , prosperous Pakistan , which will not go down the slippery slope of extremism and will be able to act as a partner in the anti-terror effort .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I would like to thank my fellow Members in the Committee on International Trade for adopting the main points which we developed in our opinion .
I want to highlight two of these points here .
The first one , which is perhaps the most important for the Committee on Foreign Affairs and was also mentioned by the Commissioner , is the requirement not to decouple human rights conditionality , including respect for the basic standards of the right to work , from granting trade preferences .
I believe that we have a difference of opinion on this point .
As human rights are a key aspect of the agreement binding the EU and Pakistan , the autonomous trade preferences proposed must be dependent upon respect for human rights in this country .
On the other hand , a prior full assessment of the impact of the measures proposed has not been conducted by the Commission .
I think that it would have had a major impact , in particular , on Pakistan 's population and this country 's budget resources .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , almost nine months after the disastrous floods , the situation in Pakistan is still bad and the people of Pakistan need our help .
It was therefore right and proper for the European Union to take action and to very quickly put together a multi-million euro aid package , and it is important that this aid actually reaches the local community .
Right from the start , I was not particularly happy about the Commission 's proposal , under pressure from the Council , to use foreign trade instruments of all things in order to provide short-term aid for Pakistan .
I brought this up several times in committee and asked in particular for the person responsible for foreign policy in the European Union , namely our High Representative , to also come to the committee or to Parliament in order to explain why foreign trade should have to be used to pay for this , to present to us in detail the overall strategy of the European Commission and put this in a common context and , in so doing , perhaps convince us that it really does make sense - I will say this again - to allow foreign trade to make a short-term contribution in this regard .
I am very grateful that Mr David and others have succeeded in putting together a package that received the support of a broad majority in committee .
In this regard , I would particularly like to emphasise the time limitation that we would like to see .
This is the only solution that enables us to avoid the misdirection of funds .
However , what is the situation in Pakistan at the moment ?
Although Bin Laden is out of the equation , the question that has arisen in recent days as to the extent to which representatives of the Pakistani Government were aware of who was hiding in their country remains .
Many fellow Members , including some in my group , are not happy about this .
Moreover , we do not yet know how the other countries within the WTO will act and whether they will ultimately give their consent .
It would therefore be good , when we vote on the amendments tomorrow , if we do not carry out a final vote , but rather refer the matter back to committee so that we can see what comes out of the WTO talks and whether it does actually make sense for us ultimately to give our consent to this package .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , quite honestly , we do not understand why the majority of the Committee on International Trade were so adamant in wanting to put this matter forward for debate , only to then ask for it to be referred back to committee , a request that we reject .
Both decisions are wrong ; however , because of the time constraints , among other reasons , I intend to focus solely on the issue of merit , but only after voicing my full support for Mr Moreira 's speech .
In this complicated world in which natural and man-made disasters are occurring all the time and in large numbers , we would be setting a dangerous precedent if we were to turn every humanitarian emergency into a review of trade policy .
That is a slippery slope that could result in serious imbalances and , hence , unfair treatment of the poorest countries .
Yet it is only through balanced , permanent and objective rules that those countries can reap the benefits of trade policy , which must not replace development cooperation .
We know that any aid earmarked for Pakistan would not be used to help the people hit by the floods almost a year ago .
We know with just as much certainty that it will be the European textile sector that mainly , if not exclusively , pays the price for this humanitarian aid .
We cannot accept this unfair departure from trade policy rules because we are aware of the need to consider other factors , too , in our discussions .
We all know that , as well as showing solidarity with Pakistan 's flood-hit populations , another fundamental reason for granting aid lies in the decision to support Pakistan 's counterterrorism efforts .
The grey areas that have emerged in recent days between the Pakistani authorities and al-Qaeda , and the Bin Laden affair itself , show how unreliable that country is .
I believe that we must focus attention on this , just as we must focus attention on the major human rights issues that have emerged lately .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is something wrong about holding a debate in May 2011 on a natural disaster that occurred in summer 2010 , a disaster that left 12 million people homeless and destroyed 20 % of the country concerned .
I do not support the socialist position , which was expressed by Mr Susta just now .
It is partly due to this hesitation that we are still racking our brains trying to work out which instruments we can adopt in order to actively help Pakistan , and on top of our frustration at not having achieved that yet , we are also conscious that we need a trade policy approach that is more mature in political and humanitarian terms : trade policy must become one of the instruments for helping populations in difficulty .
I admit that the Commission has acted swiftly and effectively by proposing a package of measures , which obviously needed to be discussed and rebalanced so that they did not penalise a European sector that has already been tested by the crisis .
It is thanks to the work done by the Committee on International Trade , including that contained in certain amendments - among which the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supports Amendment 37 - that businesses , too , can request application of the safeguard clause .
However , it seems that these are bad times for Pakistan and that too many people are failing to face up to their responsibilities .
We are asking India to change its attitude and to soften its ' no ' stance at the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) as a tangible sign of good-neighbourly relations .
True , relations are difficult between those two countries , since there was also the Mumbai attack and Pakistan 's poor cooperation in identifying and capturing the perpetrators of the attack .
Yet that affair could be something that breaks the bad habits of a bad relationship between neighbours .
We are also asking the Pakistani authorities for something , namely , to be more determined to consider this issue from a bilateral point of view in their relations with India .
Bilateral meetings have recently taken place , though little has come of them , perhaps due to a pride issue on the Pakistanis ' part .
It is clear that cricket diplomacy , emphasised by Pakistan 's Members of Parliament , whom we met just two weeks ago , has so far failed to produce meaningful results .
Lastly , it is the WTO , above all , that we are asking - as we did in Geneva during the recent Interparliamentary Assembly - quickly to adopt mechanisms that will enable international trade rules to respond swiftly and flexibly to emergencies in a country hit by unforeseen disasters .
This tariff reduction affair may end up achieving nothing , or it could open a new era in trade relations .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , this was the worst natural disaster ever to hit Pakistan .
We , I am proud to say , reacted fast .
Commissioner Georgieva was on the scene , and , when I met with Prime Minister Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani , I was certainly able to discuss the EU 's response with him .
One thing was absolutely clear .
We needed to think outside the box .
We needed to come up with a new solution to provide help .
Not only aid but trade was the answer , as a short-term measure to assist .
I am pleased that the committee has approved the report , after much deliberation , and I know , through colleagues from right across the committee , the painstaking work that was done to try and come forward with something that was acceptable .
But I am afraid some of the amendments to which the Commission has already made reference take away from the spirit of our initial intentions and the initial way in which we reacted .
At WTO level , objections have been registered to our EU proposal .
On the one hand , India says that this should not be a part of the EU-India FTA .
I agree .
There should not be a link .
That is the right approach .
But at the same time , it is asking for relaxation in trade directly from Pakistan .
There is a contradiction in its approach .
I ask them to reconsider .
I believe this House should reaffirm the Commission position .
We have the guarantee of annual impact assessments .
I hear what colleagues say about their security concerns , but I stand here as somebody who narrowly survived the Mumbai attacks and I say to those colleagues : this is not the time to turn your back on Pakistan .
The credibility of the EU is at stake .
Give the Commission proposal your support .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I , like many others in this House , share the concern for , and the sympathy with , the people affected by the terrible floods in Pakistan .
I did so at the time and I do now .
However , when I look at how the political will has been lacking , how the corporate interests have interfered and how the WTO has procrastinated , what I see before us are recommendations that dilute the original proposals put forward at such short notice by the Commission .
Mention has already been made of the short timescale for the trade preference relaxation , reduced from three years to one year : Pakistan is prevented from maintaining or increasing duties or charges within that time .
Moreover , it is proposed to seek not only an annual report on a one-year programme but also quarterly reports on the application and implementation of the measures .
This adds up to a huge bureaucracy being created , only to come to an end within one year .
So I have a great deal of sympathy with the proposal , which is Amendment 43 , to send this back to the committee so that we can come up with something which will actually deliver the help we want to give to Pakistan .
Finally , I think this really does point to the acute need to look at how the WTO works and to transform it into a properly democratic body whose proceedings are transparent and whose members are accountable .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is now almost a year since the people of Pakistan suffered devastating floods .
We all have very close ties with the people of this stricken country .
What is scandalous , however , is the fact that the negotiations in the WTO are still dragging on , and that alone makes it clear that this form of trade facilitation is not suitable to be used as an emergency aid measure .
My group has repeatedly called on the Commission to put forward a plan B in order to be able to help the people of Pakistan quickly and permanently to rebuild their country .
No alternative solution has been presented , however .
Perhaps the Commission simply lacks ideas or is unable to act because it feels obstructed by resistance in the European Council , which it is only too familiar with .
Otherwise , it would seem as if the difficult negotiations in the WTO are being used as an excuse for the lack of action .
You knew as well as we did that these negotiations would be difficult before they even started and you probably also already knew this when some of the foreign ministers from Germany and other Member States sent you on this mission .
After all , the facilitation of trade in the area of textiles , leather and ethanol that you now want to offer to Pakistan would undermine the GSP + ( Generalised System of Preferences + ) status that countries like Bangladesh have attained , and indeed , in contrast to Pakistan , they have attained it through ratification of important UN and ILO conventions for the rights of workers and environmental protection .
It is precisely this status advantage that enables Bangladesh to import primary products from Pakistan , to process them and then export them to Europe .
It is no wonder that this country is now putting up resistance .
However , we cannot in all honesty expect approval for our desire to help Pakistan at the expense of one of the poorest countries in the world .
By doing so , we will ultimately damage ourselves , too , and indeed we will be doing this on the eve of the presentation of the new Commission draft on the revision of our system of trade preferences .
My solution to this problem is therefore as follows : place the focus on direct aid for the reconstruction following the floods and take immediate action instead of losing in the negotiations in Geneva .
After all , with every day that we fail to provide aid , we as Europeans are losing the trust of Pakistan in particular and we will ultimately pay a high political price for this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider this report to be completely unacceptable .
I am aware of the tragic floods that struck Pakistan last year and I think it is right to help that country .
I understand that the European Union has already made around EUR 500 million available , which I do not consider to be a trifling sum .
These new concessions are absurd , since they are concentrated in a sector - textiles - which is a dominant sector in Pakistan but which in Europe , on the other hand , has been destroyed precisely as a result of unfair competition from Asian countries .
Do we want to deliver the final blow to the European textiles sector ?
That is certainly not what the Lega Nord want , nor do we intend to accept it .
The issue of whether to grant these waivers , should Parliament approve them , will subsequently have to be examined by the World Trade Organisation .
It appears that some states - including the aforementioned India , Pakistan 's long-time enemy - are willing to give their consent , not free of charge , of course , but in exchange for similar favourable conditions being granted by the European Union , which is inclined to welcome such requests .
I have the impression that EU trade policy is dictated by the worst possible kind of self-destructive behaviour , and I therefore hope that this measure will be rejected outright .
( DE ) Mr President , in north-west Pakistan , what had not already been destroyed in some regions by war and terrorism was swept away by the floods in 2010 .
In addition to the commitment of EUR 415 million in emergency aid , the EU now wants to lift duties on a number of products .
Pakistan will now soon attain the long-wished for status of a developing country with special tariff preferences .
However , the EU should not be under any illusions that granting trade preferences could put an end to the advance of fundamental Islamists and terrorists in the nuclear state of Pakistan .
The United States has failed to do this despite billions being provided in military aid .
The West has therefore paid dearly for the loyalty of a small and , moreover , diminishing part of the political leadership in Pakistan .
The elimination of Bin Laden by the United States has also raised a number of difficult questions .
Even if Pakistan was aware of the whereabouts of the al-Qaeda leader , who was the subject of an international arrest warrant , and therefore would have been called on to extradite him , it does not change the fact that the targeted killing was a violation of Pakistan 's sovereignty .
The West must not throw its own principles , such as the rule of law , overboard .
Terrorists , dictators and mass murderers must be brought before a court and not eliminated by means of targeted killings .
( PT ) Mr President , firstly , I should like , in particular , to congratulate our colleague from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Mr David , on his work .
I am representing him here today because it is absolutely impossible for him to be present in the Chamber .
I also want to say that we have always considered support for flood victims in Pakistan an ethical and moral imperative .
For this reason , we have strongly supported all the traditional humanitarian aid measures that have been taken .
We really believe work towards helping stabilise the situation of so many millions of affected people must continue .
What we cannot accept is that European Union trade policy should now be considered a suitable and appropriate instrument for humanitarian aid .
The truth is that this will have two harmful consequences : one within the European Union , especially for the southern countries , and for their textile and clothing industries , which are now seriously weakened because of an economic , social and financial crisis unparalleled since they joined the Union ; and , secondly , at international level , during World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) negotiations , where this opening of the largest trade bloc in the world - the European Union - to these potential exports from Pakistan could completely unbalance the negotiations .
It is not by chance that they are at the impasse they have reached .
Faced with a situation like this , therefore , it is only natural that we have to say , regarding the history of the eight months of difficult negotiations - in which we have taken part and offered the most constructive proposals - on this regulation , that the only position we will now be able to take is , unfortunately , in support of the amendment that , ultimately , envisages the end of this proposal for a regulation as we know it .
We have to do so now , not because of a lack of solidarity with Pakistan , but because we believe humanitarian aid should be given in the proper place and in the proper way .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , dealing with this European Parliament report has been complicated , mainly because it has involved measures requiring approval from the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , so the preliminary draft that the Commission sent to Parliament is different to that sent to Geneva .
We think it is necessary to help Pakistan .
We believe that , exceptionally , trade preferences can be conceded , provided that they take into account the sensitivity of European industry and , in particular , of the textile industry , which is suffering badly from the consequences of the crisis in regions like the Community of Valencia in Spain .
However , this report has enabled us to verify that measures that can be taken within the framework of international trade probably cannot be dealt with as urgently as these acts require , so we should learn for the future .
Let us help Pakistan , yes ; not , however , with the Commission 's original proposal , as it does not take into account the effects on European industry as regards implementation deadlines for sensitive products , and would even delay the implementation of these measures because it is not the same as the text awaiting WTO approval : we would miss the deadline .
We therefore consider it unacceptable to keep this proposal and we think that we will have to vote against it .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , with this proposal for a regulation , we are once again faced with a clear and lamentable exercise in Commission hypocrisy .
An exercise in hypocrisy which consists of bringing into the sphere of humanitarian aid things whose place is strictly in the sphere of the commercial interests of a few ; of business , pure and simple .
An exercise in hypocrisy which is using the natural disaster that has befallen Pakistan to bring the longstanding plans of a few big companies in the European Union 's powers to life .
Today , the justification is humanitarian aid to Pakistan .
Yesterday , it was helping in the fight against terrorism .
Yesterday , like today , there is only one true intention : to obtain trade concessions that benefit , above all , the big European importers .
That is how it is , however much the Committee on International Trade might want to sugar the pill with toothless safeguards which essentially do not change anything .
These trade concessions , as the report itself acknowledges , will harm the European Union 's textile industry , and the countries and regions most dependent on it .
This impact is severe in a sector that is already very weakened - hit hard as it was by the liberalisation of world trade - and which is concentrated in regions with high levels of unemployment , poverty and marginalisation , and with low economic diversification .
However , it becomes even more serious when these regions are situated in Member States , like Portugal , faced with an extremely serious economic and social crisis , which could shortly be exacerbated by the illegitimate intervention that the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and European Union are preparing .
I remember that the Portuguese Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution against these trade concessions .
There is a need for measures defending the European textiles sector and related jobs .
We have seen nothing like that from the Commission .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the regulation being discussed today , under the guise of solidarity , is , in reality , yet another betrayal by Europe of its citizens .
We cannot allow the EU to further damage high quality sectors such as textiles in Italy and elsewhere .
We should protect them by any means possible from unfair competition from countries such as China , Turkey , India , Vietnam and Pakistan , where workers are exploited at very low cost and where there are no minimum guarantees in terms of respect for social rights .
It is to those countries that many large European companies have relocated their production , at the expense of jobs in Europe .
Moreover , why it was not even possible to wait for the World Trade Organisation 's verdict on this regulation is beyond me .
In the meantime , however , Europe has basically shown that it will go to any lengths to harm the interests of its citizens and its high quality industries , now and in the future .
I sincerely hope that the regulation will be rejected during the vote .
( EL ) Mr President , obviously , I , too , support the provision of humanitarian aid by the European Union as and where possible .
I understand the Commission 's reasoning in terms of providing aid in the form of unilateral trade concessions in favour of Pakistan .
However , I do not agree with the Commission 's proposals calling for two industrial sectors in the Union , namely the textile and bioethanol industries , to shoulder most of the burden .
I would point out that the European textile industry has been under immense pressure over recent years as a result of the liberalisation of trade within the World Trade Organisation .
I served four terms as a member of parliament for a region , one area of which , namely Naoussa , has one of the highest unemployment rates in the whole of Europe , as a result of the impact of globalisation of the textile industry .
As far as bioethanol is concerned , I would stress that important investments have been made in the EU in this new industry .
We must not overlook the fact that these are two industries in which Pakistan would appear to be particularly competitive .
Furthermore , the said concessions have no conditionality clause attached , as would apply if Pakistan were granted GSP + status .
Finally , I should like to ask if the said concessions will benefit the flood-stricken inhabitants of Pakistan .
I doubt it .
In order to moderate the virtuous intentions here , my counter-proposal is that concessions should be made on other industrial products .
Why specifically on textiles ?
We would be equally useful to the flood victims in Pakistan .
In any event , the duration and range of concessions should be limited and provision should be made for safeguards , as proposed in the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we all firmly believe that we must help the people in Pakistan , but the instrument that you are proposing , Commissioner , is the wrong one , for three reasons .
The first is that there is absolutely no proof that trade facilitation will benefit the people affected by the floods .
On the contrary , we can even see that the textile industry in Pakistan is based in other regions and , in recent years , has even experienced growth .
Thus , this sector is not really affected at all .
How we intend to help the people affected by the floods by means of trade facilitation is beyond me .
Secondly , I cannot understand how we can now grant these facilitations to a country that plainly does not meet the GSP + conditions in terms of social and environmental standards and send a signal to other countries , like Bangladesh , which do meet these conditions , that essentially tells them that their efforts are not wanted and it is also possible to achieve this status by other means .
My third argument , Commissioner , is that this is not an approach based on solidarity , because the burden in Europe is borne in a one-sided manner by certain sectors and certain countries only .
If we want to do something , then we should do so in a spirit of solidarity with all countries and with the involvement of everyone , and that means we need direct aid for the flood victims .
That would be the right approach to take .
( PL ) Mr President , expressions of sympathy are due to all the victims of this terrible catastrophe and this is why it is right that the European Union has immediately rushed to provide humanitarian aid .
The future of Pakistan is a key issue for the world and for Europe .
This is an important country in the context of the fight against terrorism , and it is also a country which is a significant source of immigration to the European Union .
Unfortunately , until now , the European Union has had no concept for a policy on Pakistan .
The proposal for EU trade preferences has no specific aim .
The Commission was not able to justify implementation of the proposal , and neither could the Committee on International Trade during its meeting .
The proposal does not help those affected by the flood , nor does it have any significant influence on the country 's development .
The European Union has two significant and very important interests in its relations with Pakistan : firstly , the fight against terrorism ; secondly , the economic development of the country , which should be based on the rule of law , as it is elsewhere .
So instead of making proposals which do not achieve anything , we need to prepare a serious , wide-ranging offer of economic aid and cooperation , on a conditional basis .
If Pakistan wants to increase its cooperation with the European Union , it should show that it is cooperating in the fight against terrorism in a very real way and that it is developing its rule of law .
Then , a wide-ranging aid programme would make sense ; wide-ranging and not limited to one or two branches of the economy .
The proposal which has been presented - and I am repeating this once again - does not solve anything , so I believe it should be rejected .
I call on Mrs Ashton to present a well-thought through , conditional concept for cooperation with Pakistan .
Mr President , it is now eight months since the Council proposed a sensible package of measures to help Pakistan following the devastating flooding .
I regret that , eight months later , we are still debating it and not implementing it .
Let us ask why we needed this package .
There is a difference between aid and what is contained in this trade package .
Aid , of course , is very important to Pakistan , but the idea of this trade package was to provide an incentive to entrepreneurs to start rebuilding factories and reinvesting in the textile and other industries that were literally swept away by the flooding .
It is not true to say that the textile industry was not impacted by the flooding .
It is true that the centre of much of the textile industry is elsewhere than the flooded area but a lot of the support packages for the textile industry were in flooded areas , as was a lot of the textile industry .
This would have given an incentive to rebuild the textile industry by demonstrating there was a market for their products .
Unfortunately , our response has been very curmudgeonly .
I can certainly support the idea of having a safeguard clause , but it would be better to do nothing at all than to do this for only one year .
One year will not give the space for the investment that is necessary .
I also regret that India has been less than supportive in the WTO but I hope , as Mr Rinaldi mentioned , that the so-called cricket diplomacy is going to lead to a solution and that India will recognise that , both on humanitarian grounds and in the interests of security , it is important to help Pakistan create jobs and investment in the future .
( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , I see that this theme has divided the House .
Nevertheless , and contrary to the view held by my fellow Members , I support what the Council has presented .
As a member of the Committee on Development , it is precisely this aspect that I would like to emphasise .
Although urgent humanitarian aid in the form of funding is essential in response to disasters such as those in Pakistan , more needs to be done .
The most effective way we can promote development is to enable people to help themselves .
I therefore welcome the abolition of customs barriers - no matter how temporary - and I am confident that this transitional period will allow us to evaluate the process proposed by the Commission .
If this process and approach works , I would perhaps then revise the definition of the European Union 's development assistance .
If anything , it is not Pakistan , but China that poses the biggest threat to Europe 's textile market .
( RO ) Mr President , as some of our fellow Members have said , you have noticed the argument that granting special trade preferences to Pakistan would not be an appropriate solution for helping the flood victims , as they do not regard trade as a suitable means of response in such emergencies .
I agree that granting trade preferences may not help directly the people who have suffered as a result of flooding .
However , by implementing measures to supplement humanitarian aid , we can contribute to Pakistan 's economic recovery .
Indeed , international trade and humanitarian aid are not two diametrically opposed activities .
In practical terms , there is a degree of complementarity between all European Union policies .
In fact , when we offer developing countries trade preferences , we do not take this action purely for pragmatic , commercial reasons , but to show our solidarity with these states .
Mr President , the images of last summer 's flooding in Pakistan were indeed shocking , and the European Union rightly sought to implement aid measures to assist the millions of Pakistanis whose lives were devastated by this terrible disaster .
Humanitarian aid should be disbursed without political strings .
However , emergency trade preferences are a politically controversial measure , both in the context of Pakistan and the region .
The presence of Osama Bin Laden in Pakistan has now once again exposed Pakistan 's ambivalent approach towards fighting terrorism .
So , speaking personally , I am concerned that these emergency trade preferences will appear to reward the Pakistani Government for its lack of action in this respect .
I am also worried that secular , democratic Bangladesh , also a country prone to flooding , will suffer as a consequence in terms of unfair competition , and it , too , is heavily dependent on textiles .
This is a well-meaning measure and , of course , I fully accept that , but it is one we need to consider extremely carefully , given all the things that I have outlined in my brief speech .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , this draft is an attack on the European textile industry , there is no question about that .
However , allow me also to bring in a humanitarian aspect .
Extensive duty exemptions must be linked to an absolute obligation to respect human rights .
In this regard , I am thinking of Christian minorities and women 's rights .
The blasphemy law in Pakistan is particularly worrying : anyone who insults Mohammed is sentenced to death .
Fundamentalism is widespread in Pakistan across all levels of society and can even be detected among students at the renowned International Islamic University .
You clearly do not believe the argument yourself that trade preferences can be used to promote prosperity and combat radicalism .
The EU cannot simply grant trade preferences where this ignores or fails to require compliance with important matters of basic law .
Mr President , I speak as Chair of the delegation which covers Pakistan , and I must say that some real crocodile tears have been shed here tonight by people expressing views which are about 180 degrees away from those they normally express .
When we have discussed this issue here in the past , we have been assured by the Commission that the items in question have been carefully assessed to ensure they do not clash with EU exports .
Has this changed ?
We have been asked : why textiles from Pakistan ?
The answer is : because textiles are a major export for them .
You cannot expect them to conjure up something within a few months .
We , too , had our doubts about the potential effect of this measure in the flood-stricken areas .
We raised this matter when we were in Pakistan , and we heard directly from Members of Parliament there that the measure would be of benefit to industry in their constituencies , so I really think that we should consider the message we send if we do not support this measure .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to apologise for not being present at the beginning of the debate , but I was only just arriving from Brussels by plane and you were - how shall I put it ? - in advance of the schedule , which is very laudable , but which resulted in my being a little bit late .
I have taken notice of all the speeches that have been made on this report .
I would simply like to stress a couple of points .
First , we are not discussing an FTA .
It seems to me that a lot of speeches start from the assumption that this is a kind of FTA with all the elements that go with it .
For example , the problem of social conditionality , of sustainability as we call it , should not be considered here because this is very clearly a measure that is limited in time .
Secondly , we are not discussing the GSP either .
We will do that in the near future and then there will be the discussion as to which countries can be included and which not .
No , this is a proposal that the European Commission has made with respect to the massive flooding in Pakistan , time-bound for two years , with the possibility of its being continued for another year .
Let me also say that the amendment to limit it to one year , honestly speaking , to my mind does not make much sense : it would be better for you simply to vote against it .
Why have we not yet come to a conclusion , and why is this argument being used now , when about a year has already elapsed since the flooding took place ?
It is simply because we have just introduced this request for a waiver with the WTO , but within the WTO we face serious problems with the neighbours of Pakistan .
I do not think I have to name them .
We tried to find a solution .
I think we were moving in the right direction and we will have to see in the coming weeks what the impact may possibly be of what has recently been happening in Pakistan .
But there we are in the hands of the WTO as to whether or not we get a waiver , and this waiver can only be obtained by unanimity , so we cannot force this within the WTO .
We can only try to do our best to get it through .
I would also like to say that I am not talking , as one of the previous speakers has done , about crocodile tears and hypocrisy and so on .
That is not up to me to say , but let us say in a very neutral way that what has been said tonight is not necessarily consistent with what has been said in the past .
It is not because time has elapsed and that we have not yet got a waiver that the argument as such has changed .
Since the beginning , there has been a discussion as to whether or not this was directly in favour of the people struck by the flooding .
It is partially , yes .
Since the beginning , it has been said that there should also be humanitarian aid .
There has been humanitarian aid up to EUR 480 million so the arguments have not changed and I really do not see the merit in us now , all of a sudden , switching to another direction .
We have taken notice of the problems that can arise with the European textile industry , and with the ethanol industry .
There is a safeguard clause proposed that is , I think , sufficient to counter possible problems that might arise , so this is fairly clear and you are either in favour of it or against it .
The Commission is in favour of it and I think that , both from the point of view of the economic development of Pakistan and from the point of view of the security issues that are certainly linked with Pakistan , it would be a major mistake on the part of the European Parliament not to take up this responsibility and vote this down .
Mr President , I would like to welcome Commissioner De Gucht , albeit a little late , which we understand , but I think that there is still time to deliver the committee 's final position .
As the accidental rapporteur of this report and , once more , against my will , please allow me just two observations .
The first is that this debate has demonstrated as much division on this issue as in the Committee on International Trade itself or even more , and the second is that the merits of the proposals adopted by the Committee on International Trade , some of which the European Commission considers inconclusive ... the plenary sitting tomorrow will decide on the merits of these proposals and the Commission 's objections .
Allow me just two final observations .
There are two things of which Parliament and the Committee on International Trade cannot be accused .
Firstly , of having tried to block this issue , despite it being dependent on a World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) waiver and , in truth , of voting on an issue that can be rendered toothless by a lack of that waiver .
In fact , the Committee on International Trade decided to go ahead despite this .
Secondly , we took into account all the Commission 's last-minute amendments , because the Commission - which is the only body and institution that can initiate legislation - submitted its proposal , but the terms of the waiver request submitted to the WTO are not the same as the proposal that the Commission tabled before Parliament .
Moreover , then came the Council 's compromise , which was also different from the Commission 's initial proposal .
The Committee on International Trade did not question any of these things as an obstacle to taking the debate into their own hands and voting on this issue , and took on board all these late changes from both the Commission and the Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 10 May 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Questions regarding Pakistan are never entirely free of controversy , even those regarding aid following a natural disaster .
In the case of autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan , it is important to introduce a safeguard clause in case of interruptions to trade resulting from the abolition of tariffs .
We should also take into account our trading interests and care for them in the long term by establishing their optimal period of validity and the conditions which must be fulfilled by Pakistan .
The flood which affected Pakistan so catastrophically in the summer of 2010 had a disastrous effect on the country 's economy .
The EU wants to help Pakistan by contributing to the economic redevelopment of the country .
In view of the fact that Pakistan is unusually important to the security of the EU due to its geo-strategic position , we should do everything we can to stabilise the situation there .
In this way , we will prevent the radicalisation of opinion in Pakistan .
A more stable economy always brings with it a more democratic society and a retreat from anti-democratic , radical social movements .
Our decision will send an unambiguous signal to Pakistan that we want to help and that we would like Pakistan to become a stable and rich country , which will prevent opinion becoming radicalised there .
I believe that this Pakistan , as our ally , would also help to solve the deadlocked situation in Afghanistan .
I support the principle of helping Pakistan boost its economy following the floods in July 2010 .
However , I feel that the proposal made by the Commission is inappropriate for several reasons .
Firstly , it is not a particularly quick solution : almost a year after the disaster , we have no positive sign of the waiver that the Union must obtain from the WTO before its proposal can enter into force , we have not finished our work as legislators , and we have still to hold negotiations in the Council .
Secondly , no impact assessment has been carried out , and we do not know what effect these measures will have either on the Pakistani economy or on the European economy ( in particular , the textile and ethanol sectors , which are specifically targeted by the proposal ) .
Nor do we know how Pakistan will redistribute the income from exports covered by these measures so that they genuinely benefit the regions affected by the floods .
Lastly , it should be noted that the proposed measures place no human rights obligations on Pakistan .
This goes against all the positions recently adopted and must remain the exception .
Free trade agreement with India ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Mr Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the state of play of the EU-India Free Trade Agreement negotiations - B7-0214 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I hope not to use the full five minutes .
The issue is simple .
This is an initiative of the Committee on International Trade , of which I am chair , and it is as chair that I am asking this question , in relation to which the political groups have reached agreement by consensus .
I am pleased to be asking this question , which has had the approval of the political group coordinators on my committee and which seeks a response from the European Commission on a range of concerns regarding the state of play of the EU-India Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) negotiations , which have been ongoing since 2007 .
There is no need to stress the importance of this initiative .
In fact , one of the great innovations of the Treaty of Lisbon was giving the European Parliament the right not just to give final approval to agreements on , inter alia , international trade after their negotiation , but also to be informed about every stage of negotiations , from the outset .
This means that Parliament has the power and the duty to monitor negotiations - in this case , trade negotiations - and to intervene politically using the parliamentary means at its disposal , such as hearings , resolutions and oral questions , in order to stay informed on the progress of these negotiations .
It is for this reason that the Committee on International Trade believes in listening to the Commission , which , we should say , has been providing us with a great deal of information on this subject .
However , I think it needs to answer a number of questions publicly .
The oral question consists of seven questions , specifically on the progress made on a range of sensitive subjects , such as public procurement ; negotiations concerning intellectual property rights issues in relation to generic medicines ; the application for a mandate on overseas investment negotiations that the Commission submitted to the European Council ; issues being negotiated relating to culture and cultural services ; whether there has been a specific assessment of the effects of a possible FTA with India on the main European industries ; whether there is a quantitative assessment of the foreseeable benefits and losses from this FTA for the European Union ; and , finally , whether the Commission assures us that it will give Parliament 's views on this issue the proper consideration .
The questions are in writing ; they are in the document we tabled and I think that they are clear enough for us to make progress on the issue of public information on these important trade negotiations between the European Union and one of our great trade partners .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Moreira and the Committee on International Trade for giving me the opportunity to address the plenary on this important negotiation .
It goes without saying that to conclude an agreement with India at this juncture is not only of great economic value but also of major strategic importance .
India is just at the beginning of a development path which will make it one of the key economic players of this century .
An ambitious and balanced agreement with India would take our relationship to a different level by providing a stable , predictable framework governing our future economic relations .
We are therefore working very hard to bring this negotiation to a conclusion and there is a real opportunity to do so .
India is clearly interested at the highest political level .
The India-EU Summit in December came out with a strong commitment expressed by both sides to conclude the negotiations as soon as possible .
We have made progress across a range of issues .
We are making headway on the tariff offers and are preparing the exchange of offers on services .
We are now intensively negotiating on procurement , and this is the first time that India has negotiated a substantive procurement chapter including specific rules and market access commitments .
Having said this , I do not want to hide the fact that there are also still some thorny issues on the table which require difficult negotiation .
As with any negotiation , the last yards are the most difficult .
Firstly , there are the tariff negotiations where we have made some good progress quickly over the last few months and I am confident that India will significantly improve its offer , but a few sectors remain very difficult ; notably , cars , and wine and spirits .
We are also having very intense discussions on services and the contours of a possible package are getting clearer , but some of our key interests concern sectors where legislative reform is still ongoing or being contemplated in India .
This mainly concerns insurance , postal , financial , retail , legal and accountancy services .
This makes negotiations very challenging .
There is also sustainable development , which is , of course , very important for us but very sensitive in India .
We are fully aware of the views of the European Parliament in this respect and will take those into account .
However , we must remain realistic .
We need to see what will ultimately be possible with a partner like India .
We need to find a solution which satisfies our expectations but also takes into account the specific situation of India .
So yes , there will be a chapter on sustainable development that will be part and parcel of the agreements , that will recognise the importance of relevant international standards and be based on cooperation , but we also need to be clear that a sustainable development chapter which would allow the use of trade restrictions linked to social or environmental issues will not be acceptable to India .
This would also not be in accordance with the model we are advocating in our trade agreements in general .
We are not pursuing sanctions but cooperation in this area .
Another issue which has been sensitive in this negotiation and the cause of some concern is access to medicines and the potential impact this FTA might have on access to medicines in the developing world .
But let me reassure you on these crucial points .
We are fully aware of the specific role played by India as regards access to affordable medicines in the developing world .
Therefore , this FTA - whether its intellectual property rights chapter , its investment chapter or any other chapter - will not undermine the capacity of India to promote , produce or export generic medicines , including through compulsory licences .
We ourselves have even proposed very clear language to this effect but , at the same time , one should bear in mind the potential of a robust framework on IPR in India , which can certainly encourage innovation and research , including as regards the development of new medicine .
Therefore , negotiating a chapter on IPR with India remains an important objective for us in this negotiation .
Let me also be very clear as regards data protection and data exclusivity for pharmaceutical products .
What we will be asking through this agreement is that , if and when India decides to introduce a system of data exclusivity , it will be applied in a non-discriminatory manner so that European producers will also benefit from it and , of course , we continue to believe that access to medicine and the protection of test data can coexist constructively .
Further dialogue by all interested stakeholders should help to develop a common understanding on this matter .
Also , in the intellectual property rights chapter , geographical indications are a major area of interest for the EU .
It is important to obtain in this negotiation a political deliverable allowing for the effective protection of the major EU GI names .
Negotiations have so far proven to be difficult .
Nonetheless , the Commission continues to push for a satisfactory outcome .
Finally , as you are aware , the Commission has also proposed to the Council additional negotiating guidelines to also negotiate investment protection .
These draft negotiating guidelines have been shared with Parliament subject to the appropriate confidentiality requirements .
The Council is currently examining these guidelines and we look forward to hearing Parliament 's view on them .
When and how this chapter can be negotiated will ultimately depend on when the Council manages to agree on these additional negotiating guidelines .
Let me conclude by reiterating that this negotiation is very important and , I believe , an opportunity we should not miss .
Of course , we should not conclude an agreement at any cost but only if the substance on the table is right .
If the substance is not there , we should simply say no .
Some of our requests , such as access for our cars or wines and spirits or the opening of certain services sectors , are difficult for India to deliver .
I look forward to more intensified exchanges on this with the European Parliament as we move into what is hopefully the final phase .
I believe the debate we will now have is a useful opportunity for this House to give its views on these negotiations .
These views will be taken into account as far as possible , taking into account the realities and specificities of this particular negotiation .
In this respect , we look forward to the resolution that you are planning to adopt on the India FTA , which I believe is very timely .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the case of India , I would like to state that I expressly agree with the Commissioner that it is good for us to be in talks with this country regarding a trade agreement .
The strategic reasons alone - you mentioned some of them - speak for themselves .
In particular , the fact that , regrettably , we are not making any progress within the framework of the WTO also speaks even more in favour of this free trade agreement with India .
However , the issue that is still causing me concern is whether we really will obtain access to the Indian market for our enterprises .
Does this free trade agreement ultimately really only suit the world and the division of economic power between Europe and India that we know today , or will this agreement still be suitable in ten or 15 years ' time ?
In this regard , I am increasingly concerned about the issue of the exclusions .
I fully understand why India is currently demanding certain exclusions in certain sectors in the negotiations .
A country at the level of development at which India currently finds itself needs exclusions .
This is certainly something that we in Europe can understand very well .
However , I would expressly like to see all these exclusions expire on a particular day .
I would like the exclusions to be provided either with a clear time limit or with definite benchmarks , however they are structured - perhaps the Commission could consider what proposals it intends to bring to the table to go some way towards meeting India 's demands .
I would therefore like very clear limits for all exclusions , whether in the form of time limits or benchmarks .
We more than owe that to our enterprises and thus , also to our workers .
I would be very grateful if you could tell us to what extent you have such exclusions and possible limits for them in view in the negotiations .
The second important subject that you mentioned and that I would like to express my agreement with is the subject of intellectual property .
We absolutely must achieve a result that benefits our farmers and other parties affected here , particularly in the area of geographical indications .
We must also help our manufacturers when it comes to medicines , but I think that we will all agree that this must not be to the detriment of those who are dependent on access to cheap medicines .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the EU-India free trade agreement negotiations are ambitious , they concern many economic sectors , but they are also a cause for concern in Europe and in India , as I was able to see during last month 's meeting between the trade committee of the two chambers of the Indian Parliament and the European Parliament 's delegation for relations with India .
India is booming ; it is a strategic partner , as you have reminded us .
Everyone understands the importance of developing trade between us .
Yet we are not starting from scratch , since the Union is already India 's main trading partner , the main investor in India and the main destination for Indian investors , and India is also the main beneficiary of the system of generalised preferences .
We will therefore have to be alert to any new impact that a new and more far-reaching trade agreement may have on fragile sectors of the Indian economy .
I am thinking , for example , of agriculture - our Indian colleagues spoke to us about this - and of the consequences for sectors that are particularly exposed to competition from emerging countries in Europe , and I am thinking of the car industry .
Such an agreement should serve the development of our societies and of employment and not give rise to uncontrolled liberalisation that would have disastrous effects .
That is why my group wishes to emphasise a number of points in these negotiations , which should culminate in an agreement that helps achieve the objectives of sustainable development and poverty eradication , and which should also be accompanied by clear and verifiable commitments , on the basis of cooperation , of course , but then coupled with serious social and environmental commitments .
I should like to emphasise a few points in particular . Firstly , regarding agriculture - which I mentioned earlier - we call on the Commission to ensure that none of the agreement 's provisions , either on the liberalisation of agricultural trade or on intellectual property rights , threaten small-scale farming in India .
I am thinking of the provisions on seeds , for example .
Secondly , regarding generic medicines , India is the biggest producer of generic medicines in the developing world .
We call on the Commission to stop demanding data exclusivity , since all the NGOs say it is liable to harm the distribution of those medicines .
Thirdly , in the area of services , we call , firstly , for public services to be left out of the sectors to be liberalised and , secondly , concerning mode IV , for the principle of equal treatment to be guaranteed - in other words , for all forms of social dumping to be rejected .
Lastly - thank you , Mr President - we believe that the sustainable development chapter must include binding commitments in relation to respect for social and environmental standards , in particular , ILO social standards .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these negotiations are a little like the four-armed God Shiva , since it takes so much effort to conclude such a complex agreement .
I am now going to explain the position of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Firstly : access to medicines .
While I welcome the Commissioner 's statement , I confirm that I am against any attempt to implement protectionist measures in a sector in which Europe actually hindered access to low cost medicines in the past .
Exploiting the issue of counterfeiting purely for protectionist purposes is about as low as it gets .
The agreement should instead be an opportunity for the Indian and European pharmaceutical industries to cooperate with one another .
Secondly : industrial sectors .
We are asking India to allow sensitive sectors such as the automotive and alcohol sectors , in which our exports are today heavily taxed , to also feature in the agreement .
Thirdly : agriculture .
For our part , we declare ourselves willing to discuss agricultural products and to open up our market , but with a few conditions attached : obviously , we must say ' no ' to GMOs and do everything we can to protect geographical indications .
As regards this last aspect , I would remind you that geographical indications are not just a trade policy matter ; they are also part of Europe 's identity .
We therefore hope that a huge effort will be made to simplify registration procedures in India 's bureaucratic system , which is very onerous , perhaps even more onerous than the European one , which says it all .
As regards public procurement , I congratulate the Commission if it is true that India seems to be prepared , for the first time , to include public procurement in an international agreement .
Indian railways - to give you an example , 17 000 trains transport 18 million passengers every day , and there are plans to build a further 25 000 kilometres of track in the next 10 years - are one of the many markets that could potentially be opened up with this free trade agreement .
If the negotiations go well , both parties will benefit : sustainable development will be promoted , child labour will gradually be eradicated and a more progressive form of social protection will be upheld .
I feel it is pointless and detrimental to oppose this , and so I call on all the groups in Parliament to reject a priori a compromise text .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , as the Commissioner has said , he agrees with this resolution , and it reiterates everything that the EU-India Free Trade Agreement could encourage - investment , the elimination of tariffs , non-tariff barriers , etc .
The conclusion of an ambitious FTA is expected to boost bilateral trade by EUR 160 billion by 2015 , with key sectors seeing as much as a 30 % increase in bilateral foreign direct investment .
I am sure that the Commissioner will agree that these are exactly the kind of figures that will help to stimulate the economy and create jobs , not only throughout the United Kingdom , but also in India .
In its initial assessment of the potential FTA between the EU and India , the Centre for the Analysis of Regional Integration at Sussex concluded that any gains would depend on the extent to which the text identified and dealt with the key areas which the Commissioner specifically mentioned , such as government procurement , services , investment in trade facilitation , etc .
It states that if an agreement is largely confined to an issue of shallow integration , notably , the reduction of tariffs , there is a strong possibility of trade diversion exceeding trade creation for both parties .
The Commissioner mentioned , quite rightly , sustainable development .
I would say to you that we have to be very careful .
The red lines are set , as it were , in tablets of stone , and I hope that we will not go too far towards conceding too much .
I would also agree with Mr Caspary on time limits .
I think he put a very good point forward there .
At this point , I should also mention the impact of the WTO Doha Development Round on an EU-India FTA .
Current signals from Geneva have not been positive , and the Commissioner admitted not so long ago that the negotiations were in dire straits .
Now is perhaps the time , he said , for Plan B - something , I hasten to add , that the Committee on International Trade has been looking for for a long time .
What effect will this have on the EU-India FTA ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , let us be clear : this free trade agreement is not negotiated on an equal footing .
India 's per capita GDP is about 6 % of that of the EU .
India , although ambitious , is a developing country with a huge number of poor and starving people within its borders .
We must not forget this .
We are bound by the principle of policy coherence for development , which is enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty , and it tells us that none of our policies must harm development .
Yet , with this FTA , we are causing harm - to agriculture , retail , Indian companies , etc .
Examples have already been mentioned .
In addition , through the dispute settlement provisions , we are reducing the policy space for India , and for the EU and its Member States , to introduce , for example , new environmental legislation .
The mechanism in question has led to multinational companies suing countries for their policies on health and environment - and your governments , too , will be affected by this .
With regard to generic medicines , as I see it , they are not out of the danger zone .
Pushing for data exclusivity in any form is a problem , no matter how it is done .
Parliament needs to send a clear signal to the Commission that a trade agreement should be fair and should not curb the policy space .
Unfortunately , however , the members of the EPP , ALDE and ECR Groups are actually curbing their own power as Members of this Parliament .
In the Committee on International Trade , they have consistently asked the Commission not to pursue the investment chapter until Parliament has given its opinion on what investment policy should look like , but now , in this resolution , they are calling on the Commission to go ahead without waiting for Parliament 's opinion .
How come ?
I really hope that some of our colleagues can have a second look at the text before simply agreeing to it on Wednesday .
I hope we can send a clear signal to the Commission and thereby influence the negotiations , making it very clear that we want to exercise our powers as the European Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , the motions for resolutions that the European Parliament has been presented with make it clear to all groups that Parliament - as has already been emphasised - does not feel it is sufficiently informed about the specific status of the negotiations .
I am therefore grateful for the more detailed information that we have been given today .
The questions from the left side of this House in particular deal directly with the concerns of the people in Europe , but also in India , and these are concerns for their own social and economic situation and the prospects of workers and those looking for work , including in the EU Member States .
As we know , the devil is in the detail , so we would like to know the following , Commissioner : what are the specific subjects of the negotiations when it comes to public invitations to tender in the services sector or in connection with labour migration ?
What text is on the table with regard to intellectual property rights ?
What is the situation with regard to the environment and agriculture ?
By using the specific texts , we want to examine whether the role of India as the pharmacy to the world 's poor is put at risk or whether the production of cheaper malaria medicines or medicines for the treatment of AIDS will be obstructed by the agreement , without ignoring the massive research investments also made by our own pharmaceutical companies .
We want to examine whether European local authorities , hospitals or ministries are , in future , to be obliged to make calls for tenders in which Indian companies can also be included .
We want to know whether the agreement will regulate the conditions of entry into the Member States of the European Union of Indian nurses or carers for the elderly , including the length of stay and recognition of qualifications .
We want to know whether the agreement text will put small-scale farmers and fishermen in India at risk and whether European steel workers are threatened with redundancy because Indian capital will , in future , be able to be invested freely in the purchase of companies in the EU as a result of the agreement .

( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the political analysts and politicians - for example , Henry Kissinger - who predicted decades ago that besides the United States of America , the European Union , Russia and China , and India , too , would have a leading role in the new world order were right .
Of course , we congratulate the people , the peoples of India on that , but we should not forget about those infringements , including child labour , which led to this , to this development , and the European Union must send a clear message to India that the human rights infringements and child labour cannot be continued in the future .
These do not fit in with the ideas which the European Union represents .
We do not see that the free trade agreement would ensure sufficient independence of the European economy and European production .
We therefore suggest that the free trade agreement contain guarantees to ensure the independence of European family entrepreneurs , smallholders and producers , through which Europe might overcome the economic crisis in which we currently find ourselves .
( PL ) Mr President , it is right that , in a situation where there is a problem with extending trade liberalisation within the World Trade Organisation , the European Union is concluding free trade agreements with important global partners , such as India .
We have much in common with India - it is the largest democracy in the world , it is a country which acts as a stabilising influence internationally , and it is our ally in the fight against international terrorism .
Trade relations play a huge role , today .
Arranging them in the right way would lead to economic growth in India and the development of the country , and would improve international stability .
It is in our interest .
It is right that we are also expecting the Commission to take up the very significant subject of foreign investments , and to include the promotion and protection of foreign investments .
A European Parliament document on this subject already exists , addressing what Parliament expects from future talks on the mutual protection of foreign investments .
Tomorrow , we will be voting on an important regulation which will allow the Commission to take further action .
It is very important that this sector should expand and bring benefits for European and Indian investors .
( RO ) Mr President , the free trade agreement with India will become the most substantial agreement of this kind if the negotiations are concluded satisfactorily for both sides .
The European Union is India 's biggest trade partner and the Generalised System of Preferences is one of the instruments used by the European Union to encourage this country 's economic development .
Although India has an emerging economy , social disparities persist .
More than 800 million people live on less than USD 2 a day .
India 's efforts in building a strong economy must be backed up by the political will to improve the situation in terms of human , social and environmental rights .
This is why the European Commission must urge during the negotiations for some legally binding clauses to be introduced relating to these areas .
India can set not only an economic example for the rest of the developing countries , but also an example of democracy .
Mr President , I was a member of the EP delegation that went to India last month .
A small group of us went , and it was exceedingly interesting and very valuable to go .
I want to talk , in particular , about paragraph 29 of the motion on which we will vote on Wednesday .
It says that Parliament ' welcomes all efforts by the Indian Government to eradicate child labour ' .
I suppose the person who drafted this is attacking goods that might be manufactured using child labour and brought into Europe , but the motion does not say that .
What it does is single out one of the unfortunate aspects of Indian life which still exists .
Last year , our delegation visited a project in southern India , which is financed by EU money , to eliminate child labour .
From what we saw , the problem was that children were actually working in the fields - not manufacturing anything - to pay off debts that their parents had incurred .
They were sentenced to do this for life and to miss out on schooling .
The phrase used in the motion for a resolution is potentially offensive to Indians .
Of course they want to eliminate child labour .
We should either get rid of paragraph 29 or change it to say that we are concerned about goods that might be made using child labour .
For me , there is a whiff of superiority here , with Europe saying : ' We have got rid of child labour , but you Indians are still using it ' .
That is not the relationship we should have with a very important trading partner .
( NL ) Mr President , I believe there are two schools of thought on the free trade agreement with India .
Firstly , there is the view that goes : we now have an agreement which is the most extensive in the world .
We therefore need to maintain it and it is important in itself and , then , as we trade with India , a number of what are commonly known as non-trade concerns , such as minority rights , child labour and caste discrimination , will crop up .
I call this ' the trader 's take on things ' .
This way of thinking pervades the resolution that is before us .
The second take on things , Mr President , actually demands that we , first of all , clear up non-trade concerns and only then reach an agreement .
I call that ' the preacher 's take on things ' .
We know that , in the latter scenario , India will definitely not want to enter into an agreement with us .
I would like to remind this House that in March 2009 , we adopted a resolution which took into account both the trade and the non-trade concerns .
In my opinion , the resolution before us is a retrograde step .
It may contain a sustainable development clause , but it has no teeth .
The Dalits have hardly been mentioned at all .
Nature and the environment are the biggest losers in the current text .
I cannot therefore endorse the text of the resolution .
Our negotiators have to hold on to the 2009 resolution .
The trader and the preacher must continue to cooperate and , I am quoting the Commissioner here , ' only then will you have a balanced agreement ' .
( EL ) Mr President , achieving an ambitious and mutually beneficial agreement between the EU and India is , quite rightly , a core objective under the EU 's current external trade policy .
If negotiations are to be brought to a swift conclusion , consultations must be stepped up on key sectors , such as services , non-tariff barriers , public procurement and geographical indications .
As far as the trade in goods is concerned , I would highlight the high average tariffs imposed by India on both agricultural and industrial goods .
As regards access to the services sector , unfortunately , there appears to be no clear commitment on the part of India at present .
The Union should insist in no uncertain terms on its claim to enhanced protection for all geographical indications on a market as important as the Indian market .
Moreover , India is also an ally of the Union within the framework of multilateral negotiations on geographical indications in the Doha Round .
It should be noted that India has a clear legislative framework , especially as regards the procedure for the registration of geographical indications and their coexistence alongside trademarks .
Finally , I should like to say that the Union must demonstrate flexibility towards the Indian request for protection for non-agricultural Indian geographical indications so that India , in turn , will grant protection for European geographical indications .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I really do think it is important that , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we decide on the structure of the negotiations together , because this Treaty gives Parliament a new role in trade relations .
If we once again consider the fact that India is clearly a market of the future , we must also feed this back into a clear position adopted by Parliament : In our view , industrial development in the European Union - linked to jobs - is of key importance .
We therefore need to make it clear that the interests of jobs in industry in Europe must take priority in the trade agreements .
For that reason , although an agreement has to be asymmetrical , at the end of the day , the tariffs must be zero .
It is not acceptable for us to have tariffs of 100 % in mechanical engineering and the automotive sector and , in the end , perhaps negotiate 50 % .
As long as we do not have any zero tariffs , it will encourage investments outside Europe .
Therefore , Commissioner , we need to clearly define our priority areas and they lie in industry .
We also need a level playing field to be established with regard to social standards , and it is also necessary for clear obligations to be imposed on India in relation to workers ' rights .
( RO ) Madam President , India is booming as a country , with enviable economic growth , and is one of our biggest trade partners .
The free trade agreement with India is extremely important for the future of trade relations .
This is why I , too , am in favour of concluding this agreement as soon as possible .
One important aspect relates to the deregulation of services , especially with regard to modes 3 and 4 .
Services are particularly important for economic growth , both in India and the European Union , which must be reflected in the free trade agreement .
With regard to mode 4 , the problems linked to the recognition of professional qualifications need to be resolved , which is , nevertheless , a fairly difficult issue , given that we have problems with mutual recognition of professional qualifications even between European Union Member States .
I would like to ask the Commission to tell us what stage the discussions have reached on this subject .
The second aspect relates to reciprocity of access to the public procurement markets .
Providing European companies with access to India 's public procurement markets may contribute to our companies ' development .
Another measure needed is for India to produce and implement some transparent , clear regulations on public procurement , which will also enable European companies to gain access to them .
Madam President , as the original parliamentary rapporteur for this matter when we opened negotiations back in 2007 , I always said at the time that we should try to reach an ambitious free trade agreement that is really comprehensive and far-reaching in what we can achieve , and I am quite pleased to see that we have followed an agenda which seeks to do this .
It is quite clear to me when I look at what the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce is now saying that we are likely to increase bilateral trade from EUR 69 billion in 2009 to EUR 160 billion in 2015 .

I am encouraged to see also India making real headway in trying to deal with a variety of issues including particularly non-tariff barriers .
It is a great encouragement to see how the current Indian Government is now facing up to issues of corruption , even to the extent of detaining the Commonwealth Games Chief , and addressing those non-tariff barriers .
Can I also welcome , Commissioner , this joint declaration made by you and the Indian Trade Minister , Anand Sharma , on 13 December 2010 stating unequivocally that nothing in the agreement would prevent the poorest from accessing life-saving medicines .
That will , I hope , give confidence to colleagues in this House as to our approach in these negotiations .
There remains one other matter that was always regarded as a red-line issue and that is public procurement .
On all the enquiries that I have made , Commissioner , I keep being informed that some detailed negotiations and plans are in place but , as yet , we do not have those details .
I wonder if you could provide us with those today ?
May I finally be bold enough to ask you whether we can conclude this FTA before the summer is out .
( PL ) Madam President , it seems to me that , as opposed to my fellow Members , I believe that the agreement will be very beneficial for India as well as the European Union at this juncture .
The world order is changing .
Some superpowers are becoming weaker while others , like India , are growing in power .
That is why we , the European Union , need a partner like this , a democratic partner , since we also have various relations with undemocratic partners .
The agreement which is currently being negotiated concerns the exchange of goods , services and investments , but there will also be references to sensitive social and environmental issues .
I was very pleased to hear the Commissioner 's comment with regard to generic drugs that there will be no danger of a negative effect on the patients .
Having been in India many times , and also in developing countries , we have heard from AIDS patients how important it is for them to have access to cheap drugs .
Digital services and personal data are very important in Europe as well .
I am convinced that India can fulfil European conditions concerning personal data , although the EU is amending them at the moment and will probably change them as technology develops .
After the latest events at Sony , Europeans need to be sure that their data are secure if they are being processed abroad .
I am sure that this agreement will lead to a rise in various environmental working standards , but we need to be careful here .
It appears to me , especially in view of our debate , that we all have different expectations of India and we want to include these expectations in the free trade agreement .
However , this is a free trade agreement , and it cannot include all our expectations or everything we would like India to achieve .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , there are so many issues involved in this agreement that you have to concentrate somewhat in order to pick out the most important ones .
In my opinion , there are two things that are immensely important , both of which could be subsumed under the heading of ' fairness ' .
The first is fairness for our producers and for our industry .
That has been mentioned several times already .
We must not allow certain restrictions , which may perhaps make sense at the start , to remain in place permanently .
Right at the start of this agreement , we must establish how long something should apply and under what circumstances regulations will subsequently be discontinued .
After all , India will obviously continue to develop and we need to take account of that .
In this regard , I share the views expressed by my fellow Members .
It is also a question of fairness for the people , both in the European Union and also in India .
That is also extremely important .
An agreement such as this must also contain elements that do not necessarily relate only to trade - these have also been mentioned already : sustainability , human rights , social , environmental and labour standards - these things are also unbelievably important .
Above all , these aspects must be laid down in such a way that there are consequences if they are not complied with .
I do not at all mean this to sound schoolmasterish towards our Indian friends .
When it comes to human rights , I can imagine that India has better law relating to the press , for example , than some Member States of the European Union .
In other words , we need to view from the opposite side , too .
However , these requirements must be binding for both sides , they must be met and , if they are not met , it must have consequences for both sides on account of social dumping .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , we support the negotiations on this free trade agreement with India , which has to be ambitious but which nevertheless still raises some issues .
Firstly , the issue of whether to include a chapter on sustainable development .
This free trade agreement is a new-generation agreement , so it is only natural that it should include such a chapter .
Hence , we are not talking about a quid pro quo , but about a negotiating chapter as such .
Furthermore , if the free trade agreement is to reflect each party 's level of development , it cannot overlook such fundamental standards as the prohibition of child labour , for example .
Although it has been officially prohibited since 1986 , an estimated 60 million children still work today in India 's fields and factories .
The Commission cannot ignore minimum social standards during these negotiations .
To come back to the purely commercial negotiating chapter , the issue of reciprocal access to government contracts has not been fully resolved .
I am pleased that access to Indian federal government contracts is being covered by these negotiations , but what about provincial contracts ?
To conclude , I have a few concerns about the protection of intellectual property rights and , in particular , of geographical indications - this has been mentioned several times .
Indian legislation protects them only at national level , not at international level .
As I understood it , the Commission had listed 200 indications that it intended to protect via an agreement that would come into force before the free trade agreement .
Is this still the plan ?
We now move to the catch-the-eye part of the debate .
I will not be able to give the floor to everybody who has asked , and I would ask those of you who get the floor to keep to your one minute .
( SK ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the free trade agreement with India is clearly an exciting opportunity , offering tremendous potential for trade with the world 's largest democracy .
However , I am rather disappointed that negotiations on the free trade agreement have made only sluggish progress towards the conclusion of a negotiated agreement .
In particular , the domain of intellectual property rights requires clear and fair treatment because it is unacceptable , from a human rights perspective , to threaten the fundamental rights of the poorest inhabitants of developing countries , including the right of access to generic medicines and health care .
The Commission and the Indian authorities should and must intensify their cooperation on a common definition of counterfeit drugs , an important area which is harmful to patient health , in order that public health is adequately protected .
( RO ) Madam President , as a member of the European Union-India delegation , I support the conclusion of a free trade agreement between the European Union and India .
India is an important developing country and a significant trade partner for the European Union .
However , it is important for us to know what the fine detail of this agreement 's content is going to be .
I should mention as a reminder that the European Parliament will ratify this agreement .
This is why we are asking for information about the current stage of negotiations .
I would like to ask the Commission how this agreement is going to reflect both the European Union 's future industrial policy and India 's industrial policy .
There ought to be a particular focus placed on the respect for , and protection of , intellectual property rights and patents .
Last but not least , I would like to know whether this agreement will help the positions of the European Union and India converge on the fight against climate change and reducing polluting emissions .
( PL ) Madam President , reaching an agreement with India on free trade is a key issue for Europe at the moment .
In the face of current economic problems , this agreement will ensure that the Union will have greater access to one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
However , there are still many problems which need to be solved .
In my opinion , we should elaborate on agricultural matters and those concerning movement of populations .
Furthermore , there is a lack of adequate progress on government procurement and services , principles for the protection of intellectual property , including geographical indications , conditions for sustainable development , and particularly in following production standards when creating equal conditions for competition .
I believe that it is essential to carry out an assessment of the specific character of individual sectors to flag possible negative influences of a free trade agreement on vulnerable sectors of the economy of the European Union .
Madam President , I think we all welcome India 's growth over the last decade or so , and especially since dumping some of the failed marxist and socialist policies of yesteryear .
This has enabled it to throw off the shackles and to grow in an admirable way .
I would also like to remind our colleagues from all across the political spectrum that this is a trade agreement and , as such , we should be focusing on the trade aspects .
That is not to say that the other aspects are unimportant , but if we can focus on trade so as to help bring about and create wealth in India , and help entrepreneurs in India to create wealth and jobs in their own villages and towns , that will be to the benefit of all .
It concerns me when we place too much emphasis on our standards from day one in an almost imperialist way , as my colleague , Bill Newton Dunn , said earlier .
I think it is important that we focus on improving trade agreements to create wealth in these countries , including India , and help them out of poverty .
That is the best way we can help .

( PT ) Madam President , the profound weakening of the productive capacity of the weaker economies of the European Union , such as Portugal - which result from integration based on competition between the strong and those who are thus weakened ; between the rich and those who are thus impoverished ; and which is conducted according to the interests of the big companies of the European powers - is exacerbated by the liberalisation and deregulation of world trade , led by those powers in their own interests .
Faced with the visible disaster caused by this path , instead of backtracking , the European Union continues to give signals that it wishes to blindly forge on ahead .
It is in this context that we should analyse this agreement , which is the widest-ranging one agreed to date .
A profound change in current trade policy is urgently needed , steering international trade towards complementarity and not competition , towards the establishment of fair and equitable economic relationships that are mutually advantageous , and which serve the development of countries and their peoples , and not just a few companies and financial institutions .
The multifaceted crisis that we are facing demands a new rationale for economic , social , energy and environmental issues , which free trade , one of the pillars of neoliberalism , clearly renders unviable .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank colleagues for the very rich debate on the FTA negotiations with India .
It is , of course , very difficult to go into all the questions in a detailed manner , but let me just focus on some questions that have been repeatedly put .
On public procurement , it is obvious that the public procurement chapter will focus on federal level , not on provincial level .
By the way , this is the first time ever that they have been ready to negotiate on public procurement as such , but I also want to indicate the limitations of this .
What is very important is that our negotiations also cover to the maximum extent possible India 's central level public sector undertakings where the bulk of procurement is done .
Niccolò Rinaldi gave the example of trains , which is obviously one of the major sectors , given the difficult position of India with regard to infrastructure .
Another question that has been repeatedly touched upon is child labour .
I think it is fair to make a distinction between child labour in manufacturing and child labour in agriculture .
Obviously , there are still quite a lot of youngsters working in agriculture .
Whether they combine it or not with schooling is not always very clear , but I think the majority of them do so .
It may also be the case that the number of children working in manufacturing goods that will be exported to Europe is rather limited so I think , as Mr Newton Dunn rightly pointed out , we should clearly distinguish between the two .
Let me also say that child labour is a very complex matter and it has always been a very complex matter in our own countries .
I remember very well that when I was young , which is , of course , some time ago , but nevertheless not ages , a lot of children were still working specifically in agriculture , so this is not something that completely belongs to the Dark Ages in Europe either .
( FR ) Mr Désir raised the issue of Europe 's demand for data exclusivity to be included in our negotiations .
Several other Members specifically raised this point in connection with doctors in developing countries .
I would like to be very clear , however , and I have already said this on several occasions , during conferences and also directly to the NGOs concerned : we are not asking for data exclusivity ; we are simply not asking for that .
What we are saying - and it seems reasonable to me anyway - is that , if India ever decides by itself to apply data exclusivity , then it will apply to us too .
There is what we call in our jargon ' national treatment ' , and I believe that that is the right approach .
I therefore believe that I would be criticised to some extent if I agreed to apply protection measures to the Indian pharmaceutical industry that were not applied to our own industry .
That is what this is about , nothing else .
I really want to be very clear on that .
Other issues have been raised , Madam President , in particular with regard to tariffs - an issue raised , among others , by Mr Caspary .
There is , of course , a different timeframe for , let us say , the path to zero for India and for Europe , which is understandable because they have different levels of development .
The only question is whether zero can be achieved in certain sectors .
We always emphasise the need to achieve it in every sector .
Even so , I should like to draw your attention to the following , Mr Caspary : what will benefit our industry the most ?
A path towards zero in the very long term , or a rather drastic reduction in the first few years ?
I believe that we actually need to strike a balance between the two and then see where it takes us .
Nevertheless , I should like to draw your attention to the two objectives : to reach zero in , say , 20 years , and to obtain a very moderate reduction in the meantime .
The same solution is not necessarily that attractive to our industry , in my view .
Therefore , we shall see , and I am sure that together , we shall come up with the best possible solution during this discussion .
Concerning the GIs , the high level of protection is an important objective in this negotiation and it has taken quite some time and effort with India to come to a common approach .
One should also consider that India has never protected GIs through a bilateral agreement , so this is the first time that they are discussing this with a partner .
We will continue to pursue this issue vigorously with the overall objective of achieving a high level of protection for our GIs .
I think that I have covered most of the other issues .
I am certainly willing to continue the discussion on this agreement with Parliament and the Committee on International Trade , the more so now that we are reaching the end game in this discussion .
I am not going to pronounce on the exact timeframe for coming to a final agreement .
In any case , this cannot be long now because we are now dealing with the most sensitive topics - cars , wine and spirits , public procurement and GIs .
We have to come to a conclusion , so we are really in what I would call the end game of these negotiations .
We are in the last stretch to the finish , but the road will still be rather bumpy .
Mr Obermayr , you were asking for the floor earlier .
I said at the beginning of the catch-the-eye part of the debate that I could not take everybody and I am afraid you were in that category .
OK , but we do not have much time .
( DE ) Madam President , in this connection , I would like to point out that I understand what you are saying very well and that you do a splendid job as President .
However , your predecessor did not act fairly in allowing many Members to overrun by half a minute or 20 seconds - the Commissioner also spoke for seven minutes and 36 seconds instead of three minutes .
It is surely not fair to keep to the time now when the speaking time is only one minute anyway .
However , I understand what you are saying and I thank you for your understanding .
I have made it clear since I took over the chair that I expect people to keep to their speaking time for the rest of this evening or else we are going to have trouble because we will run over midnight and I do not wish to do that .
I have received four motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 11 May 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Indian economy is one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
Even now , the majority of Indian foreign investment is situated in the European Union and the Tata Group alone is a leading employer in the industrial sector in Great Britain .
Taking into account the pace of India 's development , it should be acknowledged that the trade agreement between India and the EU will form one of the most significant and demanding agreements to have been concluded to date .
The agreement will undoubtedly contribute to an increase in the level of investment and imports and exports for both parties to the agreement .
It will allow a freer exchange of goods and will contribute to greater prosperity in India as well as in EU countries .
The agreement will intensify world trade , especially in the field of services .
In spite of the advantages to be gained from signing the agreement , we should , however , bear in mind issues where both parties to the agreement present opposing views .
The EU does not accept goods which have been produced to the detriment of the environment , or which have been produced using child labour .
The agreement which we are striving for should guarantee proper workspaces , diversified , developing economies and multicultural diversity .
It is crucial to introduce a decision-making system which is effective and improves cooperation , and also to introduce measures to support training for individuals and organisations which will help the regions to develop .
In order to achieve the aims intended , a transparent and public debate is necessary .
We are entering a crucial stage in the EU-India free trade agreement negotiations .
This is a difficult exercise in which the Commission will try hard , I hope , to accommodate Europe 's various strategic interests .
In this respect , I should like to draw attention to the need to make progress in opening up the Indian market to European wine exports .
Today , the Indian market has closed itself off to our products by imposing exorbitant 150 % tariffs on them .
We must therefore demand respect for the principle of trade reciprocity .
It seems absurd , in fact , that our market should be very much open to wine products from emerging countries when we do not have satisfactory access to their market .
I therefore encourage the Commission to continue the ambitious strategy it was able to carry out when it concluded a free trade agreement with South Korea .
It is imperative to compensate for the arrival on our market of cheaper wines produced outside the EU with improved access for our products to foreign markets and , in particular , to the Indian market , the growth potential of which is exceptional .
EU-Japan trade relations ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on EU-Japan trade relations by Daniel Caspary and Jarosław Leszek Wałęsa , on behalf of the PPE Group , Syed Kamall , Robert Sturdy and Jan Zahradil , on behalf of the ECR Group , Niccolò Rinaldi , Metin Kazak and Marielle De Sarnez , on behalf of the ALDE Group , and Emilio Menéndez del Valle , David Martin and Vital Moreira , on behalf of the S & D Group ( O-000088 / 2011 / rév.1 - B7-0220 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , in recent months , Japan has increased its interest in opening possible negotiations on a free trade agreement with the European Union .
From the point of view of the European Parliament , the most important issue should be the non-tariff barriers , which has been emphasised many times at meetings of the Trade Policy Committee .
The problem is not tariffs but the numerous restrictive regulations and obstructions faced by EU companies in gaining access to the Japanese market .
I am in favour of greater cooperation between the European Union and Japan , but I believe that the priority should be the removal of these non-tariff barriers which restrict the access of EU goods to the Japanese market .
This is why paragraph 30 was accepted in the conclusions of the European Council in March and indicates the line to be taken and presented by the European Union at the EU-Japan Summit in opening negotiations on a free trade agreement .
It is quite right to make the opening of these negotiations conditional on Japan showing goodwill in reviewing , inter alia , the issue of non-tariff barriers and restrictions on public procurement .
It is worth bearing this in mind , all the more so as Japan is lobbying against the loss of competitiveness in the EU market as a result of the EU-Korea Free Trade Agreement which is due to come into effect .
author . - Madam President , I think - I hope - that most of us in this House would agree that our preference is for multilateral negotiations and a successful outcome for the Doha Development Round at the WTO .
But , given the difficulties that we all know have been encountered there , I think the Commission deserves support in negotiating some of these bilateral agreements .
For this reason , I think we should actually be pressing ahead with an EU-Japan free trade agreement .
I recognise that there are concerns over the natural disasters that have befallen Japan , but I have spoken to many Japanese colleagues , friends and others who believe that , if we tread sensitively , an EU-Japan agreement would send a signal that Japan is back on its way and is on the road to recovery .
If you look at the figures , in 2009 , Japan and the EU together represented more than a quarter of global GDP and more than 20 % of world trade , and had a combined volume of foreign direct investment of about EUR 200 billion .
Given that the EU countries and Japan face common challenges , I think it is important that we look at some of these issues and address them through trade agreements .
Despite low tariffs , I think it is quite clear that bilateral trade volumes between the EU and Japan lag behind the bulk of the EU 's trade partnerships with its other main trading partners .
I think this is mostly due to the non-tariff barriers .
It has been estimated that the cost of some of these barriers is actually higher than the existing tariff levels , and that most of the gains will come from removing these barriers .
For companies within EU countries , there would be gains if we could tackle barriers to public procurement , to the medical devices market - where there is insufficient recognition of international standards , to services - including financial services and postal services , and access for SMEs .
For the Japanese , there would be gains in the automotive and ICT sectors .
But let us not forget that removing or reducing barriers to ICT products from Japan would be of benefit to the EU as well .
I think that , overall , there is a feeling on both sides that an EU-Japan FTA has the potential to become a true win-win for both sides .
author . - Madam President , I co-signed this initiative to table an oral question and a resolution in advance of the 20th Japan-EU Summit because I believe that the European Parliament , which will be asked to give its consent to any potential free trade agreement with Japan , should have its say at the earliest possible stage .
I believe that this opportunity should be used by Parliament to strongly support an FTA with Japan for the following reasons .
The European Union and Japan are industrial giants that share democratic values and together represent 38.5 % of the world 's gross domestic product .
We share similar challenges : the rise of China , the global financial crisis , decreasing demographics and the need to access raw materials and energy sources and to achieve price stability .
Therefore , I see great potential in further developing trade relations with Japan , our sixth largest trading partner .
The economic benefits are clear .
The Copenhagen Economics report concluded that the bilateral elimination of tariffs and reduction of non-tariff barriers would benefit both businesses and consumers and drive economic welfare by EUR 33 billion in the EU and EUR 18 billion in Japan .

The potential launch of negotiations on an FTA agreement was backed by the Council as long as Japan was willing to tackle non-tariff barriers on market access and restrictions on public procurement .
I would like to reiterate that non-tariff barriers and public procurement are crucial areas for European businesses where Japan needs to make significant concessions .
Of course , the European Parliament demands that the Commission be fully transparent in all negotiations and that we be provided with timely sectoral impact assessments .
In addition , we will support bilateral safeguard measures , as was the case with the South Korea FTA , to avoid serious injury to sensitive sectors such as automotives , electronics , aviation and machinery .
In conclusion , I am firmly convinced that it is high time that Parliament showed its support for a future FTA between the EU and Japan , building on the establishment of a high-level group , especially in the wake of the March 2011 disaster .
author . - Madam President , an EU-Japan free trade agreement clearly has the potential to create significant numbers of European jobs and to benefit European companies , and the reason for that is that EU penetration of the Japanese market is currently extremely modest by comparison with EU exports elsewhere .
In fact , according to the OECD , our market penetration in Japan is amongst the lowest , and the reason for this has been indicated by my colleagues .
The problem is not high tariff barriers - the tariff barriers are relatively low - but rather non-tariff barriers , including regulatory complications , issues in relation to mutual recognition , poor access to public contracts , and so on .
The million dollar question for both the Commission and this Parliament is whether to insist that Japan continues to make progress in tackling these non-tariff barriers before we open negotiations , or to open negotiations in the hope that , by doing so , we will encourage Japan to reduce its non-tariff barriers .
There is no easy answer to that question .
However , I think the omens are good that Japan does want to tackle non-tariff barriers .
The Japanese Prime Minister has called for an ' open Japan ' policy , and that is partly because he recognises that Japanese industry is stultifying in its present environment .
It is also , of course , partly because of the anticipated impact of the South Korean free trade agreement on Japanese exports , but I think that , in addition , it reflects recognition of Japan 's limited experience with opening up .
European companies have had improved access to telecommunications , car manufacturing , retail and the insurance sector in Japan , and that has not damaged the Japanese economy but has , in fact , encouraged innovation and development in Japan .
So I think the omens are good .
On balance , my group takes the view that we still need Japan to show a little more willingness before we announce the opening of free trade negotiations .
We are not against an FTA but we think that Japan needs to do a little bit more to prove that the Japanese Prime Minister can deliver on his words .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the tsunami and earthquake that hit Japan last March constituted a major tragedy .
The resilience of the Japanese people reassures us that Japan will be able to overcome that tragedy and to emerge from it stronger than before .
The help offered and the solidarity expressed by the EU will also be instrumental in achieving this recovery .
This tragedy came a few months before a very important summit between the EU and Japan , scheduled for 28 May 2011 , which is set to define the direction of our relationship for the years to come .
As you know , the previous EU-Japan Summit of April last year established a joint high-level group composed of senior officials to identify options for the comprehensive strengthening of all aspects of the EU-Japan relationship , in the political , economic and sectoral cooperation fields .
On the trade side , the high-level group looked into ways of strengthening and integrating the economic relationship , addressing all issues of interest to both parties .
These include tariffs , non-tariff measures , investments and procurement .
From Japan 's side , the clearly stated preferred option is to start negotiations on a free trade agreement which includes preferential tariffs .
However , from the EU side , an agreement focusing on tariffs would clearly not be enough .
The problem with Japan is , indeed , not so much tariffs but the fact that EU exporters and investors still face all sorts of non-tariff barriers .
Typical examples of these include cumbersome approval processes for medical equipment and certain food products , and lack of convergence with internationally recognised standards for car parts and components .
Barriers in these areas have been in place in the Japanese market for decades .
We have raised these matters in the various bilateral dialogues between Japan and the EU over the past few years but little progress has been achieved so far .
In the light of this , we would need an agreement that would also tackle non-tariff barriers , increase market access for investment and open the Japanese public procurement market .
The focus of the high-level group 's trade discussions has been on exploring how to achieve progress on these issues .
A degree of progress has thus been delivered on a limited number of non-tariff measures from a list identified by the EU , namely three out of 27 , but for most non-tariff measures on the list , we feel that Japan has failed to present a credible road map demonstrating how the problems should be solved .
So , in the Commission 's view , what has been achieved in the high-level group provides , at this stage , no more than a good basis for further discussion .
On 25 March 2011 , the European Council reiterated the strategic importance of the EU-Japan relationship , confirming that ' the forthcoming summit must be used to strengthen this relationship and bring forward our common agenda ' .
In this regard , the conditions for a successful FTA should be explored on the basis that Japan can demonstrate its willingness to tackle , inter alia , non-tariff barriers and restrictions on public procurement .
Discussions are still ongoing with Japan .
Last week , I met Foreign Minister Matsumoto precisely to discuss this matter .
In my opinion , it is not yet clear how far we can progress , in the limited time before the EU-Japan Summit , with regard to fulfilling the Council 's conditions .
In particular , more work is needed in order to arrive at a shared level of ambition on agreeing the contents of the negotiation , as well as an ambitious but realistic outcome .
This could be achieved through a so-called ' scoping ' exercise , which could be conducted after the summit .
Once that has been done , we would examine the results and decide whether or not to launch the negotiations .
On the trade and economic side , the level of ambition should include , at least , aiming for the following : 100 % duty and quota-free treatment for all goods ; a robust and credible road map for eliminating a critical mass of non-tariff measures ; an open investment regime to achieve levels of foreign direct investment into Japan comparable to those of other OECD countries ; and a government procurement market with a level of openness matching those of the EU countries at all levels of government .
I should also mention that , if the summit leaders decide to go ahead with the option of a comprehensive bilateral legal framework , this should include both trade and investment relations and political relations and cooperation .
This comprehensive approach , encompassing all bilateral , political and economic relations in a balanced way , is necessary in order to fulfil our targets and our ambitions for a deeper strategic partnership .
We are , indeed , at a crucial stage in our economic relations with Japan , and there are still some issues that need to be clarified .
I therefore welcome this debate and look forward to hearing your views on how we should shape this relationship in the years to come .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Commissioner for giving us an overview of the current status of the trade relations between the European Union and Japan .
Unfortunately , I get the impression that the situation with regard to these trade relations has barely improved in the last two years .
You mentioned the summit in 2009 and the high-level dialogue and I get the impression that so far in these talks , we have not succeeded in obtaining any obvious additional market access for European companies in Japan .
Now that the first initiative , namely , this high-level dialogue , has been unsuccessful , I am very concerned that our primary concern is not the question of how we can perhaps achieve tangible success in this high-level dialogue , but instead we are already considering whether we should not negotiate a free trade agreement .
I can well imagine that a free trade agreement with Japan would make sense , but before we enter into such negotiations , it is not too much to ask that we first wait for the results from the existing instrument , namely this high-level dialogue .
I want to be very open about this and I am not saying this in order to take away any negotiating chips from Japan , but because I would genuinely like to see whether Japan is serious about intensifying trade relations with us and genuinely opening up its markets and also its attitude to our products .
I would be very interested - unfortunately , Commissioner , you did not mention this at all just now - in how you intend to involve the European Parliament in the issuing of the mandate .
I have the impression that we would have a great deal to say on the subject of Japan .
With regard to the negotiations with India , Canada and also Korea , we as Parliament have repeatedly been critical of the fact that , in our view , the wrong priorities were set to some extent in the negotiations , and therefore it would be very helpful if you would involve Parliament very closely in this matter right from the issuing of the mandate .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council 's request to open negotiations with Japan on the conclusion of a free trade agreement must be assessed very carefully .
We therefore welcome the Commissioner 's cautious approach to this issue and we call on Parliament as a whole to follow that approach , which inspired our group 's motion for a resolution .
The new Japanese Government has demonstrated - at least verbally - its willingness to open up its market , one of the most closed markets in the developed world .
This positive attitude must be verified in practice , especially with regard to the 27 non-tariff barriers identified by the European Union , which must be lowered so that we can open negotiations with Japan and make them one of the priorities of our trade policy .
We believe that improving these relations can help make Europe more competitive , since Japan accounts for 9 % of world GDP , or over 35 % when its GDP is added to our own .
Today , however , we cannot adopt resolutions unless they make the opening of free trade agreement negotiations subject to specific , binding and verifiable conditions ; namely , that there will be genuine reciprocity and a proper impact assessment .
Firstly , Japan 's protectionist policy in the automotive sector concerns us , because there is an imbalance between exports and imports .
Secondly , we wish to raise the issue of non-tariff barriers .
I am talking about a whole range of standards , from health and plant health measures to technical standards - especially in the agricultural and automotive sectors - export subsidy rules , customs checks and factors allowing for counterfeiting and also triangular trade with China and Korea .
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , we ask that before Europe declares itself willing to open negotiations on the conclusion of a free trade agreement , it resolutely defines the Community interest that it intends to protect and specifies the areas in which it will request reciprocity from Japan .
We hope that the Commission will take these comments of ours on board .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , in December last year , I visited Japan and one of the concerns that was raised repeatedly by the Japanese officials was the slow progress in trade relations between the European Union and Japan .
We all know that , unlike some other EU partners in the Far East , we share common values of democracy , human rights and the liberal market economy with Japan , making her a more natural partner for the European Union .
At the 19th EU-Japan Summit in April last year , it was agreed to establish a joint high-level group in order to analyse the progress in EU-Japan relations so far and draw up suggestions for streamlining our current activities .
The importance of continuing to work on non-tariff issues was also stressed in the context of the joint high-level group and I hope that these agreements can be put into practice as soon as possible .
I would like to speak in favour of timely and concrete steps to alleviate non-tariff barriers in order to liberalise EU-Japan trade relations .
Both markets would benefit greatly from upgrading trade relations between the EU and Japan , especially keeping in mind innovation and technologies .
I would also welcome further cooperation on matters relating to cyber security .
I hope that we can improve trade relations with Japan and I look forward to further progress in these relations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , it is quite desirable to review the trading arrangements that we have with other countries and it is quite understandable that Japan sees the FTA as particularly attractive in relation to the recent Korea FTA .
There is a lot that we can support in the EPP-ALDE-ECR resolution but I think that they are making a mistake to ' strongly support ' an FTA .
That is a direct quote from paragraph 2 .
I think that is premature support when we do not have impact assessments on the environmental and social effects of an FTA .
They are predicting the answer before identifying the effects of implementing the solution .
Many people have commented about the non-tariff barriers and the work that has yet to be done by the high-level group .
I think that needs a positive step forward .
When we bear in mind the importance of Japan as a trading partner - with bilateral trade with the EU standing at EUR 120 billion a year , and with the EU being the number three trading partner for Japan and the number two investor in Japan - I think we recognise that any bilateral agreement runs the risk of undermining multilateral agreements with the rest of the world and , in particular , with the developing countries .
So I think that strong unconditional support for an FTA needs to be revised .
Finally , I would like to say that , whilst we have every sympathy with Japan , future trade policies simply cannot be based on who has had the most recent natural disaster .
Madam President , Commissioner , just one topic should be the focus of attention when the summit is held between the European Union and Japan at the end of this month : the disaster that has devastated the people of Japan as a result of earthquakes , the tsunami and continuing radioactive contamination , and the concrete role that can be played by the EU , its Member States and individual citizens in helping to deal with the resulting problems in the short , medium and long term .
That is why I once again wish to express my deepest sympathies to the Japanese people .
We must immediately extend offers of partnership and help in dealing with this disaster - particularly in view of the debate we have just held on Pakistan .
The summit must produce concrete decisions , particularly in relation to cooperation in clearing contaminated areas and joint research and development in the area of renewable energy .
The possible development of our trade relations and economic cooperation through a corresponding agreement should not be simply a response to the nuclear accident .
For this reason , negotiations should not begin too hastily , but should be examined with due care , paying particular attention to the different traditions and lifestyle .
In view of the size and strength of the two economies , particular care is required when agreeing a comprehensive , bilateral trade agreement .
Many issues have been raised , including intellectual property rights and public procurement , and the investment capital has reduced the scope for political action on both sides .
That is why long-term impact assessments are required in relation to the relevant chapters and aspects of any economic and trade policy cooperation agreed in the future between the 27 EU Member States and Japan .
For this reason , the European Parliament , as a codecision-making authority , as well as the public at large , must also be consulted .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , most people know - but many do not - that , shortly after a country becomes a member of the EU , all its trade agreements are negotiated by the Commission and , specifically , the EU Trade Commissioner .
Under this arrangement , the interests of all 27 Member States need to be satisfied , which , of course , means in practice that they will not be .
In consequence , an EU-negotiated trade agreement is likely to be less beneficial for an individual Member State - and , I have to say , the UK in particular - than if the Member State had been able to negotiate for itself .
Now , the rationale for all this is that the EU is a large trading bloc and because of this clout , the EU is able to negotiate a trade treaty that would not be open to a Member State to negotiate on its own .
But what do we find here ?
The negotiations for the EU trade treaty with Japan have not even properly started , as the Commissioner said .
Meanwhile , the comparatively small , but dynamic , economy of Switzerland already has a trade treaty with Japan , and has had since 2009 .
Once again , here is further proof that the UK and the other contributing Member States would be much better off outside the bureaucratic contraption that is the European Union .
( DE ) Madam President , in 2009 between them , the EU and Japan produced more than one quarter of the world 's economic output and accounted for over 20 % of world trade , which is why a well-conceived free trade agreement with Japan is of central importance for the EU .
There are synergy effects that can be exploited , as well as shared challenges , such as competition with China and secure access to raw materials .
However , bilateral safeguard clauses are also important in this agreement .
I am thinking of sensitive economic sectors such as the automotive , electronics , aerospace and mechanical engineering industries .
I am certain that Japan can and will be a fair and reliable partner .
The bottom line is that however important Japan may be as a trading partner , European citizens must be protected from any risk from radioactive contaminated products .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr De Gucht , ladies and gentlemen , this may seem an unusual way to open a speech in the European Parliament , but I must admit that I am not sure that this is the right time to conclude a trade agreement with Japan - or indeed whether such an agreement is advisable at all .
There are three reasons for my uncertainty .
The first question is whether we are actually undermining our attempt to establish a multilateral agreement by agreeing a large number of external trade agreements with highly significant trading partners .
Are we not in danger of concentrating too much on concluding individual agreements , which may prevent us from pursuing a multilateral system with appropriate and sufficient vigour ?
Secondly , so far , I have not got the feeling that Japan is really meeting us half way in terms of market protectionism and non-tariff trade barriers .
The wheels should already have been set in motion , otherwise the entire agreement is in danger of being too one-sided .
My third question is : what are the consequences ?
I do not intend to judge whether this is good or bad for us in the final analysis .
However , I would like to know in advance how the social consequences are to be assessed , and how things look in terms of the environment or labour market .
These are issues that I do not believe have been entirely clarified .
Surely these questions should have been better assessed and researched in advance .
As some of my fellow Members have pointed out , if these points were to be clarified , the Commission would be well advised to consult the European Parliament when issuing a mandate .
This would avoid many of the difficulties encountered with other trade agreements because we were not consulted .
I would welcome such a procedure for all future trade agreements .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it would seem that some groups are very sure that it is right for us now to seek a very ambitious free trade agreement with Japan .
As you have heard , my group is not so sure .
I myself have great sympathy with this position because I believe that by strengthening cooperation in trade , we can help generate a new economic dynamism in Japan , following the disaster that has befallen the country .
However , there are some fundamental questions that are inescapable .
I do not intend to repeat what has been said about the need to predict the consequences in the bilateral area , or about the fact that we should avoid the mistake of first defining free trade priorities and then moulding European industrial policy to these as a dependent variable , or that the question of making a contribution to sustainability must be taken into consideration .
I should like to emphasise something else : I believe that the effects that such a free trade agreement between two of the giants of international trade would have on the entire structure of global trade must be discussed in greater detail than has been the case heretofore .
When two such mammoths of the commercial trade sector enter into negotiations on a free trade agreement , then this is not simply a bilateral matter .
Until now , there has been no free trade agreement between two economic superpowers , so this would be a first .
But what does that mean ?
What is the strategic perspective ?
What effect will this have ?
It is not enough simply to say we want multilateral trade and if we do not get it , then we will stick with the bilateral dimension of free trade and wait to see what happens .
We are also responsible for making the implications clear to the European public , which is why the involvement of Parliament in the issuing of the mandate , as called for by several of my fellow Members , must be central .
( RO ) Madam President , the economies of the European Union and Japan account for 35 % of global GDP .
I believe that a free trade agreement between these two economic powers could provide benefits for both sides .
However , the first thing which needs to be done is to remove the difficulties which form the basis and , in practical terms , stand in the way of drafting a really profitable agreement for both sides .
The Japanese market is currently subject to barriers , non-tariff barriers , as my fellow Members have also mentioned , which restrict import access , thereby impacting as a whole on trade activities and investments .
As part of the negotiations it is conducting , the European Commission must strive both to promote a more transparent regulatory policy , which will help European companies to understand fully the rules for conducting trade with Japanese partners , and to deregulate access to public procurement .
Finally , I also think that an impact study needs to be carried out , which will examine the effects of any agreement , particularly in the area of vulnerable European industries , such as the car industry , electronics and aeronautics .
( SK ) Madam President , Commissioner , Japan shares many common interests with the European Union that are not limited to political issues , but also extend to economic and trade cooperation .
Although both Japan and the European Union are mature economies , their trade cooperation has failed to exploit the opportunities presented by their economic clout .
In addition to duties , more effective trade cooperation is hindered by the numerous obstructions that Japan has placed in the way of standardisation and access to public procurement and government contracts .
Although I believe that it is in our interest to improve trade cooperation with Japan , we must strive to make our cooperation correct , open , balanced and beneficial to both parties .
I would therefore like to express my support for the European Commission in its pursuit of this objective .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I should just like to touch upon two points .
First , the relationship between bilateral and multilateral agreements .
Some Members have advanced the idea that we should concentrate on the multilateral agreements rather than the bilateral ones .
We do !
As you know , the multilateral negotiations for the Doha Round are in dire straits , and we are the only big trading bloc that has been making proposals recently to try to bridge the differences between the developed and the emerging economies with respect to industrial sectors .
But while we are really concentrating on the multilateral aspects of trade , on the other hand , we should not neglect all our bilateral relations with important trading partners .
Secondly , with respect to Japan , as many among you have been saying , it is really a ' chicken and egg ' situation .
Do you start the negotiations and then hope that in the course of the negotiations , you can resolve the non-tariff barriers that have been in place for many years , or do you rather try to do away with the majority of the non-tariff barriers as a precondition for negotiations on the free trade agreement ?
I think that , to a certain extent , we need that conditionality , because the real problem with Japan is not so much tariffs .
Of course , the idea would be to eliminate 100 % of tariffs , which normally you would not have with a developing or an emerging economy .
The real problem is with respect to non-tariff barriers .
We have been proposing a list of 27 non-tariff barriers which we think are crucial for our trade relationship , but in only three cases out of the 27 is there now a solution on the table which seems to be acceptable .
The Japanese claim that they have solutions for all the rest too , but we cannot see a solution in the proposals that they have been making to us .
So we believe that we need a scoping exercise so that we know what we are talking about .
I hope that , in the course of that scoping exercise , we can do away with a number of non-tariff barriers , and that this will create the right climate for us to get down to actual free trade negotiations with Japan .
That is how we see it .
We see it , at least partially , as a precondition that we should stick to .
I have received four motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 11 May 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I believe that a rapprochement in the field of aeronautics will create a huge opportunity for the European and Japanese economies .
The European aircraft industry has long been the chief supplier of civil and military technology in the international market .
Japan is also carrying out research into advanced solutions for general aviation as well as for passenger transport and cargo .
It is estimated that the transport of passengers and goods by air will be one of the fastest growing branches in the coming decades .
It is true that we already have examples of cooperation between partners from the European Union and Japan , including the EC 145 helicopter , designed jointly by Eurocopter and Kawasaki , but the potential for cooperation could be much greater in my opinion .
I appeal for action to be taken for rapid European-Japanese cooperation in aeronautics , at company level as well as in research and development units .
Transitional arrangements for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries ( debate )
The next item is the report by Carl Schlyter , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing transitional arrangements for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries
- C7-0172 / 2010 - .
Madam President , this has been a complicated issue to deal with .
We have over a thousand bilateral investment agreements .
According to the Treaty of Lisbon , this falls within the competence of the EU .
How should we handle this situation ?
It is not proving to be very easy .
We have had a lot of meetings and we have tried to find a common position , but without success .
I might as well be honest about that .
We will have to vote on it and see what Parliament 's position will be .
I would have liked us to have had a position that we all agreed on in order to be better placed to enter into negotiations with the Council .
We would then have been able to defend Parliament 's powers and principles as laid down in the Treaty .
That was not to be , on account of the fact that this is a sensitive subject , particularly when it comes to how to deal with the old agreements .
With regard to the new agreements that the Member States are continuing and are entitled to enter into , we could undoubtedly have agreed on a policy in which there is a reasonable balance between the rights of investors and other rights .
This was difficult to do with regard to the old agreements , however , and I have therefore retained the compromises that we proposed in committee , as the vote was very even .
I still hope that we have a more up-to-date view of the investment agreements than was the case with many of these old agreements , where we were the ones who invested in other countries .
Nowadays , we have at least as many investments coming into our Member States .
We must therefore make sure that we have the necessary scope in our policy and also that investments are adapted to more developed , modern work in relation to the environment and social matters .
We must defend this part of the Treaty .
Investment policy cannot fail to take it into account , either .
As I said , we will have to see how the vote goes tomorrow .
Another problem we have here is the fact that we cannot even use the reasoning of providing maximum protection for investments .
That is not the right way to create legal certainty .
Since the new trade policy is more balanced , we must also have a more balanced view of what maximum protection can entail .
We surely do not want to provide maximum protection here to foreign state-owned companies , or even companies owned by dictatorships , at the expense of human rights and the environment .
This is a balance that I hope we will be able to achieve .
The idea is not that we should use investment agreements to achieve social objectives , but neither should they prevent us from achieving social and environmental objectives .
This is a far-reaching debate .
Another important debate concerns transparency .
We recognise that Parliament and the EU have been given new competences .
The Commission is now responsible .
Therefore , it must also have access to the documents .
We must increase transparency .
Many of these agreements were written at a time when there were hardly any cases of dispute settlements .
Now we have more than 300 cases and ongoing procedures .
This must , therefore , be opened up to better scrutiny .
We cannot have this total secrecy and I very much hope that , irrespective of what we think about this link between policy and investment , when it comes to transparency , we can stand united and defend openness and the new competences bestowed on us by the Treaty .
I truly hope that that will be the case .
I therefore hope that Amendment 13 will receive support .
Without it , we will have absolutely no democratic control over these procedures .
We need this if we are to retain and defend legal certainty .
We are also seeing a tendency for many other countries , like the United States , Australia and Canada for example , to start to look at renewing their agreements .
It will be good if we can agree to update the existing dispute mechanisms and judicial procedures , because these are outdated and need to be brought up to date and made more transparent .
Then we will have an investment policy for the future .
That will be dealt with in a different context - the debate about the future itself .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the regulation on transitional arrangements for bilateral investment treaties is an important legislative initiative .
The Lisbon Treaty has entrusted the Union with a new exclusive competence on foreign direct investment .
The continued existence , since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , of more than 1 200 investment-related international agreements concluded by Member States is not questioned under international law .
However , it is incompatible , under EU law , with the new exclusive competence on foreign direct investment .
At the same time , these agreements serve as a valuable source of legal protection for European investors operating abroad .
Because the Lisbon Treaty does not contain arrangements clarifying the status of bilateral agreements , we need to establish legal certainty for investors benefiting from these agreements by authorising their continued existence .
While it is important to authorise existing investment agreements , it is also important to foresee the possibility of taking action in a cooperative manner to address important issues that could arise with regard to the content of the agreements and their interaction with EU investment policy .
We have to reserve appropriate mechanisms for Union action to permit the development and implementation of the policy at EU level .
I understand that , in relation to the Commission proposal , the scope for such action is the most difficult issue - for Parliament and even more so for the Council .
So the challenge we have here is to find a solution that safeguards the principles I have just outlined and is acceptable to both Parliament and the Council .
We realise , in this respect , that there are still some considerable gaps to be bridged between the institutions but , at the end of the day , we will have to find a compromise in the interests of the EU and of its investors .
We believe that the amendments adopted by the Committee on International Trade constitute a basis for finding such a solution .
They maintain fundamental trust in the Commission 's proposal but , at the same time , seek a potential compromise .
We note with satisfaction here that Articles 5 and 6 would still leave the Commission the power to review investment agreements and withdraw authorisation should such agreements create major problems .
Given the positions of the main protagonists in this process , we will all have to show some level of flexibility .
The Commission is ready to play its part , to be flexible and to facilitate an agreement between Parliament and the Council , but this cannot be at any cost .
We will be vigilant on the basic principles of our proposal .
The existence of the bilateral investment agreements needs to be safeguarded but , at the same time , we cannot unconditionally bless agreements if they create significant problems .
The Commission fully shares Parliament 's sentiment that the competence on investment should be exercised primarily at EU level , and we support the objective of Europeanisation of investment negotiations .
However , I need to make clear that the Commission will not be able to negotiate with all countries targeted for investment protection by Member States .
Our Member States have investment treaties with more than 100 countries .
Replacing those will be a very gradual exercise , taking years .
That is why it is important to create an effective mechanism empowering the Member States , under certain conditions , to continue negotiating and concluding bilateral investment agreements .
Such a mechanism should respect the procedures and prerogatives of the institutions involved .
Finally , it needs to be emphasised that we are approaching a decisive stage of the legislative process , and time is becoming a major factor .
It is important because the longer the adoption of the regulation takes , the longer the limbo period lasts , with the potential to create legal uncertainty for investors .
I hope that , after the vote , Parliament and the Council can sit down together to find an early agreement on this issue .
We are ready actively to support them in that endeavour .

Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Schlyter , who , as the main rapporteur , created the appropriate framework for the committee 's work in building a majority , in order to draw up a proposal which will achieve - and has achieved - a committee majority .
As Mr Schlyter said , whatever happens tomorrow - the voting results are anyone 's guess - I hope they will reflect what has been done by the committee .
Creating a common investment policy for the European Union is a very important step forward in the integration of the European Union .
If firms within the European Union compete jointly within the same framework , on the same principles , the same should be true externally ; they should have the same system of legal protection .
I also agree with Mr De Gucht .
I am very pleased that he is supporting the proposal negotiated by the committee , because it really is a very good compromise between various standpoints : a compromise between the Commission 's standpoint , on the one hand , and the opinions presented by the Member States , and , on the other , it is compatible with investors ' interests , but most of all , it opens up good prospects for the Union 's investment policy in the future , serving the Union as a whole .
It is very important that we are creating a new system , beginning by establishing a solid legal basis created by the agreements currently in force , and which were negotiated by Member States so that a common system of protection for the entire European Union could at last be established .
It is important that the resolution which will be voted on tomorrow should be quickly agreed with the Council .
This is something which is very important .
I hope it will happen this year , with the active participation and support of the Commission .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
In the era of the globalised economy , the European Union 's common commercial policy seems quite natural to us .
In this light , an initiative for the European Union to coordinate investment policy seems just as normal .
The current system , relying on Member States ' numerous overlapping , and sometimes conflicting , bilateral investment agreements , should be replaced within a reasonable timeframe by a new framework of European Union investment agreements consistent with the horizontal objectives of EU policies .
Personally , I would be in favour of placing the main emphasis on development policy .
I agree with the rapporteur that the transition to the new regime should not take place overnight but should play out within a predetermined transitional period , the duration and rules of which should be established in advance so as to avoid any legal uncertainty .
Without such a timeline , the regulation would allow parallel , potentially incompatible investment schemes to emerge .
A sufficiently long transition is needed to make the open-ended duality in EU investment policy unacceptable for Parliament , as the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states that investment policy is fully within the competence of the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mr Schlyter for his excellent report on a sensitive issue on which a great deal of common sense is needed .
Not all investment agreements can be replaced by European agreements , but not even the Commission can ignore agreements that infringe European provisions , and we agree with the rapporteur about placing the emphasis on transparency .
Ideally , we should have a clause that automatically repeals the 1 200 agreements currently in force .
Unfortunately , however , that would mean legal uncertainty for investors and too much work , perhaps , for the Commission .
Our amendments in the Committee on International Trade have been successful , firstly , in ensuring that the Commission 's powers are fully respected and , secondly , in stating that legal certainty should be guaranteed .
Some of the amendments on which we will be voting tomorrow in plenary may now alter this compromise and balance , and I call on my fellow Members , and the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs in particular , to come up with a balanced measure that is acceptable to all .


Madam President , Mr De Gucht , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schlyter , for his hard work and for trying , in the spirit of the European Parliament , to find a satisfactory compromise for all sides , and looking for the best solution and developing this on a cooperative basis .
This is not a simple issue .
It involves a common European Union investment policy in the context of international trade policy with all their concomitant effects on the situation in the EU and the Member States with regard to social , economic and employment policy , weighing up the interests of financial groups , big business and economic enterprises , on the one hand , and those of the trade unions and workers on the other .
That is why it is important that such an agreement should be reached on a democratic basis and that citizen 's should remain confident in the controlling role of Parliament .
For this reason , I hope that tomorrow 's vote will show that the compromise that has been sought is supported by Parliament .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , the Lisbon Treaty is normally regarded as having been constitutional in its scope ; but what we have here is an example of how the Lisbon Treaty will impact , and impact adversely , on the commerce of Member States .
I know we are discussing transitional arrangements but what matters is that the Lisbon Treaty has removed from Member States the right to negotiate bilateral investment treaties .
Some time in the future , and it is still not clear when , bilateral investment treaties will fall under the Commission .
Because of Lisbon , investment treaties can become an instrument for the Commission 's political objectives - and not just the Commission 's : we can be absolutely sure that the Greens will try to advance their political programme , and we have seen that in the trade treaties time after time .
Attempts will be made to tack on to every investment treaty the full Green agenda .
Now the Greens are talented politicians - and I say this in admiration .
They will often succeed , and in consequence , investment and hence commerce in all Member States will be hamstrung and hobbled .
By contrast , countries outside the EU will not be subject to the Greens ' Pantomime of the Ents , if you remember those characters in the Lord of the Rings .
It is all very , very depressing .
( DE ) Madam President , the security of investments both at home and abroad is of key importance for economic development both in Europe and in the relevant partner countries .
The only way to secure existing jobs or to create new employment is by safeguarding investments .
That is why there are two things that I regard as being important .
Firstly , the over one thousand agreements already in existence must be retained .
It makes no sense to cast investors , Member States and others into a state of legal uncertainty .
Secondly , and this is particularly important for us : in future , we will have to have many common European agreements that apply to all 27 Member States and investors from these Member States if we are also to have a uniform level of protection within the European internal market .
For this reason , I am very grateful to my fellow Members - Mr Schlyter , as well as Mr Zalewski , Mr Sturdy and Mr Rinaldi - because they have tried and succeeded in finding a broad consensus .


I think it would be a good thing if the other groups would reconsider this issue and recognise that the compromise on the table is actually a very good solution that tries to cater to all needs .
For my own group , I would like to state clearly once again that we want a good solution for investors , workers and Member States .
We are looking for speedy negotiations with the Council , so that this issue is not put on the long finger , but that a solution is found soon .
On account of the differences between the groups , my group favours completing the first reading this week .
Finally , I would like to add that we would be very open to finding a swift solution in the second reading - and we would be very grateful if this were possible - in other words , we would suggest that , rather than following the normal procedure of the second reading , we should try to find a so-called early second-reading agreement .
Once again , I would like to thank all those involved .
I think that by adopting this legislative process , the Committee on International Trade is showing that we are capable of dealing with complex issues and complex dossiers within a reasonable timeframe .
( RO ) Madam President , since 2009 , commercial policy has come under the exclusive remit of the European Union and we must now find a common denominator for a large part of foreign investment policy .
There will therefore be a transition period during which the competences relating to bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries will be transferred at EU level .
In this situation , I believe that adopting an EU-level procedure for verifying and reviewing bilateral investment agreements is preferable to a formal intergovernmental arrangement .
The role of completing the implementation of the changes must be given to the European Commission and not to Member States , so as to ensure protection of the common interest .
This is why the European executive has to guarantee both legal certainty for the investors due to be affected by the transition process and equivalent investment conditions for companies from all the European Union 's Member States .
( NL ) Madam President , the Netherlands , my native Member State , has been a trading nation for centuries , and the Commissioner ought to respect that , because we have formed a single country through working together .
The Dutch business community is amongst the largest investors worldwide .
Indeed , the Netherlands has entered into 98 bilateral investment agreements with a very high level of protection .
The proposed authorisation system gives the Commission overly extensive powers to withdraw approval from current investment agreements and too little certainty for these .
The threat that Member States might have to cancel their current bilateral investment agreements at the Commission 's instigation before the EU enters into a new agreement with an equivalent level of protection is unacceptable .
Authorisations should only be withdrawn when the EU has negotiated a new agreement with an identical level of protection .
( DE ) Madam President , there are four issues I would like to address very briefly .
The first is that this project should come under an enormous banner guaranteeing security and reliability for investors who wish to invest in the EU , as well as investors in the EU who wish to invest elsewhere .
Both groups must be able to rely on the support of the existing contracts .
Secondly : while we should be very grateful to the rapporteur for his truly comprehensive work , we should avoid trying to pack too much into trade agreements .
I must contradict the rapporteur because this is quite a typical process for dealing with differences of opinion at committee or parliamentary level and not everything can be accommodated by compromises .
Accordingly , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his fairness in our cooperation .
Let us wait and see how the vote goes tomorrow .
Thirdly , I welcome Mr De Gucht 's statement that the Commission was not questioning the existing agreements .
This does not mean that the EU should not quickly conclude new agreements now that the Union has been reconstituted under the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , if Mr De Gucht believes this to be the case , he will certainly agree with the significant weakening of the instrument for examining existing agreements , which we voted on in an amendment , and with the limitation of the reasons for withdrawing approval to four clear criteria .
Which brings me to my final point : it has been made quite plain in these discussions and during the committee 's work that there are different interests at stake here , depending on how many bilateral agreements one 's own country has concluded .
That is why it is a good thing that a transitional period is clearly defined in this directive .

Madam President , out of some 2 500 bilateral investment treaties in the world , 1 500 concern EU Member States .
Outside trade and investment are essential for economic recovery .
I doubt whether many external markets trust trade packages with the EU in the light of the failing euro and the Commission 's botched attempts to save three of its Member States ' economies .
What sort of effect will EU exclusive competency on bilateral investment have on Member States ?
The UK has a trade deficit with the EU and relies on negotiations with third countries , many of which have been in place for years and relate to our Commonwealth of Nations .
I am appalled that the EU is seeking to implement a device to proffer national packages at Union level by majority voting , undermining the ability of individual Member States to gain or maintain advantages that may substantially support domestic economies .
I would like to ask the Commission whether it actually recognises pacta sunt servanda in international law .
( EL ) Madam President , the adoption of a common foreign investment policy which safeguards equal treatment for all European investors is a very important move .
However , until such time as it is possible to conclude investment agreements at Union level , a legal vacuum - the legal uncertainty referred to by Mr Caspary - needs to be avoided and the necessary security of law must exist for European investors .
I would point out that the legislation of the Member States of the Union , in conjunction with unifying legislation , provide every guarantee needed for third country investors .
On the other hand , if a high level of protection is to be safeguarded for Europeans investing in third countries , the current bilateral agreements executed by individual Member States of the Union need to remain in force .
The draft resolution does not , in my opinion , safeguard the necessary security of law in any way whatsoever .
I refer , in particular , to the points relating to : firstly , the Commission 's discretionary powers to withdraw the authorisation to maintain existing agreements or to approve new negotiations to amend current or execute new agreements ; secondly , the provision to review the legal framework within five years ; and thirdly , the extremely time-consuming procedures for executing new agreements .
The amendments adopted by the Committee on International Trade are , in my view , a move in the right direction .
I repeat , the objective should be to maintain existing and simplify the procedure for executing and applying new bilateral agreements .
( RO ) Madam President , Member States ' investment policies must be harmonised at EU level as part of a common commercial policy .
Member States should ensure that bilateral investment agreements are compatible with the Union 's development policies .
The Commission must gradually replace existing agreements with new ones which will offer an ideal system for protecting investments .
Due to the risky nature of direct foreign investments , a high level of legal certainty must be guaranteed during the transition period .
In this regard , I welcome the approach adopted by the Commission and rapporteur , based on coexistence .
It is vital for bilateral agreements to remain in force and for Member States to be able to finalise negotiations or initiate new ones .
Finally , I support setting a timeframe with a deadline for the transition from Member States ' bilateral agreements to EU international agreements .
( SK ) Madam President , Commissioner , the protection of EU Member States ' cross-border investments has become an extremely complex and delicate issue following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
More than 1 200 bilateral investment agreements concluded by Member States under different , frequently incompatible , legal regimes need to be placed comprehensively under the auspices of the European Union without impairing the rights of the parties involved .
The only possible way out of the legal stagnation brought about by transferring Member States ' powers to the European Union would appear to be a principle allowing both sets of agreements to coexist over a transitional period , in order for Member States to renegotiate existing bilateral agreements or , in line with EU investment policy , to complete negotiations on agreements under preparation .
Even so , proper cooperation between the Commission and Member States must be maintained throughout this process , so that there is absolutely no loss of legal certainty for investors and contracting parties .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would simply like to touch upon the question that has been raised by several Members of this Parliament on compatibility with EU policies .
We aim to be flexible and to achieve a good compromise for the transitional regulation .
These amendments go even further than the Commission 's initial proposal for the regulation , as they considerably expand the scope of the review and withdrawal mechanisms which are already a source of major concern for Member States and many Members of Parliament .
These new criteria , relating to incompatibilities with established policies of the Union or general principles of the Union set out in Article 21 of the Treaty , could be regarded as opening the door to all sorts of additional requirements that existing investment agreements should meet .
I believe such an approach would be strongly opposed by Member States as considerably increasing the level of legal uncertainty for investors benefiting from these agreements .
To return to the next steps in this procedure , I believe that tomorrow 's vote will be an important signal for all stakeholders in this process , and most notably also for the Council as regards the legislative procedure .
The outcome of tomorrow 's vote will be discussed with the Ministers during the public debate next Friday .
Next Friday , we have a Foreign Affairs Council on trade , and this will be one of the topics that we will discuss .
I hope - and I am confident - that your votes will provide the basis for an agreement .
I understand that tomorrow , there will be a vote on the amendments and on the report as a whole but - as Mr Caspary , among others , has said - I hope that this will not hinder us from reaching an early agreement at second reading .
Madam President , I would like to thank everyone who has participated in the debate .
It has been difficult .
Some points that were taken up by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl and others relate to security and fairness .
That is precisely what we are all agreed on : investments must be fair , people should be treated fairly and we must have a reasonable level of security .
At the same time , we cannot over-protect them like molly-coddled infants .
It is like a minefield sometimes ; we take hits occasionally and we develop our awareness .
On the other hand , the risks must be reasonably predictable and we must be able to understand what risks we are taking .
If we are too over-protective , we will retain our old industries and miss out on the change and renewal that we need because we do not dare to take new decisions .
That would be unfortunate .
Therefore , I do not quite understand the Commissioner 's criticism of some of the compromises that are being tabled again here , as we refer to the Treaty and you are the ones who interpret how it is to be applied .
We are very well aware that you cannot review every single agreement and query everything , but can only look at serious violations .
It is also good that we are in agreement that Articles 5 and 6 should be retained .
It would be unfortunate if the Commission 's only means of querying an agreement were to be to take the matter to the European Court of Justice .
If an agreement is called into question and the European Court of Justice says that the agreement is invalid , hundreds of agreements would suddenly become invalid without warning .
That would certainly not be a practice that would result in legal certainty .
It is important for Articles 5 and 6 to be retained .
I completely agree with Mr Caspary that our negotiations should be conducted quickly .
Irrespective of how the vote goes tomorrow , it is important that we conduct the negotiations quickly .
I have already spoken to the Hungarian Presidency and it is ready and willing to deal with this matter as soon as we have voted .
It could also conceive of a decision at first reading , but it does not look as if that will be the case here .
I do not think that the Earl of Dartmouth need worry that the Greens will take over investment policy .
There are many forces that wish to keep it precisely as it has been for the last 50 years .
I have to say that even if you admire our political capability to get proposals through , please do not exaggerate it .
For my part , I admire your rhetorical skills .
With their help , perhaps we could get even more green policy through .
As I have already said , we will have to vote this week and see how it goes .
I would like to thank those involved and also the Hungarian Presidency , which I have met with on a number of occasions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 10 May 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
An attempt has been made at both WTO and OECD level to introduce comprehensive multinational regulations for foreign direct investment , or FDI , that would apply to all economic sectors .
The legal protection offered by the bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) is important in ensuring that businesses are encouraged to take the step of investing abroad , which can cost many millions .
The EU is both a recipient and provider of foreign direct investment .
It remains to be seen whether a move to coordinate the good 200 BITs in operation in the European Union can finally resolve the problem whereby binding BIT arbitration judgments based on international law entail commitments to investors by Member States that give rise to EU Treaty infringement proceedings .
Direct investment is certainly not the miracle cure claimed during the economic transformation of Central and Eastern Europe , for example .
Although greater predictability in relation to FDI opportunities for EU investors is something to be welcomed , the potential negative aspects of investment policy , for example , the fear among the local population of redundancies and wage cuts due to outsourcing and the relocation of production , should not be swept under the carpet .
Likewise , we need to make it clear to developing countries that FDI can only improve living standards if the fundamental institutional requirements are met , such as clear property rights , the independence of the legal system , and political stability .
I believe there is a lack of honesty in relation to this pseudo-humanitarian development aid .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( PL ) Madam President , today is the 61st anniversary of Schuman 's declaration .
Many official celebrations , festivals and parades are taking place to commemorate the anniversary .
Do not let the celebratory mood blind us to the problems with which the EU is currently wrestling .
Firstly , we must reply to the question whether the national self-interest which has appeared in the negotiations over the next financial perspective is in accordance with the calls for solidarity of our founding fathers ?
Secondly , are initiatives which reverse European integration , such as the latest initiative to restrict the Schengen area , compatible with the spirit of Europe ?
Finally , does the current crisis in the euro area and the lack of solidarity of Member States in tackling it present a threat to the success of this ambitious project ?
Unfortunately , there are many more examples pointing to a crisis in European integration .
On this anniversary , let us take the opportunity to reflect seriously on what to do to stop these detrimental tendencies , and to return to proper , dynamic integration in the future .
Let us renew the spirit of Europe according to the ideas of Robert Schuman , so that the successes we have had so far in our common project do not fall by the wayside .
( HU ) Madam President , on Europe Day , I would like to speak about the Community idea .
The legislative package on economic governance represents a new chapter in the life of the Union .
If observed and enforced , the new system of economic policy governance might finally encourage the Member States of the European Union to establish responsible economic policies .
However , this is only one of the conditions of stability of Europe .
The democratic regression recently seen in several Member States is a disturbing phenomenon .
The governments of certain Member States have crossed the boundaries of the rule of law , which were previously considered to be inviolable ; they are restricting the freedom of the press , which is essential for the implementation of real democracy .
The European Commission and the Council should openly combat democratic regression ; if the Commission and the Council do not take action against the democratic deficit in the Union , it will result in severe problems .
Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , EUR 976 billion have been allocated by the European Union for the period 2007-2013 .
A large proportion of that amount has been awarded to programmes for which subsidies need to be requested from the European Commission .
A Bulgarian study has shown that the funding for the majority of the approved projects has gone to three or four European countries , with very few of the others participating .
Unfortunately , the Commission does not have a summary of these findings and their causes , or of the added value of these programmes , and I fear that this will not be taken into account in the next financial framework .
The Commission pledged to apply the principles of transparency and equal treatment in these programmes .
That also means doing more to promote opportunities and ensuring fairer access to information .
I am convinced that the Commission should take steps to promote programmes among interested Europeans while catering for the needs of beneficiaries from new acceding countries .
Madam President , last week , I met a man in my local church who was arranging his son 's memorial service .
His 37-year old son had died the previous year of cancer .
No parent should have to go through the pain of losing a child .
As a mother , I can think of nothing worse .
But we have over 2 000 parents , brothers , mothers and sisters in Cyprus who are suffering every day as they wonder about the fate of their loved one .
In 1963-64 , civil unrest , and the subsequent Turkish invasion and occupation of Cyprus in 1974 , resulted in approximately 2 000 Turkish as well as Greek Cypriots going missing .
Their fate is unknown , and in 1981 , the Committee on Missing Persons was set up and funded primarily by the EU .
The work they have done in this area has brought peace to many families .
There is much more work for them to do , with over one and a half thousand people still missing .
I urge this House to support the work of the CMP , and to support Written Declaration 10 which is humanitarian in its objectives and seeks to bring peace and remembrance and reconciliation to these families .
( EL ) Madam President , today is Europe Day and it reminds us of the objectives on which the European Union must be based : a deepening of the European institutions and a common economic policy which , in our opinion , will set socially fair prosperity and viability as its priorities .
However , the agreement on the euro is fundamentally a move in the wrong direction , as it does no more than impose the traditional economic orthodoxy .
Attempts to link the euro to constant cutbacks in the social state and constant pressure on wages and pensions in the long term risk eroding not only political cohesion , but also the European ideal .
In response to this , we Greens propose the agreement on viable prosperity : integrated fiscal convergence , a truly interventionist and ambitious European budget and mainstreaming of the social and environmental dimensions .
That is why we want to pave the way to move in a different direction .
However , no one is entitled to take life-changing decisions without consulting the public .
The only solution is fundamental dialogue with and direct recourse to the public .
The intransigence , in the past , of those who handled the European Constitution prevented us from institutionalising European referenda .
However , we can find alternative solutions , provided that we have the political will .
We owe it to Europe and its future .
( EL ) Madam President , today is the 66th anniversary of the major anti-fascist grassroots victory on 9 May 1945 , when the fascist-imperialist axis between Germany , Japan and Italy and their allies was crushed .
We honour the dead , the tortured workers , men and women , who fought to crush fascism within the ranks of the communist parties , the national freedom fighters and the anti-fascist movements .
The organising forces behind the major grassroots victory against the fascist-imperialist axis were the communist parties , with the heroic fight by the people of the Soviet Union altering the course of the war , at a cost of over 20 million dead , thousands injured , villages and towns destroyed and razed to the ground and the destruction of its economy .
It is a brazen insult to the millions of dead and injured , the victims of fascist and Nazi bestiality in Greece and Europe as a whole , for the European Union to try and wipe out and falsify history : to turn 9 May from a day of anti-fascist grassroots victory into a vulgar celebration as Europe Day , a day which celebrates the European monopolies .
Today , the working classes and the poor grassroots classes are again suffering one of the worst capitalist crises .
They face the biggest attack since the end of the Second World War ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

Madam President , one of my constituents in London has informed me of serious allegations against a Mr Vladimir Perisic , also known as Dr Vladmir De Rothschild , who claims to be a medical doctor and a specialist surgeon .
It is alleged that Mr Perisic is not medically qualified , is not registered with the General Medical Council , and that he uses his spurious medical credentials to defraud vulnerable people .
He allegedly claims to have met David Cameron and persuaded the Department of Health to consider his proposal for an NHS voucher scheme .
As a result of this , an article featuring him recently appeared , in good faith , in a national Sunday newspaper .
This could give him further spurious legitimacy to dupe those in need of serious medical care .
He is potentially a dangerous risk to the public .
Mr Perisic should be investigated by the relevant UK authorities and the appropriate action taken if the allegations are found to be true .
The national press might also decide to play a useful role in investigating this matter .
( RO ) Madam President , it is a well-known fact that wherever officials from the International Monetary Fund have been , large popular uprisings have occurred .
At the moment , these despotic bureaucrats are imposing a ridiculous agreement on Romania whereby between 150 and 200 of the country 's existing 400 hospitals will be closed down .
Seventy-one hospitals have been closed so far , resulting in the deaths of innocent people .
The alleged reason for this is outrageous .
These hospitals are supposedly unprofitable .
However , there is nowhere in the world where hospitals generate money as they provide a different kind of benefit .
This is why , alarmed at this act of genocide , I lodged a criminal complaint against the IMF 's representative in Romania , Jeffrey Franks , as well as against the local henchmen .
I appeal to the European Parliament and World Health Organisation to take a stance on this to prevent a Member State of the European Union turning into an extermination camp .
At present , Big Finance , which is attempting to introduce a new world order , is exterminating us , but tomorrow they could also exterminate you .
I cherish the hope that the IMF does not want to replace al-Qaeda .
( HU ) Madam President , we , the members of the Hungarian community in Romania , imagine the Europe of the future as the Europe of the regions and communities , in which the Roma communities , too , can find their home .
Today , on Europe Day , the President of Parliament has said : ' We should not retreat behind the borders of our inner circles ; let us fight the challenges in unity ' .
I have been following with concern the flare-up of tensions in Transylvania , where the small communities are turning inwards as a result of tension , harassment or fear , shutting out the communities living together with them .
It is evident in a European region that the future of the Roma community lies not in short-sighted part-measures , but in prospective action by Europe which is founded on solidarity and dialogue .
The Roma integration strategy being prepared under the direction of the Hungarian Presidency may create the Europe of the future for the Roma communities as well .
It is the responsibility of the Commission , Parliament , the Member States , the competent authorities and every local community concerned , and all of us , to make this a reality .
( RO ) Madam President , the health service reform proposed by the current Romanian Government is continuing the series of counter-reforms which are leading this country slowly , but surely towards a real social catastrophe .
The intention behind the so-called health reform proposed by the Boc government in Bucharest is to shut down hospitals , reduce investment in medical equipment and make thousands of nurses and doctors unemployed , which are all drastic measures implemented in a medical service already suffering from a chronic lack of resources .
Romania is in last place in the European league table for the quality and quantity of medical services .
Even deeper cuts to healthcare services are a serious attack on human life and integrity .
The so-called reform proposed by the Boc government is a direct attack on the rights provided for in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
On behalf of Romania 's citizens , I call on the European Commission to take a stance and block these inhumane measures which are jeopardising lives and basic rights .
( SL ) Madam President , the agreement reached last week by the Palestinians , that is , by senior representatives of Fatah and Hamas , in which the new interim Egyptian Government was actively involved , opens up new opportunities for the resumption or , rather , the commencement of a genuine Palestinian-Israeli dialogue on peace and coexistence on the basis of the mutual recognition principle .
I hope that the Israeli Government will rightly value the opportunities this Palestinian agreement brings .
It is wrong to doubt the additional value of Palestinian unification and the agreement on democratic elections .
For this reason , the statements made by Prime Minister Netanyahu that the authorities in Ramallah should choose between Israel and Hamas are of no benefit either to peace or to the finding of a solution , or to the realisation of the project whereby the two states would live side by side in a spirit of mutual respect .
It is right that the democratic changes that are taking place in the Arab world should provide the bedrock for new structures , those of safety , coexistence and development .
( PL ) Madam President , I am taking the floor once again on a very painful matter for Poles in Lithuania .
In this country , only 7 % of the population are Poles , but in certain areas of course , there are more .
It is very disappointing that before 2004 , when Lithuania became a member of the European Union , the Polish minority had more rights than it has now .
It is a paradox that there has been a regression , especially in educational matters , writing surnames in Polish and the rights and privileges of Poles living in Lithuania .
I believe that the European Parliament , which is rightly vocal on behalf of various ethnic minorities in Europe and internationally , should also stand up for the Polish minority in Lithuania .
Madam President , my request to make a one-minute speech on the withdrawal of democratic rights to vote in elections and stand for election in Spain was sent to the Secretariat last Wednesday , at which time the Supreme Court , at the request of the Spanish Government , had banned the Bildu electoral coalition formed by two legal parties , Eusko Alkartasuna and Alternatiba , as well as independent candidates .
As a member of the Basque Friendship Group ' Toward a peace process in the Basque Country ' , I was among those signing the declaration aimed at requesting the Spanish Government to reconsider its position and take all necessary measures to ensure that the elections held on 22 May respect basic democratic principles .
Last Friday , meanwhile , by a decision of the Spanish Constitutional Court , Bildu was allowed to stand for election .
I very much welcome this decision and wish to express my hope that the elections held on 22 May in the Basque Country will be conducted in accordance with all international standards relating to democracy and electoral law .
( PT ) Mr President , I am Parliament 's rapporteur for refugees and I should say that this mission has , in recent times , become a depressing one , if not at times macabre .
Last month , I informed the House about the deaths of more than 100 refugees off the coast of Lampedusa , and now , still reeling from the shock of learning of the disappearance of 600 refugees who were leaving Libya , we learn of more than 60 who died in full view of the ships of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) and several European navies .
Let us not think that nothing can be done about these tragedies .
There is a lot to do , that we must do , and that we are obliged to do by the international conventions that we have signed .
I will give three examples in the 20 seconds I have left .
The Council should conclude the codecision procedure regarding the resettlement of refugees that this Parliament voted for and that provided for emergency mechanisms for use on these occasions .
A proposal should be tabled for a humanitarian corridor to remove from Libya refugees recognised as such by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees ( UNHCR ) , and NATO should comply with its mandate of protecting civilians , from Resolution 1973 , which means carrying out high-sea rescues .
Failure to help , let us not forget , is a crime and should not happen in our name .
( SK ) Madam President , the Duff Report on the European elections has not , in the end , appeared on the agenda for this part-session .
Let us use this time to consider it and then reject it next month .
The idea of a ​ ​ transnational list is absurd .
I have several questions : Why would Slovak , German or Italian electors vote for people they cannot understand without an interpreter ?
How will their elected MEPs then represent them if they cannot even read letters sent to them by their constituents ?
How many times is a Greek MEP going to meet his Slovak voters ?
What are they going to discuss ?
Besides , only large Member States will benefit from a pan-European list .
Approval of this report would vindicate all the Eurosceptics ' claims that the European Union harbours ambitions to become a multinational state .
It will call into question the democratic legitimacy of this Parliament and alienate citizens from the European project even more .
( EL ) Madam President , I wish to comment on the need to safeguard the transparency and efficacy of the Climate Fund .
One of the most tangible results of negotiations on climate change in Cancún was the agreement on a Green Climate Fund , with unprecedented financing in the order of USD 100 billion .
While the transitional committee set up within the framework of the UN is preparing the final form of the Fund , so that it can obtain a final seal of approval in Durban at the end of the year , questions relating to the design of this unique and extremely important instrument remain unanswered .
The Fund must be a carefully designed vehicle that will provide effective financing for adjustment to climate change in the developing world .
However , both the recent criminal attacks on the Community emissions trading system ( EU ETS ) and the information in the recent report by Transparency International on corruption in climate funding are causes for concern , not only because huge amounts of money are at risk , but also , more importantly , because a global fight which , unlike others , may not be open to repeat efforts , is at risk .
( SK ) Madam President , in 1990 , József Antall declared himself Prime Minister of all Hungarians , including Hungarians living outside Hungary .
Today , Viktor Orbán has gone even further .
A new constitution has been adopted , committing Hungary to the idea of a single Hungarian nation consisting of all Hungarians , which is taken to mean all persons belonging to the Hungarian ethnic group , whatever their citizenship .
Contrary to international law , according to which the promotion and protection of a national minority is the responsibility of the State in which that minority lives , this constitution also stipulates that Hungary is responsible for the fate of Hungarians abroad .
The new Hungarian constitution also supports efforts to establish the collective , ethnically-based self-government of Hungarian minorities living abroad .
The provisions of the Hungarian constitution may be a way of meddling in the internal affairs of foreign states and of breeding tension between Hungary and neighbouring countries .
This is at odds with the spirit of a democratic Europe .
( FR ) Madam President , I wish to express our relief following the decision by the Spanish Constitutional Court to allow the lists submitted by the Bildu coalition to be included in the Basque Country 's democratic elections .
This decision was taken on appeal .
It therefore overturned the decision of the Supreme Court , which had again banned the Basque nationalist left from standing in elections .
Would it have been acceptable , at the very heart of the European Union , for citizens to have been deprived again of the right to vote for candidates whom they wished to support ?
Fortunately , Spain has chosen to stop travelling down this very dangerous road for European democracy .
We can only be pleased about that , and we must call on Bildu to fulfil the objectives to which it has committed itself : an end to all political violence in the Basque Country and the disbandment of ETA .
A new political climate is gradually emerging .
Dialogue is difficult , but a desire for peace has been very clearly expressed .
I should like the European Parliament to continue to pay close attention to this important development , because the Basque Country is at the very heart of Europe .
It is essential for Europe that this peace process , which comes 10 years after the Northern Ireland one , receives support and that it can also run its course .
Madam President , for 12 years , I have been asking the Commission and the Council a question which has remained unanswered , as they claim it is hypothetical .
On Thursday , the people of Scotland voted in the Scottish parliamentary elections and the Scottish National Party won an overall majority of seats .
The prospect of a referendum on Scottish independence is now not a matter of ' if ' , but rather of ' when ' .
Under these new circumstances , I therefore ask the Commission and the Council , once again , whether , if part of an existing EU Member State should choose to separate , the new state would remain a member of the EU , or whether it would have to reapply for membership .
The people of Scotland deserve a clear answer to a clear question .
( GA ) Madam President , I refer to the fires we had in my home county - Donegal - and elsewhere in Ireland last weekend , when we had fires which destroyed forests , land , fences and wildlife .
I want to pay particular tribute to the fire services who were out working without sleep for three days or so , and to members of the defence forces - those who were working on the ground or in helicopters .
They made every effort to control the fire .
I am heartened by the response of the local community - young people , farmers , business people - who came out to help , along with the police and the civil defence forces .
Now we need to learn lessons from this .
We must now put an emergency plan in place so that not a minute is lost if something similar happens again .
I am saying this , therefore , to thank all those people .
( SK ) Madam President , a hundred years ago , our forefathers fought for an eight-hour working day , a dignified life and better working conditions .
A labour code is a piece of legislation under which a state provides a system of fundamental social rights for workers .
The current government in Slovakia is preparing an amendment to its Labour Code that will increase working time to 56 hours per week and overtime from the current 400 hours to 560 hours .
In addition , it places workers at a disadvantage , creates uncertainty for those in employment , and reduces financial support for those who lose their jobs .
Paradoxically , the new rules are also destabilising for employers .
Trade unions have taken to the streets to voice their opposition to the Labour Code amendment .
The European Parliament declared 2010 the year for combating poverty .
All of Europe is fighting against poverty .
The Slovak Government will fuel unemployment and increase poverty with this Labour Code .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should today like to report the death on Sunday of the activist for Cuban human rights , Juan Wilfredo Soto García , and I should also like to express my sincere sympathy to his family .
The Cuban Government 's official story is that his death was caused by pancreatitis , but , according to dissidents inside Cuba , Juan Soto 's death was caused by a beating from the police force of Castro 's communist regime .
Guillermo Fariñas , last year 's winner of the Sakharov Human Rights Prize , has accused the Cuban regime and , in particular , the First Secretary of the Communist Party , Raúl Castro , of Juan Soto 's death .
It is likely that Raúl Castro incited his followers to use violence against the opposition during the recently finished Sixth Congress of the Communist Party of Cuba , and Cuban dissidents point to him as bearing responsibility for this latest murder .
I should like to condemn the death of Juan Soto García , and to denounce the lack of freedom and democracy in Cuba .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the European food aid programme for the most deprived persons in the EU was urgently introduced during the exceptionally cold winter of 1986 , then enshrined the following year in the common agricultural policy .
This programme has become vital for 13 million Europeans who have little job security .
It eases the strain on their food budget through distributions by charities and social services , and adds up to a mere EUR 1 per European per year in aid .
Together with the Federation of Food Banks , Secours populaire , the Red Cross and Restos du Coeur in France , I am concerned about the future of this programme after the European Court of Justice called into question its funding within the framework of the CAP .
Our Parliament has often emphasised the fundamental nature of the right to food .
Our institutions made 2010 the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
To cite legal ambiguity as an excuse for dismantling , as some Member States are trying to do , a food aid programme that has proved its worth would be disastrous not only for the people concerned but also for Europe 's credibility and image .
That is why I call on the Commission to take the political measures necessary to safeguard , preserve and strengthen that programme .
( BG ) Madam President , the Romanian border control forces have been detaining illegally for more than 10 days a Bulgarian fishing vessel and its captain , Hristo Spasov , apprehended 20 miles east of Romania 's Black Sea coast , an area outside the country 's territorial waters .
Equal access to the European Union 's waters and resources is one of the basic principles of the common fisheries policy .
This principle is confirmed by Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2371 / 2002 .
Following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union , both countries ' marine areas are part of the pan-European waters and the regulations are directly applicable in their national legislations .
The Bulgarian authorities have forwarded all the necessary documents to their Romanian counterparts , certifying that the vessel is entered in the European Union register and has all the permits for fishing in the Black Sea 's waters .
In spite of this , there has been no progress on the Romanian side .
The sole response has been that only Romanian legislation and the country 's constitution are applicable .
We express our deep concern that equal access to European Union waters continues to be a huge problem for professional fishermen .
We call on our fellow MEPs from Romania and the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , to intervene as mediators to resolve the matter .
( SK ) Madam President , yesterday , we commemorated the end of the Second World War and today we celebrate Europe Day .
It has to be said that the European Union constitutes a very distinctive and unique model , built primarily on democracy and the coexistence of nations in the European Union .
At a time when we are commemorating such a significant anniversary , it is all the more dispiriting for us that , just a few days beforehand , the Hungarian Parliament , and later the President of Hungary , sign a constitution that runs counter to the fundamental principles of democracy .
It is also unfortunate because the Hungarian Government , and Hungary as a country , currently holds the Presidency of the European Union .
Viktor Orbán , as the Hungarian prime minister , has ridden roughshod over fundamental democratic principles .
Not only has he refused to cooperate with the opposition in the adoption of this basic law of his country , but , because of the way the constitution has been conceived , he has very fundamentally undermined the rights of minorities , and destabilised good neighbourly relations between EU Member States .
I therefore hope that the Venice Commission 's findings will be directed towards the adoption by this Parliament of a resolution demonstrating that the Fidesz government is bad for Hungary .
( RO ) Madam President , every year , 9 May is celebrated as Europe Day and I take this opportunity to extend my best wishes to all European citizens .
In his declaration of 9 May 1950 , Robert Schuman , the French foreign minister , indicated that Europe would not be built all at once or based on a single plan , but through specific achievements which would primarily generate genuine solidarity .
The aim of the Schuman Plan was to merge markets , modernise and expand the production of coal and steel , as well as improve and establish equal living standards for workers in these industrial sectors .
Nowadays , Member States are facing economic , financial and social crises , creating the need more than ever for solidarity and respect for the Union 's basic principles .
I call for the barriers preventing the free movement of Romanian and Bulgarian workers to be lifted .
I also request support from Member States for a new industrial policy and a new innovation policy capable of creating jobs which will provide European citizens with a decent living .
( HU ) Madam President , if we want to obtain results in the Roma strategy , we have to simultaneously improve the educational , employment , healthcare , and housing situation , and combat anti-Romanyism , hate speech , and discrimination against the Roma people .
Neither of these can be efficient if we ignore the other .
The Roma strategy of the Commission concentrates only on one side , the social tasks , and even in that respect , it shifts responsibility primarily to the Member States .
Unfortunately , it barely mentions the necessity of combating anti-Romanyism , the human rights dimension of the issue .
The Commission did not raise its voice when paramilitary groups were threatening the Roma citizens in the Hungarian Gyöngyöspata for weeks , and the Hungarian Government took action only when the tension and the provocation escalated into violence .
I fear that if Europe does not show willingness to play a greater role in the improvement of the situation of the Roma people than what was mentioned in the Commission Communication , similar situations will occur again and again .
It is not yet too late to make changes .
We would like to hear the speech of Commissioner Viviane Reding on these issues .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to ask for your attention to remind you that this year has been proclaimed the International Year of Chemistry , in commemoration of Marie Curie being awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry exactly 100 years ago .
With the slogan ' Chemistry - Our life , Our future ' , it is about making society more aware of chemistry 's contribution to our well-being .
Chemistry has made possible vaccines and antibiotics that have doubled our life expectancy , and it is key to developing new energy sources and improving food .
Furthermore , the chemistry industry is a strategic sector in Europe , with 25 000 companies that employ , directly or indirectly , five million people .
We in Parliament must , therefore , do everything we can to make the International Year of Chemistry a success because , as Marie Curie said , ' now is the time to understand more , so that we may fear less ' .
Celebrating this year is a good time to take that on board .
That concludes the item .
Preparing forests for climate change ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Kriton Arsenis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Commission Green Paper on forest protection and information in the EU : preparing forests for climate change .
Madam President , Commissioner , forests are very important to us all , for everyone here in this House and for every European in every corner of Europe .
Forests are a part of our identity .
We use them for recreation and for employment , and yet forests are so different for each of us , in each area of Europe .
If someone from northern Europe visits the Mediterranean forests , he will think that many areas that we in the Mediterranean call forests are savannahs or parks , as they support no productive activities .
Or , conversely , someone from the Mediterranean travelling in northern Europe will consider that the forests in the area are man-made rather than natural , as they support heavy productive activities .
These forests , which are so different for each individual in Europe , for each area , face a common threat : climate change .
Climate change is threatening European forests , with an increase in forest fires , with diseases passing from one country to another and putting entire species at risk , and with disasters caused by extreme weather conditions .
The impact differs from one geographical area to another , but it is a cross-border impact and needs to be addressed with Europe 's assistance .
Today , we are debating , and in two days , we shall vote on Parliament 's report on forest protection .
This report was shaped by consent , right from the start , in cooperation with members from every country and political group .
When it was tabled for debate in committee , it was further shaped by a procedure of 50 compromise amendments , from all the political groups and areas represented in Europe .
I am therefore certain that this report represents Parliament 's opinion as to how we can help forests , how we can help our communities to adapt to climate change .
What are we asking for in this report ?
We are asking for the Commission to proceed with the White Paper on adapting to and protecting forests from climate change , we are asking for a new regulation to replace the old regulation on the prevention of forest fires , we are asking for a new regulation to replace the old regulation on information on the state of forests and , finally , we are asking for an increase in funding for forests under the second pillar of the common agricultural policy .
Forests account for 42 % of the countryside , but only 1 % of the CAP .
We are asking for the facility to finance public agencies , for sustainability criteria for woody biomass used for energy and , finally , for pro-active , viable management of forests adapted to climate change .
( RO ) Madam President , the role of this report is to reopen the debate on forest protection at European level .
Both forest protection activities and the provision of information about them are based on cooperation between European institutions and the authorities in Member States .
I would like to highlight Article 23 in the report about stamping out illegal logging .
I should mention that implementing sustainable forest management is vital to preserving biodiversity in Europe .
Additional financial resources and the removal of legislative barriers are required to complete this process .
Climate change research must be encouraged , especially as part of multinational projects .
I also welcome the initiative aimed at organising employee training programmes .
( PT ) Madam President , on a subject which is vast by nature , I want to make just two brief points here .
The first is to draw attention to threats currently weighing down on countless forest ecosystems .
Amongst other things , I would highlight the spread of invading alien species , pests and forest fires .
There is evidence of some recurrence of some of these factors , especially in convergence regions .
There is a need for rigorous study of their impact , and also of the best ways to make the forest more resistant to this group of biotic and abiotic threats .
To this end , sufficient financial resources should be channelled through Union programmes and support measures for evaluation of forests ' ecological states and the health of their plants , and for their reclassification , including reforestation that favours indigenous species and mixed forests , as well as their resilience and biodiversity .
Secondly , I would draw attention to the enormous diversity of natural conditions and , consequently , of forest ecosystems occurring in Europe .
They need to be recognised and valued : their multifunctionality needs to be valued , along with their potential for generating employment and development in the rural world .
( SK ) Madam President , current studies into the impact of climate change on Europe 's forests indicate that there is a wide range of specific regional responses from forest ecosystems .
The ability to cope with the type and range of expected problems depends on natural regional conditions ( mountainous areas , for example , are exposed to different problems than those of low lying areas ) , on the physiological sensitivity of forest vegetation , on how far individual ecosystems have developed their potential to adapt , on the intensity of the expected climate change ( in Central and Eastern Europe , for instance , the change is projected to be one and a half times greater than the global average ) and on the technical possibilities available to forestry to take adaptive action , for example , by changing species composition in favour of resistant trees .
When drafting measures aimed at protection and adaptation , it is therefore extremely important to take into account specific local and regional features , and to respect factors specific to protected habitats .
Madam President , it is a pleasure to be here this afternoon .
Today , my colleagues and I were speaking for the first time in the Irish National Assembly - the Dáil - on Europe Day , so it is a historic day from that point of view .
The topic before us is absolutely vital because forests have a huge role to play , particularly in combating climate change .
We hear a lot about high-profile issues such as renewable energy , etc . , which are certainly important , but forests deserve far more attention because it takes a long time to grow forests and they must therefore be protected and encouraged .
There is a need for research , in particular , into ways of limiting forest fires .
It is galling to realise that a single lit match can potentially destroy thousands of hectares of fine forest .
I would also agree with the rapporteur that 1 % of CAP expenditure going to forestation is not enough .
Our Parliament wants to increase the number of hectares of forest in Ireland over the coming years , and an increase in funding through the CAP would certainly be sensible and worthwhile .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , at this very late hour , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Arsenis , for his commitment and his work in preparing the report on forest protection and information .
Thanks also to the members of the committee who have put forward their views for their valuable contributions .
The Commission announced its intention to present a Green Paper on forest protection and information in the context of the 2009 White Paper on adaptation to climate change .
It was adopted in March 2010 .
The Green Paper set out the various socio-economic and environmental functions of forests and the challenges they will face in coming decades .
It also reviewed current forest information systems in Europe .
Most importantly it invited Parliament and the Council , as well as all other interested stakeholders , to provide their views on forest protection and information and on the way forward so that the EU could provide added value to the work going on at Member State level and more widely across Europe .
The guiding principle has been to respect Member States ' competences and subsidiarity while , at the same time , seeing how best the EU could contribute to ensuring that the functions of forests are protected and that the information necessary to achieve this is available .
The past year has been rich in discussion and the Council conclusions , together with the results of the stakeholder consultation , are already feeding into the Commission 's reflections on the next steps .
Despite the fact that there has been a lengthy debate as to whether the EU needs a forestry policy or not , I am very pleased to see that appreciation of the economic , social and environmental functions of forests was a common theme in the stakeholder and Council input and that this concern is again evident today in the report drafted by Kriton Arsenis .
Likewise , there is a very great need for information at a comparable level across a wide range of forestry-related issues such as employment , stocks , biomass , fires , soil and forest carbon information and trends , forest health , biodiversity and water protection , and each institution lays great emphasis on finding means to achieve this .
In anticipation of Parliament 's report , we have already begun working with the Member States to develop further and more clearly the precise information needs at EU level .
The report will help us to focus this work .
A further phase needs to be developed once the information needs are clear .
We will be working on both aspects over the coming year , carefully and without duplicating other efforts in the forest area .
Armed with relevant useful and comparable information , we should , in the near future , be better able to provide EU added value across forestry-related socio-economic and environmental issues , thus paving the way for better EU input to help forests to continue to deliver their multiple benefits for us all .
The Commission will now study this report in detail and reflect fully on our response to it and to the Council conclusions and stakeholders ' input .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 11 May 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The report on the protection of forests addresses the issue of forest decline resulting from felling .
In view of the fact that we must count on further losses through climate change , European forestry finds itself in a difficult and risky situation .
Some Member States ( for example , Germany and Austria ) operate a balanced forestry policy .
A large number of countries - especially new Member States , including the Czech Republic - allow unsustainable forestry on their territory , however , which can be defined as the total clearance and looting of forest growth .
The ratio of clearance to new forest growth is even higher than 100 % .
It is absolutely essential to manage and regulate the felling and clearance of forests at the European level , as long as these countries have such incompetent or corrupt politicians who are either unable or unwilling to halt this trend .
In the Czech Republic , forestry management has become a business , in which the financial profits of the firms involved are all that matters .
There can be no talk of maintenance or sustainable forestry management .
It is also quite common that some citizens cut down trees without a permit , because the cost of heating fuel makes it worthwhile .
I must appeal to the authorities who fail to penalise this and even fail to address it , because cutting down forests has become common practice in the Czech Republic .
I welcome the report .
It is a further step towards sustainable forestry in Europe , and halting the looting of forests in some Member States .
The report accurately shows that forestry policy is the responsibility of Member States .
However , we must support it at the European level at the very least due to the principle of subsidiarity .
From the point of view of climate change , ensuring the safety of forests is extremely important , as they are threatened more and more by natural disasters , especially such as fires or wide-ranging tree diseases .
We have to remember the exceptional role of forests in ensuring biological balance and diversity , and that they are a valuable link in the proper functioning of the economy , not only in the production of timber , but also in relation to other products and services which are a common public asset .
I believe that it is therefore very important to establish a sustainable common European forestry management policy .
I appeal to the Commission to draw up legally binding criteria for the sustainable development of tree biomass , at the same time introducing tools for collecting information on forests and forestry and for making this information accessible .
I was rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on this report .
I have endeavoured to emphasise the link that exists between forests and rural communities , based on the economic and social role which forests play as an important source of income and also in agricultural production .
I feel that the role of forests in the future common agricultural policy is an important aspect of this .
This is especially true in the context where Europe 's action in the forestry sector is implemented in particular via the second pillar of the CAP - rural development .
This must be preserved as a powerful , effective instrument , while funding must continue at a sufficient level as part of the post-2013 CAP programmes .
Support must be maintained for creating forest plantations as part of these programmes .
Forests are also an important provider of public services which go unrewarded by the market .
This is why I think that forest owners should be given a direct payment per area .
The role of forests in the European Union 's energy strategy is another important point because their potential as a renewable energy source is currently underexploited .
There is a lack of consistency among the European Union 's various forestry-related policies as well as those of the Member States .
It is therefore necessary to coordinate policies related to forestry , agriculture , renewable energy , biodiversity , as well as other environmental policies , more thoroughly .
Here , we must also take industrial and research policy and the Europe 2020 strategy into account .
Forestry is a natural part of an integrated rural and regional policy , and this must be taken into account in the discussions on the future of the common agricultural policy after 2013 .
, in writing . - European forests are major contributors to climate change mitigation and the adaptation of European societies through the continuation of their economic , social and environmental functions .
Therefore , EU forest-related instruments need to be updated to address new threats to their sustainable management and conservation .
It 's underlined the central role of Sustainable Forest Management ( SFM ) and the importance of forests for competitiveness and employment , in order to achieve EU 's climate targets and deliver necessary ecosystem services such as biodiversity conservation , protection against natural disasters and CO2 capturing .
Requests for : 1 .
Reporting through National Forest Programmes to be enhanced and SFM to be better implemented throughout the European Union .
2 .
The immediate adoption of legislation on forest fire prevention as well as on forest information taking into account climate threats and the need for collection and dissemination of comparable data .
Moreover , it calls for a White Paper on forest protection , addressing financial resources , knowledge exchange and promotion of research .
3 .
There is recognition of the importance of forests for rural development and the need to remove obstacles to funding for forestry and biodiversity .
A call for access to funding of the relevant measures for public bodies and rural producers has been agreed upon .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 05 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
2009 discharge ( debate )
- The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Jorgo Chatzimarkakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , Section III - Commission and executive agencies ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0211 / 2010 - ;
by Jorgo Chatzimarkakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Court of Auditors ' special reports in the context of the 2009 Commission discharge ;
by Ville Itälä , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section I - European Parliament ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0212 / 2010 - ;
by Crescenzio Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section II - Council ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0213 / 2010 - ;
by Crescenzio Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section IV - Court of Justice ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0214 / 2010 - ;
by Crescenzio Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section V - Court of Auditors ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0215 / 2010 - ;
by Crescenzio Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section VI - European Economic and Social Committee ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0216 / 2010 - ;
by Crescenzio Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section VII - Committee of the Regions ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0217 / 2010 - ;
by Crescenzio Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section VIII - European Ombudsman ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0218 / 2010 - ;
by Crescenzio Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section IX - European Data Protection Supervisor ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0219 / 2010 - ;
by Bart Staes , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds for the financial year 2009 - C7-0220 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the 2009 discharge : performance , financial management and control of EU agencies ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Police College for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0241 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Medicines Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0233 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0232 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0226 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Community Fisheries Control Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0244 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Aviation Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0237 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0239 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Chemicals Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0245 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0230 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Food Safety Authority for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0238 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0229 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Maritime Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0236 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Network and Information Security Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0252 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Railway Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0240 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Training Foundation for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0235 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0231 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Euratom Supply Agency for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0246 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0227 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of Eurojust for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0234 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0228 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( FRONTEX ) for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0242 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority for the financial year ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0243 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0250 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0249 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Joint Undertaking for the implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0251 / 2010 - ;
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0247 / 2010 - , and
by Georgios Stavrakakis , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the SESAR Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 ( SEC ( 2010 ) 0963 - C7-0248 / 2010 - .
Mr President , Commissioner Šemeta , ladies and gentlemen , the process we are dealing with today - that is , the discharge for the expenditure of the European Commission - is an essential process .
In recent years it may perhaps have been taken rather lightly , but in fact granting discharge for all the expenditure of the European Commission for the year 2009 is an essential task of the European Parliament .
We are aware that 80 % of these funds were spent as a shared responsibility between the Commission and the Member States .
Nonetheless , the overall responsibility for this process lies with the Commission .
I would therefore like to address you quite directly , Commissioner Šemeta .
Firstly , I would like to thank you .
I would like to make that clear at the outset .
I would like to include my fellow Members who have worked very well together and who have supported Parliament 's position very strongly .
However , the discussions that we had were very intense , Commissioner Šemeta .
You have only shared responsibility for 2009 , yet you have thrown yourself into it .
In some cases we have had heated arguments and have gone into very great detail .
I should like to emphasise , however , that you have put the discharge at the top of the agenda in the College , in the Commission .
The President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , spent over an hour negotiating with us on the details .
You yourself played a major part in changing the attitude of the Commission to the discharge and the attitude of the Commission officials to this whole process .
I am grateful to you for having said quite openly that the pressure that Parliament has exerted this year will in the final event help you to improve transparency .
You now have in your hands a means of exerting pressure not just on the Member States , but also on your own administration - which has until now been a little lax in dealing with these matters .
However , I also think that we need to utilise this momentum that we have created together , Commissioner Šemeta - and I would ask you to pass on our thanks to President Barroso - and this dynamism for the other discharge reports .
For there is one thing that must be clear to us , which is that for the 16th time in succession the European Court of Auditors has not given a positive statement .
That is not insignificant , as it means that you have not actually met the criteria for 16 years running .
Nonetheless , we have set key criteria that I would like to mention briefly and that you have met .
I am pleased to have Mr Fjellner , the forthcoming rapporteur on the budget discharge , at my side .
I hope that he will continue the work with the same impetus .
The Commission has begun - and this is crucial , because we are after all talking about 80 % shared responsibility here - quite clearly to state erroneous expenditure in the accounts of the European Union for 2009 .
It has listed these items openly .
Building on this new transparency , therefore , we have set five key requirements .
The first is a long-running issue - an old favourite - that Parliament has been dealing with for a long time , and that is the national management declarations .
As a representative of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I am also pleased to be able to point out that this has been brought about by Dutch members of the ALDE Group in particular .
We are talking here about the confirmation by the finance ministers that EU funds have been spent correctly in their home countries .
We do not yet have these national management declarations , but we want to get them .
In this respect I will be building on my cooperation with Mr Fjellner in the future .
Commissioner , you have promised that we will look into whether stricter conditions can be introduced by the next financial perspective in 2014 .
It is important that you have drawn up guidelines - we are grateful to you for that - that you have shown which countries have actually provided national management declarations - it is not many : basically , only the Netherlands meets the requirements in full - and that you have instructed the Directorates General to show for the first time in the activity report for 2010 what components will be present in a future national administrative declaration , even if this will only take place at working level .
The second key requirement is that the commissioners must also accept greater responsibility .
You have proposed that the Directorates General be obliged to inform their commissioners of irregularities and I want to thank you for that .
The third , and essential , requirement was for the instrument of stopping or suspending payments to be used to a greater extent .
You have listed clear criteria for when you will do that .
You have shown us clearly how you have already done this in the last couple of years .
Thank you for such openness and transparency , which helps us exert pressure on the Member States .
Thank you also for the guidelines that will help the Member States .
In addition , you promised that when evaluating the performance audit you will set clear standards ; this is an obligation that you have anyway under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Thank you also for involving us to a considerable extent in the performance audit process .
You have also promised to make simplifications , because often the material is so complex that people hide behind the rules and indulge in abuse .
Thank you also for having set very specific requirements for the next financial perspective .
I advocate that we continue along this path .
I believe that Parliament can make a great contribution towards raising the Commission to another level .
I wish Mr Fjellner all the best and would like to extend my warm thanks to my parliamentary staff , particularly Bent Adamsen and Dominykas Mordas .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I wish to thank everyone with whom I have had the pleasure to work , in particular the shadow rapporteurs , whose cooperation was excellent .
I would also like to thank the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , as there was a clear majority on the Committee who were in favour of the report and the atmosphere was very positive indeed .
My thanks also go to all the officials who were of assistance to us .
The work was demanding , it took a long time , and the issues are quite delicate and awkward , but they nevertheless have to be dealt with and discussed .
The main idea in the report is that we in the EU are now going through an economic crisis .
Member States , companies and the general public are continually having to think about how they can make savings and how they can manage from one day to the next .
Parliament must do the same , and the Council has even proposed that Parliament should also think about savings in this respect and that they need to be made .
Of course , this is problematic , because we all have our own pet projects and our own ideas about what Parliament should be doing anyway .
Finding areas in which to make savings in such a case is sometimes obviously very difficult .
Many things that are proposed here and that relate to Members ' benefits and the way in which they work are not very major in terms of cash .
The EU 's economy will not rise or fall because of them , but the loss of reputation that we could cause if we do not function in a reasonable manner and one that is acceptable in the eyes of the public is considerable , and that is why we really need to think carefully about what we are going to do .
In my opinion , we should focus on the essential reasons why we are here .
We are a legislative body ; we draft a budget .
That is the work we do and we need to have the means to do it .
Information technology must be delivered and all the rest , but with regard to everything that goes any further than that , we have to be very critical , to ensure that it is actually connected with the work that we are here to do .
Now that time is short , I wish to raise two important but perhaps equally troublesome issues in this report .
The first is security .
Mr President , I hope that the SecretaryGeneral will soon make a proposal to improve security .
In the space of a year or so , we have had three robberies : in the bank , the canteen and the post office .
This really cannot continue .
We know that there is a continual threat of terrorism throughout the world .
If Parliament 's security is so poor that someone can walk in here and rob the post office or the bank , and no one even gets caught , there is every reason to make improvements , and fast .
There are a lot of details connected with this , and they are set out in this report .
They should serve as a basis for essentially improving security .
The next important matter is that I cannot possibly justify to the public the fact that every three weeks we change our place of work .
This incurs far more expenditure .
It cannot be justified , and that is why we should have the courage to discuss here openly whether this is a reasonable way to spend taxpayers ' money .
We know how difficult this is ; this is about our history and private passions , but in the current economic crisis we need to speak about this issue .
We cannot build walls like these between the decisionmakers and the people and alienate one from the other in this way .
That is why we need to raise the matter and talk about it .
Yesterday I saw a document that said that the French Senate has proposed that Parliament should only meet in one place , Strasbourg .
This would suit me fine , because the main issue is that we should only have one place of work and not spend money on constant travel to and fro .
I would like to reply right away by saying that the Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General put a lot of effort into ensuring our safety in Parliament .
Yesterday we spent a great deal of time discussing this issue at a meeting of the Bureau .
Procedures must be improved , but I would also like to take this opportunity to call on all the Members of the European Parliament to understand that a certain level of discipline is required of us .
I know that they are sometimes a burden , but if we want a Parliament which is both safe and open to the public , we must carry out checks , although I know that Members and I myself are sometimes irritated by them .
Please believe me when I say that there are only two options ; either these checks continue , which will mean that we can feel safer , or we dispense with them , in which case there can be no question of safety .
I would also like to ask Members once again to take a positive attitude to the heightened checks , which I do not wish to have to abandon .
They will continue to be enforced in future .
We also have other plans to ensure that Parliament remains open , since it is very important that it does .
We want to be a Parliament which is open to the public , but at the same time safety requirements dictate that we must adopt certain measures which have not been necessary to date .
This also affects our assistants , and it has come to my attention that our assistants are much more indignant than even the Members .
I would therefore ask the assistants , who work very hard in Parliament , also to understand the need for these checks .
It is not only Members that are subject to checks , but also assistants .
I am sure that we will adopt these rules in order to feel safer .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr President has said , Mr Rivellini is the rapporteur for seven reports on the table .
Our colleague has worked exceptionally hard and efficiently over the past six months , but unfortunately he is unable to attend this sitting , and I have the honour to stand in for him in today 's debate .
As I have mentioned , Mr Rivellini is the rapporteur of seven of the reports .
Allow me to remind you of the key EU institutions whose discharge reports were prepared by Mr Rivellini .
Mr Rivellini prepared the discharge report in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Council , the European Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the European Court of Justice , the European Court of Auditors , the Ombudsman , and the European Data Protection Supervisor and their offices .

Let me thank Mr Rivellini on my part , and also specifically the European Court of Auditors ; the work of this institution was indispensable for the preparation of the reports on the table .
Let me also thank the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control of the European Parliament and also their colleagues for their work which has led to today 's results .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to highlight two reports .
One is the discharge report of the European Council , the other is the discharge report of the European Economic and Social Committee .
The discharge of the European Council is always complicated because a debate develops each year between the two institutions , the European Parliament and the European Council concerning the discharge procedure .
Let me be clear and unequivocal .
The definite and clear position of the European Parliament is that it has the same power and authority to grant or withhold discharge concerning the European Council as in the case of any other institution .
Mr Rivellini proposes to postpone the discharge of the European Council in order to leave room for further consultation between the Council and the European Parliament concerning the discharge procedure .
We followed a similar procedure last year and the year before .
The competent committee of the Parliament recommended postponement of the discharge of the Council , and discharge was granted on a later date .
This year , although the proposal is similar to previous years ' in that it concerns the postponement of the discharge , we have unquestionably achieved progress as regards the Council discharge procedure , therefore I thank and congratulate the Hungarian Presidency of the European Council .
As point eight of the discharge report concerning the European Council says , this progress is due to the positive attitude and efforts of the Hungarian Presidency .
Therefore I congratulate those involved in the work of the Hungarian Presidency .
We have experienced this progress year by year , but its rate is nowhere near what would be desirable .
We consider it to be a positive result that the Council has acknowledged the discharge procedure and the budgetary procedure as two different processes that must be handled separately .
It is also to be welcomed that Members of the Council attend and participate in the current debate on the discharge proposal .
Unfortunately , Council representatives ignored the invitation of the technical committee this year , too .
They did not participate in the committee debate on the discharge procedure , nor did they provide access to important documents which would have been necessary for granting discharge , and the European Council did not answer the questions of the parliamentary committee either .
These are the problems which should be overcome at last .
I hope that after the postponement of discharge it will be possible to reach a definitive and forward-looking agreement between the competent parliamentary committee , the European Parliament and the European Council on the issues related to the discharge of the Council .
Finally allow me to touch upon the proposal for exemption of the European Economic and Social Committee .
The problems related to the management of the budget of the Committee are not as serious as to justify the postponement of discharge , therefore we are in favour of granting discharge .
Furthermore , the problems detected during the work of the committee are not connected to the year following the year for which discharge is granted .
Ladies and gentlemen , as substitute for Mr Rivellini I can say that as regards the seven proposals we should motion for a resolution by Parliament as laid down in the proposal .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , you deserve a pat on the back .
For the first time in years , the Council is attending this debate on the discharge of the budget .
Congratulations , we really appreciate that .
Ladies and gentlemen , EUR 22.6 billion , that is how much the 10th European Development Fund will spend in the 2008-2013 period .
That makes the European Development Fund the EU 's most important financial instrument for development cooperation with the ACP countries .

The 10th European Development Fund is also extremely important in terms of its financial commitment and , in terms of scope , it is 64 % larger than its predecessor , the 9th European Development Fund .
I would like to make five comments .
First of all , so far , the European Development Fund has not been part of the EU 's ordinary budget .
That is actually unacceptable because it interferes with democratic supervision , leads to a lack of responsibility and certainly does not help the transparency of funding .
In my report , I remind the Commission that , during the discussions on the future financial framework , it has committed itself to ensuring that the European Development Fund becomes a truly integral part of the European budget .
I hope that that will now be the case and I hope , President-in-Office of the Council , that you will send out the message to the Council and to Member States that , from 2014 , the European Development Fund really must become an integral part of the Union budget .
Obviously , that should not be taken to mean that this operation should be allowed to result in resources which are generally made available for development cooperation being cut .
Secondly , quantity is one thing , quality is another .
As far as ordinary development cooperation is concerned , the European Commission has committed itself to spending 20 % of the aid on primary and secondary education and on primary health care .
In my report , I ask the Commission to do the same with regard to the European Development Fund . To focus , primarily , on primary and secondary education , health care and even to increase that amount to 25 % of the total fund .
In that respect , cooperation with NGOs , both local and European , is of vital importance .
Thirdly , allow me to comment on financial management .
The European Court of Auditors has carried out an extremely thorough investigation of the financial management of the 8th , 9th and 10th European Development Funds , not only in its annual report but in a great many special reports , and made really good and really valuable comments .
However , there are indeed some reasons for concern , such as the shortcomings the Court has found with regard to procurement procedures , ex-ante checks of the European Commission 's delegations and failing internal control systems in our partner countries .
The Court of Auditors explicitly notes that this is not fraud , but shortcomings .
I think that we need to take that on board .
There are indeed far too many non-quantifiable errors .
Commissioner , I hope that you will take this up with your colleague .
Something really needs to happen on that front .
My fourth comment is to do with budget aid ( and it would be more fitting in a broader debate ) .
Mr Charles Goerens is here with us ; he is the rapporteur of the Committee on Development Cooperation for the Green Paper on Budget Aid .
We all recognise that budget aid can be an important element for the improvement of development cooperation .
However , it should not be regarded as a cure-all , because it also comes with a number of drawbacks .
The positives are that transaction costs are low , that partner countries have an increased responsibility for themselves and that there is a better dialogue between partners and donors .
At the same time , there is obviously the risk of embezzlement , of the misappropriation of funds .
I can see this debate taking place many more times to come in this Parliament .
My fifth and last comment concerns the investment facility .
The investment facility is a vehicle used by the European Investment Bank to divert loans to our partner countries .
At the moment , this mechanism does not actually fall under the discharge , nor does it fall under the declaration of assurance of the Court of Auditors .
That is actually not acceptable .
We need to remedy a few things .
What is positive in all this is that the representatives of the European Investment Bank and the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control have had an extremely constructive debate .
As a matter of fact , they have , for the first time ever , produced a report .
There is a lot we can learn from that .
There are a number of important comments in my report with respect to that .
We are also entrusting a few tasks to the European Investment Bank and the European Commission .
We are asking for better coordination of funds .
European Investment Bank , European Commission , we are actually asking for an investigation into the activities of the European Investment Bank towards the end of September this year so that we can start the next discharge procedure with proper documentation .
We are asking for greater involvement of local partners where the Investment Bank cofinances projects , we are asking for more direct and less theoretical reporting and we are asking for a general audit of all funds of the European Investment Bank .
Ladies and gentlemen , my assessment of the functioning of the European Development Fund may be strict , but I think that it is a fair one .
I believe that my report considers a great many avenues for the better management of financial resources for development cooperation and I would therefore urge you to adopt my report with a large majority .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to inform you that I will be making use of all my time .
I was responsible for the discharge of the agencies , where the Committee on Budgetary Control has executed its task of exercising control over the administration of a significant number of decentralised agencies and joint undertakings .
The successful execution of this important task would not be possible without the help and cooperation of my fellow shadow rapporteurs or the members of the committee , my office and the secretariat .
I would like to thank them all for that .
I would also like to very much thank Mr O 'Shea from the Court of Auditors for his contribution and cooperation .
I strongly believe that the European agencies and joint undertakings bring added value to the EU and help strengthen European identity with a presence in the Member States .
At the same time , our role as a Parliament is accountability towards citizens , so we have to make sure that taxpayers ' money is used properly , transparently and effectively .
The constructive dialogue involved a long monitoring process over several months between Parliament , the agencies , the Commission , the Internal Audit Service and the Court of Auditors .
The joint long , analytical and preparatory work has resulted , in my opinion , in increasing transparency and tighter management discipline .
Let me now turn to the two agencies for which our committee is proposing to postpone the discharge : CEPOL and EMEA .
In CEPOL we were expecting to find problems dating back to last year 's report .
Since the new Director has been in place the action plan that Parliament requested has been implemented and results are just now starting to be visible .
I think that it is widely accepted that , since the new management took over , improvements in the running of ' CEPOL have been evident .
Nevertheless CEPOL needs to step up its efforts .
In EMEA , the European Medicines Agency , problems were found with the management of procurement procedures .
Concerns were raised about the potential risk to the independence of experts and also potential problems with staff recruitment .
In general , EMEA is considered a well organised and functioning agency .
Nevertheless , for an agency of this significance , I think that we should be absolutely sure that the right procedures are in place and effectively applied .
For this reason we have requested the agency , with the cooperation of the Internal Audit Service , to conduct an audit and present us with the results by the end of June .
Let me now conclude with a horizontal report .
I would like to believe that this report gives a comprehensive overview of all the issues that are related to all the agencies and joint undertakings .
The report identifies many examples of good practice and includes proposals for future improvements .
It calls for a review of all agencies by the Commission , with particular attention to be paid to the smallest agencies and how their performance can be improved .
It also calls on the Court of Auditors to undertake a comprehensive analysis of the agencies ' approach to the management of situations where there is a potential conflict of interests .
I am very satisfied with the readiness of the Court to do so .
In the current major economic and social crisis , the significance of monitoring has become more important than ever before .
Together - Parliament , agencies , the Commission and the Court of Auditors - we are committed to dealing with and solving the problems and achieving even better results .
It is exceptionally difficult to avoid irregularities but it is even more important to find them and to prevent them .
I am of the opinion that we have successfully carried out this function of monitoring .
The next speaker is Minister Zsolt László Becsey on behalf of the Council .
Minister , thank you very much for coming here this morning .
The Hungarian Presidency is giving a very good example , also to the next presidencies , in being present for this very important discussion .
I am saying what our colleague Bart Staes said a few minutes ago : it is very good that you are present .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I will only speak in Hungarian as an introduction , and then I will continue in English when speaking as a Member of the Council , but since as a MEP I always speak in Hungarian in this room , I will continue to do so .
Secondly , I would like to ask Mr President to allow me the two minutes at the end of the debate regardless of when my machine is switched off .
I hope that the Council will be granted enough time , as in previous debates .
This debate comes at a time of economic and financial crisis when many Member States have had to cut their national budgets and keep their expenditure under strict control .
European citizens and taxpayers are rightly paying ever closer attention to the proper spending of EU funds .
I therefore welcome the opportunity to present the views of the Council and the Hungarian Presidency during this debate .
Of course it is right that the budgets of each of the institutions are part of the wider system of control and scrutiny .
For too long we have operated under the ' gentleman 's agreement ' originating from 1970 , according to which both Parliament and the Council have refrained from examining each other 's administrative expenditure .
I think we both accept that such an agreement is no longer appropriate in today 's climate after the Lisbon Treaty .
That is why the Council has proposed , and is ready to discuss , new arrangements for governing the long-term cooperation between our two institutions involved in the discharge procedure .
We have put forward a proposal and we look forward to discussing it with you .
I strongly believe that it is in both our interests to cooperate in this area , and no less important to show Europe 's citizens that we are cooperating .
I therefore invite Parliament to begin discussions on this issue .
I personally ask you , Mr President , to do your best to appoint your delegation to negotiate with us at a political level .
We are ready to share our ideas with you .
More generally we share your concern that the EU budget be correctly implemented .
We have examined in detail the Commission 's annual accounts as well as the observations made by the European Court of Auditors in its annual report .
At the end of February , I myself presented to the Committee on Budgetary Control the Council 's recommendations on the discharge to the Commission for the implementation of the budget .
I welcome the fact that many of the points highlighted by the Council have been taken up by your institution as well .
The Council recommended granting discharge to the Commission , and it acknowledged the overall improvements identified by the Court .
These are part of a welcome trend and are due largely to the efforts over recent years by both the Commission and the Member States .
Yet despite these positive signs the overall result is not yet satisfactory and the Court still had to qualify its opinion for 2009 .

I would like to briefly mention these issues : we need a serious discussion ; we need long-term cooperation and a long-term agreement with you : following on from the gentleman 's agreement that is what we should like to do .
We stand by the discharge procedure on the basis of the Court of Auditors ' findings because that is the rule , that is the Treaty issue ; and we also expect Parliament and ourselves to take into account the complexity of simplifying existing regulations and enhancing their transparency .
I hope that this kind of problem , whereby the Council discharge has been postponed by Parliament , will never come up in the future again so I ask that even during the Hungarian Presidency we should have a political discussion and agreement .
That is my personal request to you , to Parliament and to you , Mr President .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first allow me to thank the Committee on Budgetary Control , and in particular the rapporteur Mr Chatzimarkakis , for their excellent cooperation and the report he has drawn up , including the recommendation that the budget for 2009 should be discharged .

I would also like to thank Mr Staes for his report on the implementation of the European Development Fund , and Mr Stavrakakis for his report on agencies .
The 2009 discharge procedure is now reaching its end .
It was an intensive period in which Parliament and Commission gave shape to the special partnership between our two institutions .
We can observe that both institutions have a lot in common as regards sound financial management and European added value .
You have heard the Court of Auditors and examined its reports .
Several of my fellow Commissioners have conducted a fruitful dialogue with the Committee on Budgetary Control , and a lot of information has been shared with you .
I would like to focus on three topics of special interest .
First , both the Commission and Parliament need to reflect closely , together with the Council , on how the responsibility of the various financial actors can be better defined and outlined in the legislative framework .
The fact that the majority of errors are detected by the Court of Auditors and the Commission in projects and payments managed by Member States indicates clearly where more efforts need to be made without delay , as shared management represents almost 80 % of the European Funds .
Article 317 of the Lisbon Treaty explicitly requires the cooperation of Member States in the implementation of the budget .
To this effect , the Commission has put forward consistent proposals in the context of the current revision of the Financial Regulation .
As Parliament is now on an equal footing with the Council as regards recasting this regulation , there is a real and unique opportunity to reinforce Member States ' accountability , and it should not be missed .
Second , you will undoubtedly share the view that the complexity of the rules discourages potential beneficiaries from applying for EU financial support .
In addition , this complexity constitutes a significant source of errors , as underscored by the Court of Auditors in several of its audit reports .
The simplification of eligibility rules and financial processes is a priority objective of the Commission in the perspective of the next Multiannual Financial Framework .
Therefore , the Commission has also made proposals for the revision of the Financial Regulation aimed at clarifying the rules , ensuring their consistency with sectoral legislation and simplifying financial processes .
Third , these proposals also foresee differentiated control strategies according to the level of risk estimated per programme , action and type of beneficiary .
This approach aims at improving the quality of controls by ensuring that their costs are proportionate to the benefits they generate while providing reasonable assurance that the EU budget is managed in accordance with sound financial management principles .
I am happy to see that this approach is high on the agenda of the ongoing discussions and the proposals which are on the table really match the Commission 's ambitions .
The discharge procedure has allowed the Commission to learn from the conclusions and recommendations of the European Court of Auditors and the resolution of the discharge authority at a time when we are considering the future design of EU policies and their reflection in the EU budget .
It is now our common responsibility , together with the Council , to translate concretely those lessons into a new set of modern and efficient rules and processes which will enable the Union to meet better the expectations of our 500 million citizens in a sound and cost-effective way .
Let me conclude by expressing my special thanks to the European Parliament for its continuous support , over the years , of the Commission 's efforts to achieve better financial management of the European Union 's budget .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development Cooperation . - ( NL ) Madam President , in the past , the European Development Fund has been the target of the Court of Auditors ' criticism that greater efforts need to be invested in expenditure control .
This control must , above all , come from the EU delegations in developing countries .
They are the closest to the projects which we are discussing .
In recent years , in particular , the European Commission has made important steps towards improving control , especially as regards budget aid and spending in fragile states .
What is more , better cooperation and coordination on development policy between Member States could save us EUR 6 billion .
However , to achieve this we need strong EU delegations , delegations which can assume those roles and tasks and ensure the quality of spending .
Ironically enough , the parties that cry blue murder about fraud , but refuse to spend money on strengthening the management of EU delegations , are often one and the same .
If we really want these delegations to prevent development money ending up in the wrong hands or to prevent money leaking away into failing projects , then EU delegations will need more staff .
We therefore have to make that choice in our external policy budget for the coming years .
I await with curiosity the Commission 's answer to a number of comments made by Mr Bart Staes in his excellent report .
My group fully endorses his conclusions .
Having said that , what needs to happen before ex-ante controls are improved ?
How can we ensure improvement of the management of implementing organisations ?
What will the Commission do in order to increase further the capacity of beneficiary countries and regional organisations and what is necessary for that to happen ?
In the future , the EU development policy should spend more on funds which offer access to financial services , that is microfinancing funds . There are people with enough dreams and skills in poor countries .
They should be given the chance to build up their own lives with small loans .
The EDF should also contribute to that .
Finally , as part of the European budget , the European Development Fund is obviously subject to democratic control , but that must not lead to the total budget for development cooperation being cut .

Madam President , discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds inspires me to make the following comments .
Firstly , the Commission 's ambition - a very justifiable one - is to promote regional development in Africa .
It has two instruments , two mandates in fact , for doing so .
Firstly , it has a mandate from the Member States to implement the European Development Fund , which is in fact financed by the national budgets .
The same Member States have also given it a mandate to negotiate economic partnership agreements .
It is therefore a policy coherence matter that we are talking about here .
Moreover , the Commission has a heavy responsibility in this matter .
It can , however , count on the members of the European Parliament 's Committee on Development when it comes to making the necessary resources available to the delegations .
Secondly , the implementation of the European Development Fund is a matter for the Africans , who are co-owners of the European Development Fund with the European Union .
It is in both partners ' interests to make the best possible use of it .
I hope that the inclusion of the European Development Fund in the budget , which I also demand - that elusive phenomenon , that event which is always promised but which has never materialised - will be able to preserve the original nature of the Fund .
We will have to ensure that this acquis is preserved .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( HU ) Madam President , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs I would like to draw the attention of the Committee on Budgetary Control to several proposals , and ask it to include them in its report .
First of all , we appreciate the efforts of the Commission to improve financial management , but at the same time we regret that Member States do not draw in full the financial assets of the European Social Fund notwithstanding the financial crisis .
This rate decreased from 54 % in 2007 to 36 % .
We think that more efforts must be made in this field .
We also urge greater efforts to decrease the frequency of refunding non-eligible expenditures , and we would like to draw the attention of the Commission to the need to accelerate decision-making processes relating to financial adjustments .
It is to be welcomed that the European Social Fund focused on employment strategy , but as I have said , they did not involve all the funds available , so further efforts are necessary in this regard .
There were minor problems with the agencies , I do not have time to elaborate on it , but in general we must say that their financial management is acceptable and should be supported .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has expressed a very positive opinion to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
We were very pleased with how the funds had been implemented by the Commission services .
We have no criticisms to make , either as regards the way in which the funds were spent or as regards the level of expenditure .
On the contrary , we have nothing but praise for the prompt and positive use of the funds in the LIFE programme .
The Commission has succeeded in spending the additional funding that we granted and in doing so usefully .
The agencies in our area - the European Environment Agency ( EEA ) , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) , the European Chemicals Agency ( ECA ) , the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) and the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) - have also managed their money responsibly .
In contrast to the competent committee , the Committee on Budgetary Control criticises the European Medicines Agency in its report and even wishes to refuse discharge for this agency .
I think that is going too far , to put it politely .
If I were being less polite I might say that the Committee on Budgetary Control is interfering in matters outside its sphere of competence .
It should please stop doing so .
I can only ask Parliament and plenary to improve matters in this respect .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( DE ) Madam President , unlike the previous committee , the Committee on Transport and Tourism was not able to express a purely positive opinion .
We nonetheless welcomed the fact that substantial resources were provided for the trans-European transport networks and that in 2009 the Galileo programme finally had a very good year , which was regrettably not the case in previous years .
We were also able to state that the coordinators are doing a good job in the case of the trans-European networks , because they are also making a great contribution to the overall financing of these major projects .
As we see it , there is room for improvement in other areas that this Parliament considers important - such as road safety .
In this area only 73 % of the funds have been committed .
In our opinion , this programme in particular could do more work and better work with less funding .
Finally , I would like to mention that we would like to see greater coordination between transport and cohesion policy .
We cannot have priorities being specified in one committee and these then being ignored in other committees .
Such coordination is , however , taking place at the moment in the reviews that we are carrying out .
We hope that we will be able to report better news on this for 2010 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has endorsed my recommendation for discharge to be granted to the European transport agencies , which support the European Commission .
The discharge is granted because the Court of Auditors deemed that the annual accounts of the agencies were substantially reliable , although we must take note of and underscore a number of critical issues .
Some of these issues are common to all the agencies or some of them , including for example : cancellations and delays in procurement procedures , failure to observe Staff Regulations , or the violation of the principle of budgetary annuality .
These agencies ' commitment to overcome said problems should , however , be highlighted .
In general terms , I should like to make two brief political observations , namely the lack of any multiannual programming - which is symptomatic of a leadership deficit - and the dearth of incisiveness in the work of some agencies , such as the European Railway Agency .
In the same vein , I should like to note the delay - some two years after the fact - in setting up procedures to determine responsibility for the Viareggio disaster .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( DE ) Madam President , I would like to use a minute now as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development and then speak for two minutes later in the debate on behalf of my group .
Madam President , Mr Becsey , Commissioner Šemeta , President Caldeira , ladies and gentlemen , the regional policy budget remains the Achilles heel of the European Union general budget .
Five percent of payments from the European Regional Fund still have errors and must therefore be described as irregular payments .
Even some of the payments that appear to be correct are actually supporting grotesque projects .
May I remind you that an Elton John concert in Naples was subsidised by the European Regional Fund .
It was said to be a measure to promote tourism .
That might be the case , but in my opinion real regional aid for Naples should take a different form .
The reason for this is that all too often the Member States still consider funding from the European Regional Fund to be soft money .
This is obvious from the fact that there is a backlog of repayments due from irregular payments , from the fact that very often the Commission has to use the instrument of suspending payments - something that , as budget controllers , we expressly welcome - and from the fact that the punctuality of reporting suffers .
The Director General for Regional Policy cannot provide us with any assurance as to the legality and reliability of over half the operational programmes because the reporting by the Member States is inadequate .
Ladies and gentlemen , we still have a lot to do here .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - Madam President , the Community Fisheries Control Agency was established in 2005 to ensure better compliance with the rules of the common fisheries policy by the EU Member States .
This agency , which is based in Vigo , Spain , plays an important role in strengthening fisheries control and ensuring coordination between EU Member States .
I welcome the recent adoption by the agency of a multiannual work programme for the period 2011-2015 in line with the EU 2020 Strategy .
I believe that the multiannual work programme will improve cost-effectiveness through enhanced regional cooperation and the pooling of means under joint deployment plans .
I welcome the approval by the Court of Auditors of the granting of discharge .
This viewpoint is supported by my opinion , which was adopted by the Committee on Fisheries .
The Commission will shortly publish its legislative proposals for the reform of the common fisheries policy .
This reform must standardise Member States ' compliance and enforcement regimes , as there is no uniformity throughout the EU .
In this regard , I strongly urge the Commission to introduce a system of administrative sanctions .
This should not be left to each individual country .
If we have a common policy , then the sanctions should apply across the board .
We should , in fact , have administrative sanctions for minor offences rather than the criminal system that is currently employed in my own country .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( ES ) Madam President , year after year we in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality have been reiterating the need for a gender perspective to be incorporated into all stages of budgetary procedure , in order to make progress with policies on equality and , therefore , on equality between men and women in the European Union .
We therefore welcome both the special report drawn up by the Court of Auditors on professional training activities financed by the European Social Fund , and a study evaluating the viability and options regarding the inclusion of certain elements in the gender perspective .
Even so , it is essential to continue making progress with it .
We are concerned about issues relating to payments in the Daphne programme combating gender violence , and we hope that over the years there will be greater sensitivity , and that we will really take the gender perspective into account in each and every one of the operational programmes undertaken in the EU .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank both Commissioner Šemeta and the rapporteur , Mr Chatzimarkakis , for their truly excellent cooperation .
This is a sound report and I can only say that we are essentially in agreement in the Committee on Budgetary Control on the recommendations that we have tabled .
It is nevertheless the 16th year in a row that there has not been a clear statement of assurance from the Court of Auditors .
The errors are not increasing .
On the contrary , they are decreasing , but it is still not acceptable .
The picture that emerges from the figures year on year is not one that we consider to be acceptable .
The Commission bears a large degree of responsibility for this , but I would say that the Member States probably bear an even greater degree of responsibility .
As the Commissioner pointed out , 80 % of the finances and the funds used are under joint responsibility and the Member States are not taking their share of the responsibility for this .
This is also where we have the biggest problems .
The Commission must therefore put pressure on the Member States to persuade them to assume responsibility for the funds that the EU allows them to manage .
The report contains three requirements that I would like to emphasise in particular .
The first is to do more to get the Member States to submit national declarations .
There are currently four countries that do so - the Netherlands , Sweden , Denmark and the United Kingdom .
This shows that it is possible .
The Commission must provide these countries with support , but it must also use them as an example in order to force other countries to do the same thing .
The second point is that the Commission must get better at utilising the opportunity to suspend payments .
For those countries that repeatedly have problems managing money , payments should be suspended .
It is not possible to continue mismanaging funds without it being noticed .
The third point is that we must have better systems for recovering money paid out in error .
We need clear rules .
It is a strange situation that those countries with large debts to the EU can continue to have money paid out to them and that it can take such an incredibly long time before the money comes back .
This is another area in which the Commission must make improvements .
I am pleased that the Commissioner has met Parliament half way on these three points , and I look forward to being able to work closely with Commissioner Šemeta next year as rapporteur .
I would like to thank Mr Chatzimarkakis .
I will try to carry on your work well during the next year .
Now we are making progress .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( RO ) Madam President , I too want to thank the rapporteur for this excellent report and the very productive cooperation I received while drafting it .
I also would like to thank the Commission for the dialogue which we managed to have because this budget discharge report is not only an annual discharge report , but it also sets new cooperation guidelines for the next period .
I would like to raise three issues which I regard as being very important .
Firstly , I would like to discuss the national management declarations which should indicate how EU money is used .
More than 80 % of the European Union 's budget is managed at national level , but almost all the responsibility for managing this money lies at EU level .
National management declarations should help us a great deal to see how EU money is used by national authorities and who is responsible for the use of this money .
It is of paramount importance that a minister assumes this responsibility and that these national management declarations have the signature of a political decision-maker on them .
Secondly , I want to touch on the subject of the automatic blocking of European funds when EU money is badly managed or when there are indications that this money would be badly managed .
It is extremely important for us to intervene quickly when the management and implementation mechanisms for EU funds are not operating very well .
Thirdly , we are talking about money from taxpayers , European citizens .
It is therefore extremely important that , when it comes to the fraudulent use of EU funds , recovery operations are much more efficient and that the cost of them does not come out of the European citizen 's pocket .
This is money which European citizens give the European Union .
When it has been used fraudulently , it is European citizens who cover the loss .
This is not fair .
European citizens have lost out twice and this is a situation which needs to be resolved quickly .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I , too , would like to offer sincere thanks to Mr Chatzimarkakis and all the other rapporteurs for their excellent work .
I , too , would like to thank the Council and the President of the Court of Auditors , in particular , for their presence here , although it is strange that we should have to make specific reference to that .
Nonetheless , thank you for being here .
Madam President , the discharge for this year comes at an important moment for two reasons .
The first reason is that all Member States are having to make extremely stringent cuts .
The second reason is that we are on the eve of the adoption of a new multiannual budget .
I believe that both of these reasons highlight the fact that we need to look at this discharge and European spending with additional scrutiny .
As far as I am concerned , this is about both the legitimacy and the effectiveness of European spending , because European citizens are entitled to expect that European investments really do deliver something .
Madam President , for me , political accountability for spending is as easy as pie .
Name one body of local , provincial , regional or national democratic representation that does not exercise political accountability for spending .
Why then do we not have the same at European level ?
Why are Member States still failing to exercise responsibility for 80 % of the EU 's spending ?
I call once again on the Council to finally get down to work on national Member States ' declarations .
In my view , there will be no multiannual budgets from 2014 onward so long as those declarations from Member States are not given .
Madam President , the current situation is forcing us to give additional scrutiny to Parliament 's own budget .
I am really pleased with the savings we have managed to make , even though they have come about as a result of our efforts to conserve our resources .
We are now also going to be using our air miles on business flights and we are going to tackle paper consumption .
Every one of these proposals is excellent .
There is one more thing that I would like to point out : from this September , we could use not just cars , but bicycles as well , and through you , Madam Vice-President , I would like to invite Mr Buzek to officially launch this bicycle scheme in September .
Madam President , this debate covers a very extensive issue , as it involves granting discharge to a whole range of European institutions , each one of which has its own specific features .
It is therefore very difficult to summarise this issue in one speech .
Cooperation between the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control , of which I am a member , is excellent , and this cooperation has produced certain recommendations on how the European Parliament should vote when granting discharge .
Nevertheless , in the evaluation of individual institutions , especially the European agencies , deficiencies constantly arise , for example in the recruitment process , in public procurement , in problems with transparency or problems with internal control .
It is therefore very difficult , for a whole series of these reasons , to agree to grant discharge .
On the contrary , we should support the reports which propose postponing discharge .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there are five reports I would like to comment on .
First of all , the Commission .
I very much appreciate my fellow member Mr Chatzimarkakis 's approach .
I think that he has done a brilliant job of handling this discharge exercise .
In a very targeted way , he has focused in advance on a number of questions , he has put six questions to the Commission and I have to say that we have achieved what we asked for .
I also have to thank the Commission .
This is my 12th discharge exercise .
I believe this must be the first time that we have worked together in such a constructive spirit ; not only Commissioner Šemeta , but also individual commissioners in charge of their own remits have really invested time on this discharge .
They have met both the shadow rapporteurs and the lead rapporteur on several occasions and , thanks to their constructive dialogue , I think that we have achieved a great deal .
I agree to a large extent with what Mr Gerbrandy has said .
These are times for saving and we therefore need to be prudent about how we spend our money .
Eighty per cent of the European budget is , indeed , spent in Member States and managed by Member States .
President-in-Office of the Council , we must finally have this political responsibility for shared management of EU funds in place .
For that reason , we are still demanding that Member States submit their national declarations of assurance .
For me , that is a vitally important demand .
There is also a need for better control .
I think that Member States should carry out audits of the funds they receive from the EU more intensively than has been the case to date .
The lead rapporteur has also paid a lot of attention to finding out where funds have been used improperly and recovering them , as well as to introducing control mechanisms .
The way I see it , that area does indeed deserve a great deal of attention and the comments he has made should provide the basis for the next discharge exercise under Mr Fjellner 's rapporteurship .
Moving to the European Parliament : I see that our Secretary-General is sitting next to the Vice-President .
I have to offer explicit thanks to Mr Welle .
I was the discharge rapporteur for the last exercise .
There was some tension between me and the Secretariat-General .
Though , at the time , I wrote a rather stringent report , I have to thank Mr Welle because he and his administration have , very diligently , correctly answered all the questions I had put to them and put a great deal of effort into this work .
I believe that , eventually , the tension that may have existed between us has led to a better result and probably to a better European Parliament budget .
When we talk about the European Parliament 's budget , what I also want to impress on my colleagues here is that we have to do away with the culture of ever more , ever more and never enough .
As an institution , we should be setting an example , which means that we should also be bold enough to save .
However , let me add a side comment on that point .
I have rather grave reservations about the Museum of European History , in particular , not about the content of the project in itself , but about the costs associated with it .
Obviously , it is good that we are going to have such a museum , but what disturbs me greatly about this is that , in this plenary chamber , we have never really had a serious debate about this project .
And yet , if we add everything up , we are going to spend more or less EUR 136 million on the Museum of European History .
That is a lot of money , ladies and gentlemen , but we have never had a serious debate about it .
We have never debated where this museum should be located and what it should look like .
All of it is happening behind closed doors , often in the inner sanctum of the Bureau , and , as a democrat , I cannot accept that .
Let me turn now to the Lux film prize : Mr Itälä has made several comments on this prize in his report and , by the way , I congratulate him on the work that he has done .
I have to say that my group sets great store by the Lux prize ; though we are now most certainly prepared to take on board a number of critical comments about the functioning of the prize , we do consider it valuable that the European Parliament is supporting this project , because that means valuable film projects are getting support .
I also want to mention Mr Stavrakakis and one of his reports about the Council .
I am now addressing directly the President-in-Office of the Council , the Hungarian Presidency .
I find it unbelievable that the Council , which has always demanded that others act transparently , has obviously been much more reserved when it comes to itself .
Our demand is very simple , President-in-Office : as Parliament , as the body approving the discharge , we want access to all documents .
We want an open debate about the Council 's budget .
We do not want to talk about the content of the Council 's budget and say : you are allowed to do this and you are not allowed to do that , but what we do want is transparency about how the Council is spending its money because the Council 's budget is different now from what it used to be 30 years ago and consists of a great deal more than just a number of administrative expenses .
Finally , I would just like to comment on the European Medicines Agency .
We have problems there .
We have postponed the discharge , because EMEA is clearly having problems in terms of procurement procedures .
Its procurement procedures for several projects have been fraught with errors , which corresponds to the significant amount of EUR 30 million .
Moreover , there have been issues surrounding conflicts of interest of EMEA 's experts and staff .
I believe , now that the discharge has been postponed , we will have a debate on this at some point before the autumn and I hope that , with that debate , we will be able to put an end to conflicts of interest within EMEA .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DA ) Thank you , Madam President .
I would like to start by thanking everyone involved in drawing up these excellent and critical reports on the EU institutions ' accounts for 2009 .
Some people have questioned whether we are not being overly critical .
For example , when we ask questions about our own method of spending money here in the European Parliament , whether in relation to the delayed opening of the Visitors ' Centre , the establishment of a secret television channel or the continuing travelling circus moving between Brussels and Strasbourg .
No , we are not being overly critical .
In fact our job , on behalf of European taxpayers , is precisely to put our finger on the sensitive areas and press hard .
That is what our citizens expect of us , and in reality we could have included even more points of criticism .
The fact that it is our job to investigate and to be critical is precisely why the Council 's behaviour is unacceptable .
This year , the Council has again done everything it can to impede our work as auditors .
It has refused to send us the relevant material , it has refused to answer our questions and it has refused to meet the Committee on Budgetary Control for an open debate , as all the other institutions do .
I am obviously pleased that the Hungarian Presidency has chosen to be here .
It should be commended for this .
However , when we talk about a ' gentlemen 's agreement ' between the Council and Parliament , I have to say that , if there is such an agreement , please can we see it .
The Council has the chance to read it out today , if such an agreement exists .
We would like to see it .
We have repeatedly asked the Council to let us have it , but we have never received it .
This is because it does not exist .
Therefore , my group can fully support the proposal not to grant discharge to the Council today .
Instead , we would call on the Council to desist from boycotting Parliament and to answer the questions that we are asking about its accounts .
Today we are debating the EU 's accounts for 2009 .
However , just as important as what the accounts tell us is what they do not tell us about something that is extremely important for the EU 's economy .
A few days ago , Europol published a report on organised crime in the EU .
It made shocking reading .
According to the account in the newspaper Le Monde , VAT fraud alone costs many billions of euro a year .
There is also fraud in connection with CO2 quotas , as well as other types of fraud .
Therefore , there is certainly reason for us to continue , and intensify , our discussion of how the EU 's economy can be organised in the interests of taxpayers .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I believe it is madness for this European Parliament to approve the 2009 EU budget when financial irregularities or possible fraud affect between 2 % and more than 5 % of the total .
These are not figures made up by me to suit party-political propaganda , but estimates from the European Court of Auditors .
The level of irregularities for 2009 is abnormally high and equates to half of the UK 's contribution for the EU for this year , roughly EUR 6.3 billion .
This situation would simply not be tolerated in any company or organisation : heads would roll .
This House is set to approve discharge for 27 EU agencies - expensive and needless quangos - while the European Court of Auditors has launched a full-scale investigation into their accounts for 2009 .
This should ring alarm bells ahead of the vote .
I repeat , in the strongest possible terms , that it is nothing short of madness to sign off EUR 523 million of - let us remember - taxpayers ' money , while the official auditing arm of the EU is investigating possible fraud and financial mismanagement at these agencies .
Medicines Agency and CEPOL postponement is piecemeal .
Year after year we hear the European Commission blame the Member States for the irregularities , yet it does absolutely nothing about it when it has the power to block funding .
Instead it is proposing to move from a zero tolerance strategy to one of tolerable risk when it comes to EU expenditure fraud .
To make matters worse , the Commission and Parliament are demanding increases in the budget for the coming years .
Most of these increases coincide with the areas with the highest level of irregularities .
It will be an absolute disgrace , and an affront to taxpayers , if this House grants discharge for the 2009 accounts .
The only conclusion to be drawn from a vote in favour of discharge is that this House and its Members openly endorse financial mismanagement or worse .
I call on the British Prime Minister to reduce the UK 's contribution to the EU in line with the amount of the irregularities if the European Parliament fails to act in the interests of the British taxpayer .
( DE ) Madam President , perhaps you would allow me briefly to make a very general appeal to my fellow Members with regard to the discharge procedure .
Budgetary control - and thus also the discharge procedure - is undoubtedly an essential element of parliamentary work , but in my opinion this discharge procedure has no teeth whatsoever .
Even if discharge is refused , there is no real possibility of binding sanctions ; the only thing that can be done is for the president of the European Parliament to bring Treaty infringement proceedings at the European Court of Justice .
In the event that discharge were to be refused for the European Parliament , we would end up with the absurd situation of the presidency of Parliament initiating infringement proceedings against itself .
There can be no doubt that reform is needed here .
Moreover , the fact that the legal basis of the discharge process was geared mainly towards the Commission yet we tend to grant discharge reciprocally with other institutions creates a certain amount of legal uncertainty that we should be preventing .
What remains in practice are other political levers that we can use .
That is not sufficient for this discharge procedure .
I , along with my fellow Members , would therefore like us to work towards reforming the discharge process .
Corrigenda ( Rule 216 ) : see Minutes
2009 discharge ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the 2009 discharge .
Madam President , the first issue I want to discuss is that of our concerns about the functioning of the European agencies .
These are areas of concern in which we need to make changes in the future in order to prevent and avoid bad management , irregularities , fraud , conflicts of interest and , at the end of the day , bad expenditure .
One of our concerns is institutional transparency .
All the EU agencies should make available on their websites a list of all contracts awarded over the previous three years at least , and the Commission should undertake to integrate this information into its financial transparency system . Transparency is also needed with regard to the rotation of staff between agencies , and I have asked for an overview of all staff members who change working place from one agency to another .
A second area of concern is conflicts of interest , and many of my colleagues have referred to this already .
Proper management of current and potential conflicts of interest in the EU agencies requires a major effort , and cases such as that involving the European Medicines Agency must be prevented and avoided , and penalised wherever they occur .
The third area of concern is rationality and efficiency in the functioning of the EU agencies , especially at a time of financial crisis .
I propose discussing and finalising a merger of CEPOL into Europol , as this would be the best solution to CEPOL 's structural and chronic problems .
Moreover , it is undeniable , beyond the CEPOL case , that a number of EU agencies with common fields of intervention are performing similar or complementary activities from headquarters located all over Europe .
The Commission should therefore evaluate the possibility of merging agencies with overlapping or complementary activities .
The second issue I would like to address very quickly is the fact that we decided to postpone the discharge , and will vote to postpone the discharge , for two agencies - CEPOL and EMA .
There have been serious violations in terms of public procurement , recruitment and conflicts of interest and also , with regard to CEPOL , appropriations and the cancellation of appropriations .
The last issue I would like to refer to is the transparency of EU beneficiary funds .
I have been questioning the Commission about this for a year and I will continue to do so .
We need transparency in all EU beneficiary funds , and I would draw attention here to the national companies which benefit from and use such funds .
There must be a single website , in one or two languages , with common criteria , on which all these beneficiaries can be identified and compared .

( ES ) Madam President , first of all , I should like to say how pleased I am to finally see all the actors in this discharge procedure together .
In particular , I would welcome Mr Caldeira , President of the Court of Auditors , and Mr Becsey , representative of the Hungarian Presidency , as well as Commissioner Šemeta , naturally .
As regards the current discharge procedure , with respect , in particular , to the other institutions , which is my field , I should like to express my agreement with the steps that have been taken since last year 's Spanish Presidency decided , when applying the Treaty of Lisbon , that it was time to bring the necessary transparency and control of the Council 's accounts up-to-date too .
The gentlemen 's agreement was useful last century , but its bases have changed radically .
I would therefore be grateful if the Hungarian Presidency kept up these efforts toward continued progress , whilst recognising that the Council gives advice or makes recommendations on the discharge procedure , but it is Parliament - the European Union 's only democratic institution , directly elected by the European public - that decides and adopts the final decision .
Let us , then , acknowledge the efforts that both institutions - ours well represented by Mr Welle - are making so that we can have a procedure suitable for the 21st century , and institutions that must be transparent and respond to the European public 's expectations .
As rapporteur for next year 's discharge , I mean to continue cooperating closely with the Council to that end , but for the moment the deferral is still necessary .
I will conclude by expressing my concern about the incidents and irregularities that have taken place in the administration of the European Economic and Social Committee ( EESC ) .
As a European-level forum for expressing opinions and reaching a consensus between the three pillars of our productive and economic life , which are so necessary at this time of crisis , it is a body that seems essential to me .
That , then , is reason enough to demand that it be administered as impeccably as the other institutions .
Therefore , given the decision of the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) to start investigative proceedings , as well as the recent General Court judgment annulling the vacancy notice concerning the post of Secretary-General of the EESC , my group intends to clearly call for a deferral until the EESC has been given the opportunity to table a plan or strategy before Parliament for overcoming the current situation of opacity and continuous irregularities , which reveal the urgent need for change .

( NL ) Madam President , rapporteur Chatzimarkakis and many other speakers have rightly highlighted the need for Member States to submit declarations of assurance .
It may rather appear as if we are asking the Council and Member States for a favour .
I believe that that is a misconstruction of the situation and that is why I think it is good that the Council is present here this morning .
Perhaps it would be good for the Council to read once again the exact wording of the interinstitutional agreement which was entered into when we adopted the financial perspectives for this period .
The agreement clearly states that the Council would issue declarations at the most appropriate political level .
It is unfortunate that the Council has not adhered to these arrangements .
However , the agreement was supposed to be a quid pro quo and it is perhaps good to remind you of this , now that we are busy negotiating new financial perspectives .
There was a difference of opinion between the Council and Parliament over the level of the financial perspectives .
The difference was EUR 112 billion over a seven-year period .
Parliament agreed to revise their figure to EUR 110 billion .
What we wanted in return were a number of things which would not cost any money at all .
Declarations of assurance from Member States and political responsibility cost nothing .
That is what the Council signed up to .
What , though , is the situation now , four years after that date ?
Four Member States have complied with the agreement , but the others have not .
That is a good omen for the upcoming negotiations .
You have to be as good as your word , even though it was Austria that held the presidency of the Council back then .
I therefore think that it is vital that we actually implement the action programme that has been agreed , because , otherwise , the negotiations over the new financial perspectives will be at risk .
Finally , I would like to touch on a general matter .
If I am not mistaken , it is now the seventeenth time that the European Court of Auditors has failed to issue a declaration of assurance .
In light of the upcoming European elections , maintaining a situation whereby Parliament nonetheless grants a discharge for the budget every year will be untenable .
It is time we had a positive DAS for a change .
- ( CS ) Madam President , we are discussing an apparently routine matter , moreover it is money that has already been spent .
The annual repeat performance of this procedure should , above all , lead to a situation where matters are assessed and prepared more carefully and conscientiously in the future .
For example , in the case of the two largest EU projects , which are the global satellite navigation system and the European joint undertaking for ITER and the development of nuclear fusion , I consider it unacceptable that such important projects are literally ' drowning ' in deficiencies which any decent manager would know how to resolve .
Irregularities in the involvement of small and medium-sized enterprises in satellite projects , deficiencies in recruitment and infringements of the principles of equal treatment , problems in the ITER undertaking over compliance with budgetary principles , audits and rules for providing grants ; these are just some of the errors identified .
One of the main causes of problems , however , is undoubtedly the lengthy decision-making on the projects themselves .
Unless we are clear about priorities , including funding in such key activities , half-hearted and patchy decision-making will continue to bring not only the problems mentioned , but also a reduction in the overall quality of projects .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time of general economic belt-tightening in which everyone is being asked to make sacrifices , I think it is essential for the European institutions - which operate thanks to the money of European citizens - to have the most transparent financial management possible .
I find it unacceptable that one of its main bodies , the Council , should continue to maintain a stance that is totally insular and lacking in transparency .
Given that Parliament is the only European institution that is democratically elected and that represents European citizens and taxpayers directly , I believe we have the right to know exactly how all the appropriations are managed .
The Council cannot keep behaving as it is , rejecting necessary and proper interinstitutional comparison .
The European Union is based on a fundamental balance of powers , a prerogative which the Council undermines by acting in this way .
It must therefore fall into line with the other institutions as quickly as possible and explain to Parliament - and therefore citizens - how its budget is actually managed .
( NL ) Madam President , it seems that we have a new rule in Europe : in case of doubt , create an agency .
Today we are debating the reports of no fewer than 39 agencies and Parliament will be deciding on whether or not to grant discharge for 2009 .
As far as my group is concerned , discharge should definitely not be granted .
The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is against these monstrosities which just eat money and do not serve a single demonstrable purpose .
That is the case with the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions .
The Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions alone have already swallowed up hundreds of millions of euros and , yet , they have had no effect on policy .
They are merely talking shops , where litres of coffee are consumed and which produce an endless stream of reports which not a single person reads .
Madam President , our group will therefore not be granting discharge , except to the conclusion that there is a great deal in these agencies that is not working properly ; in fact there is so much that is not working that we should abolish them as soon as possible .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by saying something about the comments on the House of European History .
As rapporteur for buildings I would firstly like to say that the figure of EUR 136 million is definitely incorrect .
Secondly , we are not talking about a prestige project here ; after all , we are constantly complaining that people know nothing of European development since the Second World War , and we now want to make sure that two to three million people a year get to know these developments and find out more about them - so that perhaps they will be less Eurosceptic .
We should debate together the level of the operating costs and the synergies that may be able to be realised with the information centre .
A great many Members have taken part in the debate .
However , the debate has only just become public , with the result that some Members do not yet feel they have been adequately informed .
I will be happy to provide assistance with such discussions or requests for information .
I consider the project to be necessary and useful , because people need to find out more about European development - otherwise there will be more and more Eurosceptics .
Secondly , on the subject of development aid .
I would first like to thank Mr Staes warmly for the fact that we have genuinely achieved a joint report in many , many respects that I can categorically support .
I consider it essential that we set development aid priorities in the areas of infrastructure , health , education and particularly agriculture , and in particular I think that perhaps we should consider introducing an evaluation of projects after 10 years .
It is not our aim to start only short-term projects that in the final event have no lasting effect .
Moreover , we should make sure that we achieve better coordination of development aid with the Member States and also are able to implement once and for all the integration of the entire development aid budget into the EU budget , because it is incomprehensible why only part of our development aid is included in the EU budget .
( LT ) Madam President , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for their excellent work .
The budget discharge procedure is very important for defending the European Union 's financial interests , for ensuring better management of European Union finances and more transparent and responsible European Union handling of taxpayers ' money .
I have a few comments .
Firstly , infringements of rules on procurement remain some of the most frequent errors mentioned in the report on the budget discharge .
This is linked to the complexity of these rules .
There is a need to simplify procurement rules and set out clear and uniform procurement principles throughout the entire European Union .
The Commission should analyse the best experience gained in this area , because some Member States , such as Lithuania , have already established sufficiently effective procurement principles , based on modern technologies , but as I mentioned , the Commission itself has to express its political will on this matter .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise that improving the quality of how the funds are spent should not only be an important European Union priority , but a realistic one .
There needs to be clear and more rapid progress developing effective management and control systems in the Member States , reducing the level of risk of error and simplifying requirements and rules .
For example , the report presented stresses that , due to complicated rules , there is slow uptake of European Union funds earmarked for TEN and TNI projects and other cohesion policy priorities .
I feel that in this area there is an urgent need to ensure the simplification , effectiveness and transparency of procedures .
Thirdly , as rapporteur responsible for the working document of the Committee on Budgetary Control " Improving transport performance on trans-European rail axes ” , I would again like to call on the Commission to take action in order to adapt the rail infrastructure to cater for trans-European services , while creating missing links at cross-border locations , helping the Member States to alleviate various complications related to the different gauges and providing the effective financial assistance .
Finally , as for discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Parliament for 2009 , I believe that Parliament also has to implement realistic decisions which would include better value for money .
( FI ) Madam President , in my speech I want to focus mainly on cohesion policy .
Although the error rate in cohesion policy has fallen considerably since 2008 , from 11 % to around 5 % , it is still an area which presents us with a number of challenges in spending .
The biggest challenges relate specifically to public procurement and , in addition , most of the problems connected with cohesion funds are also associated with the complicated implementing rules and the acts arising from the Financial Regulation , which take insufficient account of the complex network of actors in regional development .
Much has also been spoken of increasing the risk of error .
We nevertheless have to remember that this does not eliminate the fundamental problem of rules and systems being too complicated .
Moreover , in this case the problems should not be tackled from the wrong angle .
At the same time , Parliament is also considering the Financial Regulation for future financial frameworks .
Although the discharge process now under way has its focus on the year 2009 , it is important to learn a lesson for tomorrow and finally also simplify financial management .

( PL ) Madam President , what matters is not in fact that the number of Eurosceptics is growing as a result of the way in which the EU institutions spend money ; the problem is that European taxpayers and European voters deserve transparency and a certain basic respect .
The fact that funds are recovered very inefficiently , or that they are used inefficiently , certainly does nothing to enhance the authority of the European Union or our institutions .
It also does nothing to enhance the authority of the agencies , which are examples of a certain kind of Euro-bureaucracy , which evade internal and external monitoring , where friends are employed and where the idea of competitive selection procedures is pure fantasy .
The Museum of European History is a very controversial proposal , and therefore the majority of the members of our group will vote against the majority of these reports .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European agencies are permanently in the crossfire of criticism .
Yet on the other hand , we rely on them when problems arise almost overnight ; for example , if increased FRONTEX personnel are required in the Mediterranean or if dioxin is found in animal feed .
For this reason I would ask all my fellow Members to apply a sense of proportion and political foresight to these discharges .
We need to evaluate the operational efficiency of the agencies objectively if we are to get away from opinions and assumptions and get a clear overview of what the agencies are actually achieving .
I have been working to achieve this for some time .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would also like to warmly welcome to this House the Hungarian Presidency and the President of the European Court of Auditors .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) I should like to thank all the rapporteurs for their cooperation and also all the representatives of the institutions for coming .
I should like to point out to the Council at this early stage that Members of Parliament are elected to control the executive .
The idea , then , that national governments should be allowed to control the European Parliament is an unprecedented attempt to weaken this Parliament .
Consequently , your offer is not really an offer .
It is an offer to make us small and weak .
How would the national parliaments react to such a suggestion ?
If you would not dare to try it nationally , please do not attempt it at European level .
Regarding the discharge in the European Parliament I should like to say that improvements in management can be discerned under the current Bureau and the present Secretary-General .
I would like to expressly acknowledge the PPE Group 's part in these improvements .
We can see that action is being taken and that things are being done at our request - such as the intervention in the voluntary pension fund - that were absolutely necessary in order to avert the immediate insolvency of this fund in 2009 .
I should now like to comment principally on the proposals to reform the Staff Regulations .
These are paragraphs 77 and 81 in the report by Mr Chatzimarkakis .
These proposals have led to unprecedented lobbying by those affected , including of Members here in this House .
The criticism of the Regulations is justified , however .
The Regulations are still living in the 1950s and have never been modernised .
Travel days are calculated based on times taken in the days of steam and the benefits come from a time when working abroad was extremely unusual .
They are no longer justified today .
We have today our last and actually our only opportunity to have an influence ahead of the reform of the Regulations .
My proposals also concern the matter of whether it is normal for a member of Commission staff - not including their annual holiday entitlement , note - to have up to seven weeks paid time off , and this for all those earning more than EUR 10 000 net per month .
In my opinion , overtime should definitely be included in this salary .
What we are talking about here is creating new job vacancies .
By removing some of these days off we could create around a thousand jobs .
Instead of being days struck out , these new jobs could be used for Europe 's new tasks so that we can make recourse to the European Commission instead of constantly having to establish new authorities and agencies .
We should also seek to obtain a true overview of the administrative costs .
The current 6.7 % of the budget is far too low an estimate .
It may be correct for direct management , but it is certainly not correct if we include all the administrative expenditure - including that in the Member States - for managing EU funds .
I suggest that we produce an own-initiative report on the actual administrative costs of the European Union here in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I regard this discharge as yet another in a series of discharges granted in recent years , and I remember very well how serious our reservations were only three years ago , in particular with regard to areas such as the Structural Funds , the Cohesion Fund , the regional funds and external actions .
It has to be admitted that the Commission has fulfilled certain commitments over the past two years by making visible improvements , such as a reduction in the error rate recorded over the past three years .
I think this is a good opportunity to say to Commissioner Šemeta that we have seen and noticed these developments , that we are taking note of them and that they are a good sign .
I still have a number of concerns , however .
Firstly , the procedure for recovering misspent funds is too slow .
Secondly , there is a certain reluctance to concentrate on priority projects , or to talk about the error rate for these projects .
Regardless of a project 's value , I think that there must be some reason behind errors in funding and in the implementation of funds .
I am very concerned by the growing discrepancy between commitments and payments , which means that there is a growing pot of money that the Member States are apparently unable to spend .
The blame here lies with the Member States .
The Council 's reluctance to cooperate with Parliament as far as the discharge is concerned is extremely alarming .
Yet I see that Mr Becsey is with us , who has served his time in this Chamber , and who I think will be able to convince the Council that Parliament is the only democratically and directly elected body in respect of which the Council has a reporting obligation .
Finally , I share the many reservations that have been voiced regarding the agencies , although my reservations only relate to a small number of them .
( FR ) Madam President , my speech will concern the granting of discharge to the European Medicines Agency , but I could have made more or less the same speech about the European Food Safety Authority .
I have to say that the Committee on Budgetary Control has done an absolutely excellent job , and that if there were ever a time for Parliament to state its position , it is during the vote on discharge .
Therefore , there is indeed a budgetary aspect to what I am going to say , and it relates to the EMA 's work .
Firstly in terms of its passivity in the benfluorex , or Mediator , affair - it is totally unacceptable .
Secondly , in terms of the management of conflicts of interest , and I shall give just one example .
I have publicly denounced , together with our colleague Mrs Parvanova and a group of NGOs , the truly scandalous case of the Agency 's Executive Director .
This whole affair has been managed by the Agency 's Management Board in an extremely casual way , which makes it impossible to build trust .
The role of our agencies is to give us the means to take decisions and to enable our fellow citizens to have confidence in the guidelines that are given .
That is why I strongly support the postponement of discharge and will vote in favour only if we are fully satisfied with regard to conflicts of interest .
( NL ) Madam President , the Eurobarometer shows that enthusiasm for the European Union has been fading for years .
There are now only five Member States in which the majority of the population speaks about the European Union in positive terms .
As far as the citizens are concerned , Europe is synonymous with waste of money .
We have to take those objections extremely seriously and , indeed , my fellow member Mr Itälä has rightly done so .
He argues that it is irresponsible of Parliament to continue the practice of meeting in two locations .
I totally agree with him on that .
To Mr Sarkozy , I say : we have to put a stop to Parliament travelling back and forth between Brussels and Strasbourg .
We also need sound accountability when it comes to our own general expenditure allowance .
Because of a lack of such sound accountability , members of the European Parliament will soon find that appearances are against them and that they really ought to have paid more attention to the general expenditure allowance .
That situation has to change .
Mr Itälä rightly argues in recital 5 that we must take adequate measures to ensure for a responsible attitude towards our general expenditure allowance .
I hope that recital will stay , because it is good for credibility and transparency .
( PL ) Madam President , every debate on the discharge takes place in a certain context .
On the one hand , today 's debate is taking place in the context of the crisis , the preventive measures being taken and the financial difficulties being experienced by certain Member States , while on the other hand it is being held against the backdrop of the new financial perspective for the post-2014 period , which has already been drafted .
We must be aware of the fact that our comments today regarding the implementation of the budget have a very serious impact on the debate on the future of the financial perspective .
Therefore the debate on the discharge is important not only in terms of monitoring , but also in terms of correcting errors and taking note of areas where we have failed or where up-to-date measures mean we are now faced with new requirements .
A characteristic feature of this debate is not only the fact that ever more people are criticising the budget , but also that the results are quite obviously better , for example in respect of cohesion policy , where clear improvements have been made , albeit improvements which have gone unnoticed by the critics of the European budget .
I would also like to draw attention to the fact that these positive results must now also be integrated into our considerations regarding future action , or in other words the type of action that must be continued and the regulations that must be introduced , in particular with regard to the recovery of funds .
I would also like to draw the House 's attention to the following issue : the debate on whether the budget has been implemented properly must be accompanied by a debate on the effectiveness of policies .
We refer to this very frequently in parliamentary documents , but we concentrate on procedures .
There has been much talk of a Europe of results , but this is not the same as following the correct procedures .
One entails the other , but we must also pay attention to the effects and results of our actions .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs : they have done an important job for us .
In my contribution I would like to comment on a few reports , and firstly on the discharge for the Committee of the Regions .
The CoR is , of course , the voice of regions but it also delivers many EU programmes .
It would therefore be wrong to suggest , as some have done , that it should fund itself .
On the Commission 's discharge , I support the granting of a discharge .
Although more needs to be done , as outlined in the report , I believe that reducing the error rate for regional policy from 11 % to 5 % is real progress .
Structural funds are extremely important for places like Wales - where I come from - where they are implemented very well .
We therefore need to ensure that structural funds are not discredited or undermined .
On the Council discharge , I would support postponement .
We are often lectured by certain Council members on the need for transparency , so they themselves should be open to providing information on their expenditure .
Unfortunately , some seem reluctant to do so .
Finally , I would like to say a few words on Parliament 's discharge .
It is always controversial to consider one 's own spending , and our budget certainly receives a lot of attention , which is perhaps understandable in times of economic and financial difficulties .
Therefore I am pleased with many of the suggestions made in the report , including on issues concerning buildings policy and prizes - which need to be reviewed and made more transparent - as well as allowances and the important issue of the need for a savings strategy for Parliament 's budget .
It could be argued that many of these points concern future budgets rather than the 2009 budget , but I believe that , when we consider any budget and any discharge , we should also look to the future to ensure that we learn lessons from the past .
Mr President , for the 16th year the Court of Auditors has only given a qualified statement of assurance , which means for the 16th year public confidence in the integrity of the management of our financial affairs has been undermined .
I recognise that the Commission has made efforts to make improvements , but in voting to grant discharge I can only vote outcomes , not intent .
The auditors report that far too many headings are materially affected by error and , since 80 % of our spending is under shared management with the Member States , it is perfectly clear that the Member States must accept greater responsibility .
It is clear too that the Commission must give greater urgency to achieving that outcome .
So until I see evidence of significant improvement , I shall continue to vote against discharge of the budget .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating all the rapporteurs on the huge amount of work they have done on this discharge , and I am also pleased that the Council is in attendance for this debate .
The European Parliament 's seat in Strasbourg is a question of European identity , not just a question of saving money .
I am discussing this today , in this House , during the debate on the 2009 discharge because the symbol of Franco-German reconciliation is being treated by some members of the Committee on Budgetary Control as a blessing , as an easy way to cut costs .
The issue of Parliament 's expenditure also interests me .
While on this subject , I propose that we hold the group weeks in Strasbourg rather than in Brussels ; that way , we would ensure that our parliamentary seat in Strasbourg is cost-effective .
Since we want to make savings , I propose other things , such as abolishing the Friday subsistence allowance for our colleagues and the subsistence allowances for journalists , too .
Europe is enough of a draw for journalists not to have to be given a subsistence allowance .
We should not use the budget as an excuse for appropriating an important issue that goes beyond the scope of budgetary control , and though I welcome the important work done by Mr Itälä , our rapporteur , I say this with regard to this discharge .
Lastly , since we are talking about savings , I should also like us to clean up and reorganise the system for reimbursing sponsored visitors groups .
I do not think it is very moral to reimburse the group leader in cash on the day of the visit without making any effort to check how much the group has spent .
It gives a very poor impression of our institution .
I would inform you that the amount allocated sometimes exceeds the amount actually spent .
It would make sense for the groups to send an estimate prior to the visits , for Parliament to send them an advance payment on their expenses , to be paid into a bank account , and for the balance to be paid upon presentation of the receipts detailing the expenses actually incurred , up to a certain amount , of course .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Becsey , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs on their excellent work .
I want this speech to focus , in particular , on heading 5 , relating to the administrative and operational expenditure of the various institutions , and to recall that the volume of administrative and operational expenditure represents less than 6 % of the European Union 's annual budget .
Despite this figure , I believe it essential that the principles of economy , efficiency and effectiveness be applied .
It is in budgetary implementation , above all , that savings need to be promoted and incentivised .
At the same time , under no circumstances can we incentivise and promote the full usage of all the funds for each heading .
It is important that rigour and austerity be advocated , and , at the same time , that Parliament have the minimum resources that it needs for excellence in lawmaking .
With regard to interpretation and translation , I believe it essential and crucial that members be able to express themselves and work in their native language .
In essence , that is us giving meaning to the motto ' united in diversity ' .
I believe that , in place of purely incremental budgets , we should have zero-based budgeting at the beginning of each parliamentary session , and furthermore that the institutions ' budgets should be multiannual budgets .
Control cannot mean bureaucracy , since this is always an unnecessary cost .
The principle of trust in the institutions should prevail .
Finally , discharge cannot be a time for discussing detailed policy requiring broad consensus , in particular revision of the Treaties .
For example , I consider the discussion of workplace-related issues in discharge reports inappropriate .
( DE ) Mr President , honourable members of the Council and Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to comment on the agencies that I dealt with as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
First , however , let me say one thing about the permanent debate on Strasbourg versus Brussels .
I am a definite advocate of Strasbourg and I believe that if there is any doubt then we should move the entire parliament to Strasbourg , not to Brussels .
Strasbourg is a symbol of European unity that must not be abandoned .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety we looked at six agencies that have achieved outstanding results in terms of the intensity and quality of their work .
The error rate has reduced noticeably .
I should therefore like to take this opportunity to praise the staff of these agencies .
A total of 104 new jobs were created at the European Chemicals Agency , which mainly supervises our REACH projects .
In the case of the European Food Safety Authority , or EFSA , it should be noted that we need to achieve more precise monitoring and greater transparency .
In the case of the European Centre for Disease Control , or ECDC , we found that the funds had not been fully utilised .
Not all its tasks have yet been discharged .
The European Environment Agency reliably provides data and figures that are very important for our work , for the way we shape the future .
However , I would like us to establish more precisely what overall cost savings the Union will achieve as a result of environmental improvements and to present these figures .
The European Medicines Agency is still clearly having difficulty getting things off the ground , despite having been in existence for some years now .
We found some accounting errors and inadequate coordination between financial services and scientific services here .
Overall , however , I consider the work of the agencies to be very positive .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Ulmer for his noticeably factual contribution .
It makes a pleasant contrast to many of the things that I have heard said about the agencies this morning .
It is extremely depressing that many of the Members from the Eurosceptic parts of this House can never think of anything else but the agencies when it comes to budget cuts .
May I remind you that when these agencies were allocated it seemed that the prime ministers and governments of the Member States of the European Union could not get enough of these agencies on their soil .
Yet now people are acting as if they are the scourge of the European Union .
I am very pleased at the announcement of a study by the European Court of Auditors into the management costs of the agencies .
I believe it will provide us with a basis to at last have a more objective debate .
I am delighted - as I said previously in my first contribution - that the representatives of the Hungarian Presidency are here with us this morning .
That is not something we can take for granted when there is a debate that includes the discharge of the Council .
I would therefore like to address you directly , Mr Becsey .
I am pleased that the Council is prepared to recognise - as I took from the comments made by Mr Deutsch - that the budget proceedings and the discharge procedure must be dealt with differently .
This European Parliament is the people 's representation and it demands accountability for the use of taxpayers ' money .
We will therefore not shirk from demanding that the Council be held accountable for the money given to the Council from the Community budget to finance its work .
Of course , there is plenty that we could negotiate on , such as what form the discharge procedure should take in the future .
However , I should like to ask you whether you seriously expect the European Parliament to negotiate on something that is our right under the treaties .
After all , that could only result in this right being restricted .
I fail to see why I , as a Member of the European Parliament , would do that .
Unfortunately , we do not have many opportunities to discuss things together and I would be delighted if you would take this opportunity to make it clear to us for once who it is in the Council that is actually fighting against the necessary transparency .
- ( SK ) Mr President , I was interested to hear the information about the communication problems with the European Council regarding fulfilment of its chapter of the general budget .
As far as I am aware , control over the executive is one of the fundamental tasks of MEPs .
The Council , the Commission and also the other EU institutions handle the financial resources of EU citizens according to agreed rules .
It is therefore natural that the elected representatives of the people perform checks on behalf of taxpayers as to whether the institutions are handling citizens ' money carefully and in accordance with the agreed rules .
It works the same way in all democratic states .
I therefore cannot understand the position of the European Council , which refuses to give us the cooperation necessary for assessing its budget .
We are not asking whether Mr Sarkozy or Mrs Merkel are visiting a better or worse restaurant or purchasing a better or worse briefcase , or buying the clothes of this or that firm , but we are asking how they handle the public resources of taxpayers , and we are fully entitled to do this , and they are wholly obliged to provide this information .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , since I have only two minutes to react , I would like to address only a few things .
One is , I would like to reiterate that we are prepared to reach a long-term agreement in the debate between the Council and Parliament .
Only this can solve the problem , namely , the problem of legitimacy , which was also mentioned by Mrs Gräßle .
Let me tell you that I know that Parliament is a directly elected body - after all , I was also a Member ; but there are legitimate leaders , ministers , in the Council as well .
Furthermore , both bodies are equal participants in the discharge procedure : one of them at the level of recommendation , the other in the case of final discharge .
In the recommendation submitted we separated the budgetary process and the discharge process .
I would like to request appointment of a delegation to negotiate on behalf of Parliament and we should reach an agreement by means of a politically representative delegation for Parliament .
It is not helpful to continue with these problems .
And it is also clear from the draft Memorandum of Understanding we have submitted that we also have to clarify what data provision falls within the competence of the Council and what does not .
I think this will promote presentation between the various administrations .
Then we can indeed be requested to provide data that fall within the competence of the Council .
As regards national declarations , which has also been raised several times , I propose that we should solve this in the debate on the Financial Regulation .
I know there are proposals concerning this .
Of course the complexity of the issue in certain Member States has to be considered , but I repeat that this will be a very significant point of debate in another process .
Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to speak , and I would like to urge everyone once again not to turn the relationship between the two discharge bodies or institutions into a wrestling match .
Let us sit down and negotiate , and reach an agreement instead of degrading this problem to a mailing debate of the secretariats and bureaucracies .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this debate confirms the broad common understanding between Parliament and the Commission on the way forward and on the need to improve our policies and programmes , bringing added value to EU citizens .
I think we are moving in the right direction , and the issues you have raised concerning the introduction of management declarations , more automaticity in the application of sanctions and work on recoveries are really important subjects , on which the Commission is working .
I would like , in particular , to thank Ms Grässle for her work on the Financial Regulation .
I think it is very important that the proposal submitted by the Commission on the introduction of management declarations is finally approved because this issue is really about increasing the accountability of our Member States , which are responsible for managing 80 % of your budget .
With streamlined and much more automatic application of the interruption of payments procedure , I think we will see , in the discharge for 2010 , that the incidence of interruption of payments is growing and services are no longer afraid to apply this instrument in their work .
We are also working with the Member States on recoveries , and we submitted a lot of information to the rapporteur about the situation in relation to recoveries .
I think that , working together , we can find ways of improving the situation here .
Of course , sanctions are a good thing but we also have to seek incentives , and this is an important subject in terms of facilitating our Member States ' activity .
We all agree that we have moved forward on simplification of our rules , and we have presented our views on this subject .
These proposals will be taken into account when we are preparing new programmes for the next Multiannual Financial Framework .
I fully agree that our public procurement legislation is very complex , and a great many errors are occurring in the area of public procurement .
That is why the Commission has launched a public consultation on the simplification and improvement of public procurement rules , and I hope this will lead to a much simpler and more efficient system .
With regard to the Staff Regulations , it is time to look at them once again , and my colleague Maroš Šefčovič is working on a revision of the Staff Regulations .
This is , of course , a complex issue , and we have to take into account all those sensitive matters which are related to simplification , but the fact is that certain provisions in the Regulations are really outdated and need to be reconsidered and revised .
Of course , the Commission will reply formally to your recommendations in the follow-up report , to be presented after the summer , but , as you can see , we are already working hard to reinforce the management of the EU budget and improve the performance of our programmes .
I am looking forward to our future cooperation .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the Commissioner once again on behalf of Parliament for his excellent cooperation .
You have now raised certain points once again .
We should take these as a starting point for our continued work .
However , I would also ask you to pass on our thanks to your colleagues , because we had a very intense exchange with many individuals - I should particularly like to mention Mr Cioloş and Mr Hahn - and both were very cooperative .
Please would you pass this message on to them once again .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Becsey , for his clear words .
He spoke very clearly ; we may not like what he said , but at least he was clear in what he said and we are grateful for that .
I consider it only right that you are here .
I do not think there is particular cause to mention it .
Nonetheless , it is good that you are here .
I have saved my final thanks for the President of the European Court of Auditors , Mr Caldeira , with whom Parliament always enjoys genuinely open and positive cooperation .
We very much appreciate that .
Our work would not be possible without your background work .
Our discharge is based mainly on your contributions .
We would like to see you playing a greater role in the future assessment of the performance audit , Mr Caldeira .
The future of the European Union depends not just on the funds being spent legally and correctly , but also and above all on their being spent usefully ; in other words , effectively and efficiently .
That will form part of the performance audit under Article 318 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As Parliament , we would like to see an annual debate on the performance audit of the Commission and we would like you to be invited here to debate it with us as a representative of the European Court of Auditors . My sincere thanks to my fellow Members and to everyone involved .
Welcome
I should like to adjourn the debate a moment to announce that today in the visitors ' gallery we have Professor Dagmar Lieblová , President of Theresienstadt Martyrs Remembrance Association , from the Czech Republic , whom we welcome .
( Applause )
Professor Lieblová is in Strasbourg accompanied by 28 students from Prague and Hamburg , who have worked together on a two-year project researching the transfer of Czech forced labourers from Hamburg to Theresienstadt concentration camp .
She is visiting our Parliament at the invitation of our Vice-President , Mr Rouček , and of Mr Fleckenstein , and her project has been awarded a European prize .

Thanks very much to Professor Lieblová and her students for their major contribution to furthering our understanding of European history , and for their commitment to the moral values that inspire the Union .
2009 discharge ( continuation of debate )
We will now continue with the debate on 2009 discharge ( 39 reports ) .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , when in my initial speech I spoke about Parliament 's security , President Buzek immediately said that this issue had been discussed by the Bureau .
That is excellent and an important thing , so my thanks go to the SecretaryGeneral , who has taken swift action .
I wish to thank him for the many other steps that he has taken that have led to improvements in this House .
The year 2009 was election year , after which we had new statutes for assistants as well as Members .
There were a lot of problems with those and the SecretaryGeneral and the RothBehrendt working group introduced changes , and that is excellent .
Many have asked why I am raising the issue of travel between Strasbourg and Brussels .
The reason is that taxpayers do not understand why we are squandering the money that they pay in taxes .
What happens , then , when the people do not understand ?
In Finland we recently had elections .
The only party that was triumphant was the Eurosceptics , and they won easily .
If this trend spreads in Europe we will have big problems in important areas .
Finland does not now intend to endorse the Portuguese package .
These matters impact on one another , and that is why I am trying to explain here that , unless we are prepared to make changes now , the public are not going to back us and we will lose out in the significant , major issues .
That is why we need to sort out the smaller ones .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to thank everyone who has enriched today 's debate with their valuable comments .
As I have indicated this in my capacity of rapporteur , or to be precise , as a stand-in for Mr Rivellini , seven discharge proposals are tabled to the European Parliament .
The seven discharge proposals concern seven very important European institutions .
In his discharge report Mr Rivellini proposes that the European Parliament should grant discharge to the European Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the European Court of Justice , the European Court of Auditors , the European Ombudsman , and the European Data Protection Supervisor and their respective offices .
Today 's debate has confirmed for us that there is an agreement in the European Parliament on this issue .
One of Mr Rivellni 's proposals concerns the discharge of the European Council .
Here again , there is an agreement among the Members and groups of the European Parliament that discharge should be postponed .
I would like to welcome the observation of Minister of State Becsey , made in today 's debate .
I consider the steps relating to the work of the Hungarian Presidency to be important .
If these steps are continued , when Parliament puts the issue of the Council discharge on its agenda again this autumn , finally it will be possible for the European Parliament to grant discharge to the European Council with the backing of a long-term agreement between the European Council and the European Parliament on the Council discharge procedure .
In the light of these thoughts , I would like to thank again everyone who contributed with their work to Parliament making a decision on these seven proposals today .
, in writing . - ( PL ) Unanimity is rare among the Members of the European Parliament , who are usually divided into eight groups .
In today 's votes on the 39 discharges in respect of the implementation of the budgets of the individual institutions for 2009 , we postponed the decision to grant discharge to the Council of the European Union by 637 votes in favour , 4 against and 13 abstentions .
The decision taken by Members today is the natural consequence of the events of recent months .
Council representatives , including the Secretary General , did not accept a single invitation from the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control to discuss the Council 's expenditure in 2009 .
What is more , we were not given answers to any of several dozen specific questions , which included questions regarding the funding arrangements for the European External Action Service , which was set up in late 2009 ( the Rivellini report contains a full list of questions ) .
If we remind ourselves of the difficulties that accompanied the debates on the Council 's expenditure in 2007 and 2008 and the far-reaching concessions granted by Parliament in this respect , this year 's position is understandable .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , both institutions need a formal agreement on reviews of expenditure to replace the 30-year-old ' gentlemen 's agreement ' .
Citizens have the right to demand transparency as far as the Council 's and Parliament 's finances are concerned .
For now , we must wait until 15 June 2011 , when the Council is to provide answers to MEPs ' questions .
in writing . - ( BG ) The process of improving the quality of expenditure and control over legal spending and complying with the rules is not a one-off activity , but an ongoing process which is our main responsibility to Europe 's citizens .
People do not understand why we are still dealing with the 2009 budget in the middle of 2011 .
This is why , based on preliminary discussions through organising an interinstitutional discussion , we can shorten the procedure , but without it being at the expense of quality .
Control over the spending of European funds would improve considerably if there were specific data and methods available for assessing the management and control systems deployed in Member States because error rates of 0 % are questionable .
At least 30 % of the errors could have been detected and rectified by the national agencies prior to them being certified by the European Commission .
Member States and the Commission must take the necessary action to comply with the rules and adopt suitable measures for promptly removing any deficiencies detected .
The report on the 2009 discharge for fulfilment of the EU 's general budget , section I - European Parliament .
We are constantly confronted with numerous shortcomings that prevent us from using our resources in a wholly efficient manner .
In my work as Chief Rapporteur for the EU budget for 2010 for the area of Other Divisions , I came across concrete examples of bad management .
This applies to the area of the security service , where security costs are constantly rising , to the area of translation and the effective use of translation resources , and to other areas .
The bureaucracy is recording substantial increases in workload .
This leads to pressure for additional resources .
We therefore need a comprehensive assessment of staffing structures and the requirement for resources .
In the area of security policy , but also in the area of IT and buildings , we need to find a balance between internal employees and external suppliers .
The internal problems of every institution make people forget about improving interinstitutional cooperation .
Most of the increasing problems have a common denominator : we are making little use of independent studies into the use of resources and the organisation of work .
We therefore need to subscribe to such studies in selected areas this year .
I fully support the Committee on Budgetary Control 's decision to postpone granting discharge to the European Medicines Agency in the light of what I feel are some very serious points .
I should like to emphasise in particular the lack of guarantees regarding the independence of experts and managers , and hence the potential for conflicts of interest .
This issue is all the more relevant in view of the finding that certain dangerous medicines that caused the deaths of numerous people in Europe were belatedly withdrawn from the market .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.30 and resumed at 12.00 )

1 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - Court of Justice (
2 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - European Ombudsman (
3 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - European Data Protection Supervisor (
4 .
2009 discharge : performance , financial management and control of the agencies (
5 .
2009 discharge : European Police College (
6 .
2009 discharge : Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union (
7 .
2009 discharge : European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (
8 .
2009 discharge : Community Fisheries Control Agency (
9 .
2009 discharge : European Aviation Safety Agency (
10 .
2009 discharge : European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (
11 .
2009 discharge : European Chemicals Agency (
12 .
2009 discharge : European Environment Agency (
13 .
2009 discharge : European Food Safety Authority (
14 .
2009 discharge : European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (
15 .
2009 discharge : European Maritime Safety Agency (
16 .
2009 discharge : European Network and Information Security Agency (
17 .
2009 discharge : European Railway Agency (
18 .
2009 discharge : European Training Foundation (
19 .
2009 discharge : European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (
20 .
2009 discharge : Euratom Supply Agency (
21 .
2009 discharge : European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (
22 .
2009 discharge : Eurojust (
23 .
2009 discharge : European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders ( FRONTEX ) (
24 .
2009 discharge : European GNSS Supervisory Authority (
25 .
2009 discharge : ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking (
26 .
2009 discharge : Clean Sky Joint Undertaking (
27 .
2009 discharge : Joint Undertaking ( Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines ) (
28 .
2009 discharge : SESAR Joint Undertaking (
29 .
Defence of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Luigi de Magistris (
( IT ) Madam President , I should like to have something clarified .
I should like to know whether the vote we are about to take is the result of an automatic procedure or of a specific request made by Mr de Magistris , who has earned a reputation over the years for attacking the privileges of politicians , saying they should defend themselves in court and not seek loopholes to avoid it .
Essentially , I should like to know whether Mr de Magistris asked for immunity or whether this is an automatic procedure .
Madam President , please can you clarify this issue , because if Mr de Magistris is seeking to avoid trial ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Silvestris , may I respond ?
You asked if Mr de Magistris requested immunity or if it is an automatic procedure ?
Who did you ask ?
I am told that Mr de Magistris requested the defence of his immunity .
30 .
Defence of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Bruno Gollnisch (
( FR ) Madam President , I shall speak for just two minutes , if I may , since there is no debate or oral explanation of vote , which I find rather astonishing in this kind of procedure .
What are we talking about here ?
We are talking about a political expression , in respect of which legal action is being taken by ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I am sorry but we must proceed to the vote .
You have already had the chance to state your views , Mr Gollnisch .
( FR ) Until now these two objective criteria ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Gollnisch , you spoke only yesterday .
In any case , it is not permitted under the Rules of Procedure .
I am sorry , we are proceeding to the vote .
31 .
Waiver of Mr Bruno Gollnisch 's parliamentary immunity (
32 .
Protection and sustainable development of the Prespa Park area (
33 .
Port state measures to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing (
34 .
Freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets in cross-border cases (
rapporteur . - Madam President , briefly stated , it was not possible to have a debate and presentation of the report and I would like to thank my colleagues in the other political groups who have supported my recommendation .
I want to inform the Commission and the Council that this is the start of Parliament 's campaign to win new rights for our citizens who are the victims of fraud .
Pan-European orders for the disclosure and freezing of fraudsters ' assets are critical , because currently the fraudsters walk away while the victims lose out and face expensive legal bills .
With this vote , therefore , we are asking the Commission to urgently come forward with legislative proposals to redress this injustice and to give power back to our citizens , the victims of crime .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I shall now read a message from Mr Buzek .
' I am pleased to inform you that today we have the honour of welcoming Bogdan Borusewicz , Speaker of the Polish Senate , Irena Degutienė , Speaker of the Seimas of the Republic of Lithuania and Volodimir Litvin , Speaker of the Verkovna Rada of Ukraine .
The three speakers met today in Parliament for an extraordinary session of the Parliamentary Assembly of Lithuania , Poland and Ukraine .
This assembly is rooted in the tradition of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth , which for more than two centuries has represented the boundary of Europe , understood as a political , cultural and civil project .
The meeting of this parliamentary assembly in Strasbourg today marks the 220th anniversary of the adoption of the 3 May Constitution , the first constitution in Europe . '
1 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget , Section III - Commission (
2 .
ECA special reports in the context of the 2009 Commission discharge (
3 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - European Parliament (
Madam President , on behalf of my group , I should like to table an oral amendment to this paragraph .
It is a fairly technical amendment , but it is still significant .
I propose that the future tense be replaced by the perfect tense for points i ) , ii ) and iii ) .
Indeed , the measures referred to in these passages were implemented a long time ago - over two years ago .
It is pointless , then , to request things for the future when they are already being applied in the present .
I think that even this venerable Parliament can accept this basic principle .
It should therefore read : ' the European Parliament notes that the option of drawing a reduced pension from the age of 50 and the option of receiving a lump sum equivalent to 25 % of pension rights have been abolished ' .
It should read : ' the retirement age for the Scheme has been raised from 60 to 63 ' .
It should read : ' the managers of the Fund have been called upon to adopt ... ' .
( Applause )
4 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - Council (
5 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - Court of Auditors (
6 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - Economic and Social Committee (
7 .
2009 discharge : EU general budget - Committee of the Regions (
8 .
2009 discharge : Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds ( EDF ) (
9 .
2009 discharge : European Medicines Agency (
10 .
2009 discharge : European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (
11 .
2009 discharge : European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy (
12 .
Emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan (

Madam President , in paragraph 2 of Article 9a , after the words ' at the request of a Member State ' , we would like to add the phrase ' any legal person or any association not having legal personality acting on behalf of the Union industry ' .
The reason is to make this regulation consistent with other safeguards that we have approved , such as the South Korea FTA safeguard clause .
Chair of the INTA Committee . - Mr President , as Chair of the Committee on International Trade I have a mandate from the committee to ask for the postponement of the vote on the legislative resolution .
This is of course irrespective of my personal position in this regard .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission can agree with the proposal to postpone the vote on the legislative resolution .
13 .
Transitional arrangements for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries (
14 .
Further macro-financial assistance for Georgia (
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Madam President , a billion here , a billion there , and pretty soon we are talking real money .
The amounts that have been dedicated by the European Union to these bailouts dwarf the domestic spending of our national governments .
The United Kingdom alone has so far made available GBP 7 billion in Ireland and it is now about to be asked for another GBP 4.2 billion in Portugal .
GBP 7 billion is more than the value of all the domestic cuts we have made in social security put together - and all for a policy which is now visibly failing .
When the Greek bailout was originally agreed we were told that it would be enough to deter the speculators , that Greece would now be borrowing competitively in the market and that no more would be needed .
Yet , we now see Greece openly negotiating for a default and for further loans .
It is clear that we are not going to see the money again .
It is also clear that we are breaking the law .
These bailouts are not merely unauthorised under the Treaties , they are expressly prohibited and , worst of all , they are damaging to the recipient countries .
There is a racket - a Ponzi scheme - whereby governments and banks connive to give money to European bankers and bondholders , while expecting the repayment to come from ordinary European taxpayers .
Ireland and Greece are now having to borrow more money to send to Portugal , while at the same time Ireland and Portugal are having to borrow more money to send to Greece .
Let me finish by quoting my countryman Rudyard Kipling .
' You will find it better policy to say : --
' We never pay any-one Dane-geld ,
No matter how trifling the cost ;
For the end of that game is oppression and shame ,
And the nation that plays it is lost ! '
Madam President , we have voted today on the 2009 accounts at a time when governments across Europe are having to take austerity measures : expenditure is being cut and taxes are being increased .
Yet , in the European Union , every year the Commission demands more money , and every year the Court of Auditors replies that the money is not being well spent .
The Court of Auditors says that the 2009 accounts , on which we have just voted , are materially affected by error and that is why I am very pleased that the British Conservatives and our good friends in the European Conservatives have voted against discharge of these accounts .
The EU should take much better care of taxpayers ' money .
Madam President , when my constituents ask me about the EU budget , one of the things they do not understand , particularly at the difficult time that we are going through , is why we are spending all this money .
At a time when our government is having to make cuts and reduce the level of public spending , and governments across the EU are having to do exactly the same thing , why is it , first of all , that the EU is asking for more money for its budgets and its financial perspective , and secondly that it cannot spend the money it has efficiently ?
As my colleague Mr Fox said earlier , the EU accounts for 2009 were riddled with error .
The accounts have not been signed off for 15 years , and all the time our constituents have been asking us why we are not spending their money better .
It is time we put our house in order .
Whatever you feel about the European Union , it is surely right that we should spend taxpayers ' money wisely .
( FR ) Madam President , I voted against granting discharge in respect of the implementation of Parliament 's budget , not so much for financial reasons as for political reasons , since this House is anything but a Parliament .
No talking goes on in it , there is no opportunity to debate in it , even when the fundamental rights of one of its Members are at stake .
Over and above myself , I feel ashamed for our institution .
It is mired in political correctness .
There is no confrontation of ideas .
There is no real freedom of expression .
It is all about conformism .
We spend our time doing work that would be far better done by a technical agency responsible for harmonising standards or rules and , other than that , we play at being the United Nations .
You defend human rights in Guatemala and Indonesia - anywhere in the world where you have no jurisdiction .
You are incapable of defending the rights of one of your Members .
I feel ashamed for this Parliament ; it is a useless Parliament and a Parliament of useless people .
( FI ) Madam President , I would like to say a few words about the EU budget .
First of all , I think that it is very important to ensure that the way in which the European Parliament spends its money is transparent and open .
We are actually going through a time in Europe when all the Member States are having to make budget cuts and watch every penny , so we must also apply the same policy .
It is very important that openness and transparency have an important role in all that we do .
There are , however , a few small areas - of seemingly little consequence - where some wanted to make cuts .
In my view , these types of cultural services and cultural awards , such as the LUX Prize , which would represent savings of a few tens of thousands of euros , are not the right areas in which to make savings , because we can see that culture and creative industry have recently been a source of growth .
In this respect , it is important that , when we make cuts , we take the view that we should not do so in areas that are sources of growth in the European Union , but instead cut the red tape that does not produce growth .
Finally , I hope that the pay reforms that apply to us Members of Parliament , and which have gone through , will be implemented everywhere , in each Member State of the European Union at the same time .
That is because I understood that this reform was based on the notion that all Members of the European Parliament would receive the same salary , and this should also be taken into account by the nation states in their taxation practices .
( DA ) Madam President , we were not able to vote on the final resolution on Pakistan in this House today , but I would very much like to point out that I think it is absolutely reasonable and timely for us to help Pakistan through the very difficult situation that the country is facing .
The EU has provided EUR 415 million in emergency aid to Pakistan , and that is a good thing .
It is also positive that we are now taking the initiative to remove duties on some important export products in these areas , namely textiles and leather .
We are doing this because our experience essentially shows that free trade is a good thing .
However , I must say that , at the same time , I find it regrettable and somewhat hypocritical that we are also making indeterminate promises and saying that , if the initiatives that we are taking in respect of Pakistan start to work , we will discontinue them .
We will erect the customs barriers again .
I think Parliament should revise its view of how this matter should be dealt with .
Therefore , it is perhaps very sensible that we have postponed the vote on the resolution .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , even though the vote has been postponed , I remain strongly opposed to the report because I do not want to see the death of an industry - textiles - which has been the real driving force and economic backbone of my homeland , Tuscany .
Today we are allowing duties on textile products from Pakistan to be eliminated : it could then be the turn of India and then who knows which other State .
This is the result of the European Union 's wretched trade policy .
After the floods , Pakistan had already been helped by Europe with almost half a billion euros .
It seems that aid is granted partly in order avoid dangerous anti-democratic tendencies .
Yet , if I am not mistaken , the most wanted and dangerous terrorist in history was hiding in Pakistan .
Did the Pakistani authorities really not know about this ?
Last year , the Veneto region was also hit by extremely serious floods , which crippled many local textile companies .
By signing this agreement , we risk all the efforts made to return to production being rendered totally pointless .
Textile producers , especially the very smallest , now seem to have been abandoned by Europe , where big manufacturers - which have relocated - rule all .
However , we in Lega Nord shall fight until the end to preserve and develop this valuable resource for our territories .
Madam President , six months after the floods in Pakistan the UN spoke of a humanitarian crisis of epic proportions .
Another three months have passed , and there is still an entirely insufficient response by the EU and the WTO .
I voted in favour of granting Pakistan emergency trade preferences for textile and other products in the EU in order for these trade preferences not simply to be a purely token measure that filled the pockets of the corrupt elites in Pakistan .
I call for effective control over the increased income by democratic trade unions to ensure that the money is directed towards rebuilding schools and hospitals in the areas affected by flooding .
A major threat to the collective interests of all workers in Pakistan has been brought to my attention by the Progressive Workers Federation of Pakistan .
I oppose the disgraceful attempt and threat by the government to no longer allow trade unions to organise on a national level .
( IT ) Madam President , the Treaty of Lisbon lists foreign direct investment among the matters pertaining to common commercial policy .
Indeed , according to Article 3 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the Union has exclusive competence in this matter .
Following the entry in force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Member States have maintained a significant number of agreements with third countries on foreign direct investment .
If we want to prevent these agreements from interfering with the rules laid down by the Treaty , we cannot but adopt the policies and measures contained in the report by Mr Schlyter .
The adoption of measures to substitute the existing agreements is the only way to ensure a high degree of protection for investors and to ensure that their rights are recognised and guaranteed by the legal certainty of such agreements .
The draft certainly moves along these lines and I have therefore voted in its favour .
( IT ) Madam President , I voted in favour of this report because I am absolutely convinced that we need to control European investments abroad at a time of great crisis and economic uncertainty .
In fact , with the entry in force of the new Treaty , responsibility for the protection of investments passes from the Member States to the Union .
I hope , however , that the Commission will submit a report in September that sets out strategies on this issue .
We must regulate the transition phase and it is essential that , through an authorization process , the bilateral investment treaties ( BITS ) concluded by Member States are respected and that they are allowed , under certain conditions , to renegotiate existing BITS or finalise pending ones and to enter negotiations for further ones .
Legal certainty remains , however , a relative term as long as the transition of the investment protection regime is not completed and expiry dates are not set for Member States ' existing BITs .
A transition period is therefore necessary to manage this change and , in order to avoid legal vacuums , the regulation in question leaves the management of the Treaties to the Member States .
In light of what I have said , I reiterate my hope that the Commission will set out the appropriate strategies in short order .
( DA ) Madam President , we have voted today on the provision of EUR 46 million in macro-financial assistance to Georgia .
Obviously , these funds will not be provided without imposing the conditions of responsible economic management and transparency .
That is clearly important , but it is also important to remember that the provision of this money is in our own interests , as Georgia is very important from a geopolitical point of view .
The country was hit by a double blow : first there was the war with Russia in August 2008 and then the global financial crisis . It is still suffering as a result of a trade embargo imposed by Russia .
It is therefore in the European Union 's interests to support a Western-oriented government that is willing to undertake reforms , which is what we have done with the vote today .
( PL ) Madam President , Georgia is a strategically important country , in particular for the countries situated in the eastern part of the European Union .
In addition , it is a participant in the Eastern Partnership programme , which is aimed at strengthening cooperation with EU Member States .
The country places a strong emphasis on following pro-Euro-Atlantic policies .
The recent Russo-Georgian conflict of August 2008 demonstrated how important it is to keep this country within the sphere of European policy .
The programme of macro-financial assistance to strengthen Georgia 's economy , which has been implemented since 2009 , is therefore still crucial for the further development of positive political and economic relations , and also in respect of national security .
I therefore agree entirely with the European Commission 's proposal regarding the earmarking of additional funds for grants and loans in order to improve Georgia 's financial situation .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) I am voting for this proposal , since I agree with the discharge procedures , as they propose suitable appropriations for each heading .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and agreed with the European Parliament 's decision to grant the Court of Justice discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
In the course of preparation of the Annual Report concerning the financial year 2009 , the Court of Auditors performed an in-depth assessment of supervisory and control systems in the Court of Justice , which included examinations relating to human resources and other administrative expenditure .
This assessment had broadly positive results , with the exception of observations concerning a contract concluded for the provision of services .
I endorse the suggestion of the Court of Auditors that procurement procedures should be better prepared and coordinated by the Court of Justice .
The Court of Justice experienced difficulties as regards recruitment of qualified conference interpreters , and the limitations as well as the need to use a range of interpretation techniques in order to be able to qualitatively and quantitatively satisfy all requests for interpretation .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Court of Justice should report on this in its upcoming Annual Reports , given the importance of interpretation for the proper functioning of judicial work .
I voted in favour of authorising discharge of the 2009 budget of the Court of Justice because I believe its formal and substantial accuracy is the result of extremely competent work done by all the staff of this institution .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the exhaustive analysis carried out in this report by the Court of Auditors , and I call for the continued exchange of best practices between the institutions , as well as effective interinstitutional cooperation regarding development and the implementation of an integrated management system .
The report flags up certain situations that still need to be reviewed , and I hope that these are given due consideration .
I therefore support and welcome the rapporteur 's conclusions .
Financial control on implementing the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the EU Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by the European Parliament .
With today 's vote , discharge is granted for the implementation of the budget of the European Court of Justice for the financial year 2009 .
I voted in favour because controls carried out by the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control showed that all transactions were carried out in a wholly legal and regular manner .
in writing . - I voted to grant discharge to the Court of Justice , while noting the mixed results in terms of speeding up procedures .
I welcome the increase in the number of cases completed by the Court of Justice ( 377 judgments and 165 orders compared to 333 and 161 respectively in 2008 ) , take note of the number of preliminary ruling cases being the highest ever ( 302 ) and welcome the decrease in the number of cases pending at the end of 2009 ( 741 cases compared to 768 cases at the end of 2008 ) .
However , I note with concern that the General Court in 2009 showed a decrease in the number of cases decided and an increase in the duration of the proceedings and that consequently , although the number of new cases in 2009 was lower ( 568 new cases compared to 629 in 2008 ) , the backlog of pending cases continued to increase ( from 1178 in 2008 to 1191 in 2009 ) .
I also welcome the fact that the Civil Service Tribunal closed more cases than ever before ( 155 cases ) , and that the average duration of a procedure was 15.1 months compared to 17 months in 2008 .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions provided by the Court of Auditors pursuant to Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , I voted for this decision , which grants the Registrar of the Court of Justice discharge in respect of the implementation of the Court of Justice budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - Grants the Registrar of the Court of Justice discharge in respect of the implementation of the Court of Justice budget for the financial year 2009 .
With today 's resolution , Parliament grants discharge to the Registrar of the Court of Justice for the implementation of the budget of the Court of Justice for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament notes that , in the course of preparation of the Annual Report concerning the financial year 2009 , the Court of Auditors performed an in-depth assessment of supervisory and control systems in the Court of Justice , the European Ombudsman and the European Data Protection Supervisor , which included the examination of an additional sample of transactions involving payments relating to human resources and to other administrative expenditure .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the decision to grant the European Ombudsman discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
In the course of preparation of the Annual Report concerning the financial year 2009 , the Court of Auditors performed an in-depth assessment of supervisory and control systems in the Court of Justice , the Ombudsman and the European Data Protection Supervisor which included the examination of an additional sample of transactions involving payments relating to human resources and to other administrative expenditure .
The Court of Auditors found that the Ombudsman has not adopted general provisions on the procedures for the recruitment of temporary staff , although the relevant article of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union requires that each institution shall have done so .
I agree with the rapporteur that this omission may affect a large proportion of the Ombudsman 's staff , as the majority of posts granted are temporary .
The Ombudsman should report on progress in this area in his annual activity report .
The Court of Auditors indicated in its annual report that the audit did not give rise to any further significant observations as regards the Ombudsman .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of authorising discharge of the 2009 budget of the European Ombudsman since , mindful of the report on its activities and the observations I was able to make about it , I believe that accounting procedures have been respected , that the overall management can be considered good and that in the coming years we will be able to improve those aspects which are now considered controversial .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the conclusions of the audit in the Annual Report of the Court of Auditors .
I also welcome the implementation of the key performance indicators in the Annual Management Plan , as well as the fact that the objectives for 2009 were achieved and the Ombudsman 's decision to publish his annual declaration of interests on his website .
Finally , I support the rapporteur 's conclusions and commend the quality of Ombudsman 's annual activity report , and welcome the inclusion of the follow-up during the year to Parliament 's earlier discharge decisions .
I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Rivellini , for his excellent work throughout the discharge process .
In today 's vote , I gave my backing to the request for discharge regarding the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section VIII - European Ombudsman .
The Court of Auditors , which is responsible for external financial control , said that following careful assessment of the budget it had received reasonable assurances as to the reliability of the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 and the legality and regularity of the pertinent transactions .
I also applaud the Ombudsman 's decision to publish his annual declaration of interests , including on the Ombudsman 's own website , and I should like to join the Court of Auditors in praising the quality of the annual activity report submitted by the Ombudsman .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the Ombudsman and note , with satisfaction , that in 2009 the Ombudsman was able to help with almost 77 % of all complaints and dealt with 70 % of inquiries in less than one year , and I welcome the fact that the average length of inquiry was reduced to 9 months ( from 13 months in 2008 ) .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions provided by the Court of Auditors pursuant to Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , I voted for this decision , which grants the European Ombudsman discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the European Ombudsman discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) With today 's resolution Parliament grants discharge to the European Ombudsman for the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2009 .
I would like to stress that Parliament welcomes the fact that in 2009 the Ombudsman was able to help with almost 77 % of the complaints and that he dealt with 70 % of the investigations in less than one year .
We welcome the fact that the average length of inquiry was reduced to nine months ( compared to 13 months in 2008 ) .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the decision to grant the European Data Protection Supervisor discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors indicated in its annual report that the audit did not find any significant gaps as regards the EDPS .
In the course of preparation of the Annual Report concerning the financial year 2009 , the Court of Auditors performed an in-depth assessment of supervisory and control systems in the EDPS .
This included the examination of an additional sample of transactions involving payments relating to human resources and to other administrative expenditure .
The Court of Auditors found that under certain circumstances the EDPS may run the risk of making incorrect payments to staff .
I endorse the suggestion of the Court of Auditors that EDPS staff should be requested to submit at appropriate intervals documents proving their personal situation , and that the EDPS should improve its system for the timely monitoring and control of those documents .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of granting the European Data Protection Supervisor discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2009 since , despite the fact that some data was controversial and less transparent than required , the EDPS has shown willingness to commit itself to undertaking further ex-post verification processes from 2011 onwards .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the conclusions of the audit by the Court of Auditors , whose annual report notes that the audit did not give rise to any significant observations .
I also welcome the annual publication of declarations of the financial interests of the institution 's elected members , with relevant information on remunerated tasks and activities , or professional activities that are subject to declaration .
Finally , I welcome the rapporteur 's conclusion on the request made to the European Data Protection Supervisor to include a chapter in its next annual activity report - financial year 2010 - including detailed information on the follow-up during the year to Parliament 's discharge decisions .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Data Protection Supervisor ( EDPS ) but I note the Court of Auditors findings that the EDPS had not put in place a system of ex-post verification , where appropriate , as required by the Financial Regulation , and that the standards of internal control adopted by the EDPS did not provide for exceptions to standard financial procedures to be duly recorded in a central register .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions provided by the Court of Auditors pursuant to Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , I voted for this decision , which grants the European Data Protection Supervisor discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the European Data Protection Supervisor discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) With today 's resolution , Parliament grants discharge to the European Data Protection Supervisor for the execution of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
I would underline that Parliament welcomes the fact that in the course of preparation of the Annual Report concerning the financial year 2009 , the Court of Auditors performed an in-depth assessment of supervisory and control systems in the Court of Justice .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
The Court of Auditors has again drawn the European Parliament 's attention to a large volume of carryovers of unspent funds by several agencies in the financial year 2009 .
I agree with the rapporteur that the agencies concerned should step up their efforts to improve financial and budgetary planning and programming .
I also believe that the agencies ' expenditure should be predictable and a solution that respects the annuality principle of the Union budget should be found .
The agencies should strengthen their internal controls to make sure that contracts and procurement procedures are correctly applied .
Furthermore , it is important to fully guarantee the independence of agency staff and experts .
The Commission should provide Parliament with a detailed overview of the criteria applied in order to ensure the independence of recruited staff .
I agree that each agency should establish a multiannual work programme , in accordance with the Union strategy in the sector it deals with .
The multiannual work programme is important for enabling an agency to better organise its activities , provide an enhanced risk-assessment of its activities , and make effective organisational arrangements to implement its strategy .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of authorising discharge of the 2009 budget for the performance , financial management and control of EU agencies since I find the report to be objective , serious and independent .
The critical issues are adequately highlighted , as are the positive elements .
With reports of this standard , as long as its contents are followed up over the coming years , the quality of EU administration can only increase , invalidating the grounds for complaints from critics of the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) In the last few years , there has been an unprecedented increase in the number of agencies , so the Interinstitutional Working Group on Agencies is crucial , as is the forthcoming special report by the Court of Auditors , with a study on these agencies ' performance and a comparative analysis of their costs .
It is important to mention the innumerable weaknesses found by the Court of Auditors , and for their extent to be rapidly scaled back .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur on the need to improve the transparency of estimates and responsibility of projects ; to strengthen their procurement authorisation at the financing decision and work-programme level ; to correct failings in the recruitment of personnel , and increase its objectivity and transparency ; and to implement and comply with the Financial Regulation to which they are subject .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work , and I call on all the agencies to include the conclusions that have been adopted .
Every year , the European Parliament adopts a report on the European agencies to accompany the debates on budgetary discharge .
And every year it is the same finding : waste , shortcomings in recruitment and public procurement procedures , carryovers and cancellations of too numerous appropriations ...
It is not necessary to uncover fraud , as at the European Economic and Social Committee , to reach a verdict of mismanagement .
Every time , however , Parliament pretends to see progress , and grants discharge .
What is worse , it never calls into question the Commission 's policy of outsourcing to these agencies , which appears to be aimed less at effectively implementing the European Union 's policies than at providing every major city in the Union with its own small share of European institutions .
The nagging question of whether these agencies are effective and useful unfortunately remains unanswered , year after year .
The few agencies that analyse their performance do so in accordance with the procedures and processes that are imposed on them and not in relation to concrete results .
The agencies are useful above all ... to the agencies .
That is why we refused to grant discharge to a number of them and abstained on the resolutions that accompanied them .
in writing . - I support the report of Georgios Stavrakakis on the performance , financial management and control of EU agencies because mainly it stresses the need to encourage the agencies to develop , and then regularly update , a comprehensive situation outlining their financial circuits and the responsibilities of the financial and operational actors .
In addition , it reminds the agencies of the importance of fully guaranteeing the independence of their staff and experts .
It argues , overall , for a more constructive and transparent process .
in writing . - ( IT ) I commend the work carried out by the rapporteur , Mr Stavrakakis , and all those who participated in the drafting of the texts relating to the granting of discharge for the financial year 2009 .
We can say , in general terms , that the results achieved in 2009 are better than the previous results .
Nevertheless , it is true that even with respect to the current financial year , the Court of Auditors has noted , in more than one agency , a high level of carryovers and cancellations of operational appropriations and a high number of transfers .
Some agencies have also shown a number of weaknesses in procurement procedures .
Certainly , the present context of severe economic crisis must be taken fully into consideration when reviews and assessments are undertaken , but it is also important to highlight the need for a general improvement in the management of subsidies .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report ' 2009 discharge : performance , financial management and control of EU agencies ' in order to acknowledge that the functioning of all EU agencies needs to be further improved .
The discharge procedure for the financial year 2009 revealed that immediate actions are required with regard to transparency and efficiency .
For transparency in EU agencies to be improved , all 21 Agencies and the Commission must publish a list of all contracts awarded over the last three years as well as a report of the staff members changing jobs from one agency to another , and they must enact stricter rules regarding conflicts of interest as soon as possible .
Moreover , for the future discharge procedures , the Director of each EU agency should make available to Parliament its report from the Internal Audit Service .
To enhance greater efficiency in the functioning and expenditure of the EU agencies , genuine consideration must be given to the possibility of merging Governing Boards for agencies working in related fields .
Furthermore , the Commission should deliver an assessment of the feasibility of merging EU agencies with overlapping activities .
in writing . - I voted for this Report but am concerned by the Court of Auditors ' findings that several agencies had deficiencies in procurement procedures .
I call on the agencies to strengthen their internal controls to make sure that contracts and procurement procedures are correctly applied .
Parliament is not ready to accept the chronic inability to put in place a control system which avoids or detects in time persistent errors undermining the legality and regularity of the agency 's transactions .
I urge , in this respect , the agencies to :
improve the transparency of estimates and responsibility of projects ;
strengthen their procurement authorisation at the financing decision and work-programme level ;
ensure that the disclosure of exceptions in their Annual Activity Report is made in a comprehensive manner ;
ensure adequate follow up of potential irregularities ;
develop and report on ex-post controls .
I voted in favour of the report on the 2009 discharge : performance , financial management and control of EU agencies .
If we want Parliament to play its role of discharge authority seriously , the MEPs must be given access to more comprehensive and detailed information on the budgetary and financial management of the agencies .
We note that the responsibilities are shared , but they also seem to be diluted .
Thus , the European Commission , despite being represented within the management boards , reminds us , on the subject of the accounting errors made by the European Police College ( CEPOL ) , that an agency is ' an entity with its own legal personality and has a fully administrative autonomy , which includes financial autonomy . '
Yet the management board sometimes delegates sole administrative responsibility to the Executive Director .
Finally , the European Parliament decides whether or not to grant discharge to an agency , on the basis of the fairly brief reports by the external auditor , and depends on the goodwill of the Executive Director to be given additional information .
I believe it is imperative to fill this gap in the legislation on Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) reports on the agencies and to propose a solution that will see Parliament granted real powers .
in writing . - I note that the Court of Auditors has once again drawn attention to a large volume of carryovers and cancellations of operational appropriations by several agencies in the financial year 2009 .
I also note the existence of unused budget lines and the high number of transfers in some of the agencies , and I would call on the agencies concerned to step up their efforts to improve financial and budgetary planning and programming .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and agree that the European Parliament should postpone its decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of budget of the European Police College for the financial year 2009 .
In its report the Court of Auditors again qualified its opinion on the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions .
The College demonstrates a persistent lack of compliance with the Financial Regulation with regard to public procurement rules .
A significant amount of the College 's total budget contains irregularities .
The Court of Auditors identified severe shortcomings in the administrative and financial rules governing expenditure on the organisation of courses and seminars , which accounts for a major proportion of the College 's operational expenditure .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is unacceptable that the revised College 's Financial Regulation has never entered into force and , as a result , all engagement contracts signed were illegal .
In the interest of fostering transparency , the College should provide direct access to its budget , which should include a list of its contract and procurement decisions , and should be published on the College 's website .
I have voted against granting discharge for 2009 for the European Police College , as proposed by the rapporteur , because not even I am convinced by the irregular procedures adopted in the period under review .
I consider that more details are required to provide a deeper and more detailed explanation showing the regularity of the accounts .
For the second year in a row , we have been unable to grant discharge to the European Police College ( CEPOL ) for the financial year 2009 .
The multiannual action plan that was devised following the identification of the agency 's management problems lacks clarity , and the monitoring report fails to give us a proper understanding of the measures put in place .
The College admittedly performed better in 2010 , following the departure of its former Director , Ulf Göransson , who has been taken to task by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) and the Court of Auditors for his irregular , indeed fraudulent , expenditure .
However , it is still unacceptable that this agency , founded in 2006 , has yet to meet the criteria of good administration .
We must give thought to the very structure of CEPOL , which is clearly too small to function autonomously given the complex rules it must observe as an agency .
We must also question why this agency , the role of which is to organise training seminars for national senior police officers , should require its own headquarters rather than be attached to Europol , the Hague-based European Police Office , which everyone praises for its effective services .
With this vote the European Parliament has decided not to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Police College for the financial year 2009 but to postpone the decision .
In effect our decision is based on the considerations of the Court of Auditors , which issued an opinion with reservations on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the budget of the European Police College , by reason of the fact that the procurement procedures did not conform to the provisons of the financial regulation.Therefore I support the request to the College and its Governing Board to inform the discharge authority , by 30 June 2011 , of the actions undertaken and improvements made in relation to all the irregular and / or incomplete points raised in the course of this procedure .
in writing . - The report on the 2009 discharge for the European Police College provided for the postponement of the discharge .
I voted in favour of this report in order to acknowledge the structural problems that the College has been facing for many years now .
For the financial year 2009 , almost half of the money carried over to 2009 was not spent , and 43 % of the 2009 budget was carried over to 2010 .
The European Court of Auditors stated that implementation of the College 's budget is hampered by severe and recurrent weaknesses in its programming and monitoring .
Moreover , serious and repeated violations of public procurement rules were identified : five procurement procedures - worth a total of EUR 455 111 - failed to comply with the rules .
Transparency also remains a matter of concern , since irregularities continue to affect staff selection .
Likewise , I consider unacceptable the lack of investigation of the former Director in relation to his responsibilities concerning College appropriations that have been used to finance private expenditure .
Therefore , I advocate the merger of the College into Europol as the best way of achieving greater efficiency in expenditure and tackling the College 's structural and chronic problems .
I voted in favour of postponing the decision to grant discharge for the financial year 2009 : the Court of Auditors again qualified its opinion with regard to the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts for the financial year 2009 .
In particular , the Court identified severe shortcomings in the enforcement of the financial rules on public procurement and of the rules governing expenditure on the organisation of courses .
The report notes that payment appropriations , equivalent to 43 % of the total budget , were carried forward to 2010 , which is at odds with the principle of annuality .
We would like the agency to inform Parliament of the actions taken and the improvements made , and we call on the Court of Auditors to conduct a specific audit on the implementation of the European Police College 's action plan .
Together with my colleagues , I propose that the College merge with Europol in the Hague .
I have my doubts about the College 's ability to resolve structural problems linked to its small size , the relocation of its secretariat to Bramshill ( 70 km from London ) and its high governance costs .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Police College ( EPC ) for the financial year 2009 , together with its replies , I voted for this decision , which postpones granting the Director of the EPC discharge in respect of the implementation of the EPC 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This postpones the closure of the accounts of the European Police College for the financial year 2009 .
With today 's resolution the European Parliament has postponed the decision granting budgetary discharge to the Director of the European Police College .
In its reports on the annual discharge for 2006 and 2007 the Court of Auditors issued a qualified opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the budget of the European Police College , by reason of the fact that the procurement procedures did not conform to the provisons of the financial regulation .
In particular , Parliament is concerned that the Court of Auditors pointed to serious deficiencies in the administrative and financial rules governing expenses for the organisation of courses and seminars , which represent a large proportion of the College 's operational expenses .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted for the postponement of the discharge .
In view of the inglorious history of the European Police College 's financial conduct , it is essential that a detailed review is carried out .
In this connection I also consider it regrettable that the debate on the - in my eyes sensible - incorporation of the College into EUROPOL has subsided again .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and agree with the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I welcome the Centre 's plan to carry out a mid-term review of its Strategy 2008-2012 .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Centre should further develop the evaluation of its performance by improving the links between its strategic actions and the actions foreseen in its Work Programme and by reviewing indicators for monitoring its performance in order to comply with SMART criteria .
The Centre should also take more effective action on the constant expenditure growth in its budget .
I have voted in favour of granting budgetary discharge to the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union for 2009 because in this report I have found high precision , great transparency and a notable orientation towards results .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome and agree with the rapporteur 's observations , and I congratulate the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union on the work it does .
I also welcome the decision made by the centre to carry out a midterm review of its Strategy 2008-2012 , and congratulate it on its excellent performance , with a 41 % rise in its translation services in relation to 2008 .
I wish first of all to thank the rapporteur for the outstanding work done .
As is known , financial control of the execution of the Community budget takes place at three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control by the European Court of Auditors ; and the discharge procedure of the European Parliament .
With today 's vote , the financial control procedure is concluded with the granting of discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget for 2009 of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union , the accounts of which are legal and regular .
Lastly , I would like to congratulate the Centre for submitting to the Court of Auditors a comparison of its operations carried out in the course of 2008 and 2009 , allowing the discharge authority to make a better evaluation of the performance of the Centre from one year to the next .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the Translation Centre .
However , I call on the Centre to take more effective measures to remedy its constant rise in surplus ; I note , in fact , that for several years the Centre has had an accumulated budget surplus contrary to Regulation ( EC ) No 2965 / 94 , and that in 2009 the surplus amounted to EUR 24 000 000 , whereas it had been EUR 26 700 000 in 2008 , EUR 16 900 000 in 2006 , EUR 10 500 000 in 2005 and EUR 3 500 000 in 2004 ; I observe that this surplus is mainly linked to the lack of precision in the forecasts for translation requests received from its clients .
I welcome , nevertheless , the Centre 's initiative to refund EUR 11 000 000 to its clients in 2009 ; and I stress that similarly , in 2007 , the Centre had already refunded EUR 9 300 000 to its clients
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , together with the centre 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Director of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union discharge in respect of the implementation of the centre 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Director of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union discharge in respect of the implementation of the centre 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
With today 's resolution the European Parliament has granted budgetary discharge for 2009 to the director of the Translation Centre for the Bodies of the European Union .
The European Parliament welcomes the fact that the Centre will carry out a mid-term review of its strategy for 2008-2012 ; however , it invites the Centre to further develop the appraisal of its own performance , by improving the synergies between its strategic activities and the activities foreseen in its work programme and by reviewing the indicators for monitoring its performance in order to comply with SMART criteria .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the discharge .
The Translation Centre was established in 1994 to cope with the challenges presented by the multilingual nature of the EU - one of its essential features and proof of its cultural diversity .
The agency is self-financing from payments made by the institutions / bodies for services provided .
The European Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for 2009 are legal and regular .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and the decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Centre 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
In 2011 the Centre intends to make available Gantt charts for all key operational activities .
These charts outline the amount of time spent by each staff member on a project and encourage an approach geared towards achieving results .
In 2009 , the Centre introduced a performance measurement system ( PMS ) in respect of its medium term priorities 2009-2011 and its annual work programme .
The introduction of a PMS helps the Centre manage and evaluate its impact , efficiency , effectiveness and relevance .
I agree with the rapporteur that the institution should continue to improve programming and monitoring and to respect the principle of annuality .
Furthermore , the Centre must apply more effectively the budgetary principles of specification and transparency .
I have voted in favour of granting discharge for 2009 in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training because the Centre has managed its funds soundly and in line with previous forecasts .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training for the financial year 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
With a view to more efficient financial management in the future , the centre should submit a comparison of the operations during the year in progress and those of the previous year , to allow the authority responsible for discharge to assess its year-on-year performance more effectively .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am pleased that the Court of Auditors has declared the operations underlying the centre 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 to be legal and regular .
I would congratulate the centre for introducing a performance measurement system ( PMS ) in 2009 , and on the introduction of changes in its recruitment procedures following remarks by the Court of Auditors in its 2009 report ; these have contributed to improved transparency .
I welcome and agree with the rapporteur 's observations , and I congratulate the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training on the work it does .
With today 's vote I have supported the request for budgetary discharge for 2009 for the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training .
The Court of Auditors , which is responsible for external financial control , following a thorough asessment of the Centre 's accounts , has declared that it has obtained reasonable assurance that the accounts for 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I also wish to applaud the work done by the European Centre as the first to voluntarily undertake a pilot audit on its ethical framework in 2009 .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training .
I congratulate the Centre for introducing a performance measurement system ( PMS ) in 2009 in respect of its 2009-2011 medium term priorities and its annual work programme , and for having set up a framework of performance indicators to monitor progress and measure output , outcome and impact ; I consider , in particular , that the introduction of a PMS helps the Centre manage and evaluate its impact , efficiency , effectiveness and relevance ; I believe , furthermore , that this system could include further improvements to the activity-based budget and closer monitoring of payment appropriations to avoid carryovers .

in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training discharge in respect of the implementation of the centre 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training for the financial year 2009 , together with the centre 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Director of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training discharge in respect of the implementation of the centre 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
With today 's resolution , the European Parliament grants discharge to the Director of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training for the implementation of the Centre 's budget for 2009 .
The European Parliament expresses its satisfaction that the Court of Auditors has stated that the transactions underlying the Centre 's annual accounts for the 2009 financial year are legal and regular .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the discharge .
The European Court of Auditors was able to confirm that the annual accounts for 2009 were legal and regular .
The Centre , which was established in 1975 and carries out analyses of vocational training systems as well as providing information for policy , research and practice in this area , is needed more than ever in these times when concerns are being raised as regards the level of training and the threatened shortage of skilled labour .
Only its remote base in Greece , which makes it necessary to have a contact office in Brussels , should be reconsidered .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Community Fisheries Control Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
In 2010 the Agency adopted its multiannual work programme for 2011-2015 .
This document is important for ensuring that the Agency can make effective organisational arrangements to implement its strategy and achieve its goals .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency should set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year so as to enable the European Parliament to assess the Agency 's performance from one year to the next more effectively .
The Agency should improve its annual work programme by including specific and measurable objectives both at policy area level and at operational activity level .
The Agency should also redress its weaknesses in recruitment planning .
I voted for discharge of the implementation of the budget of the Community Fisheries Control Agency for the financial year 2009 after seeing the analysis the Court of Auditors is undertaking , which states that its actions are legal and regular .
Of its activities , I would stress the adoption of its multiannual work programme .
I have voted in favour of budgetary discharge for the Community Fisheries Control Agency for 2009 because I appreciate the correctness , clarity and transparency of the accounts and the efficiency deriving from comprehensible and feasible planning .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am pleased with the decisions detailed in the Court of Auditors ' report that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I would congratulate the Community Fisheries Control Agency ( CFCA ) on adopting a multiannual work programme for 2011-2015 which will enable the better organisation and realisation of the proposed goals , as well as the creation of the Internal Audit Structure ( IAS ) , which is an internal audit mechanism specialising in support and advice to the Executive Director of the CFCA and its management .
I welcome and agree with the rapporteur 's observations , and I congratulate the CFCA on the work it does .
in writing . - ( PT ) Implementing control and inspection measures in relation to the application of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) in its own exclusive economic zone should be a competence of the Member States , and as such they should be given adequate and sufficient backing , to which the European Union should contribute .
We do not deny the need for there to be ways for the various Member States to cooperate , link up and coordinate their activities to control and combat illegal fishing , but we were sceptical of the benefits of creating the Community Fisheries Control Agency ( CFCA ) because we believe that some of its competences clash with those of the Member States .
This is a centralisation that , apart from anything else , is not beneficial in terms of the necessary effectiveness of control activities .
We have also stated our disagreement in terms of the representativeness of the Administrative Board of the CFCA , its operational model and the excessive weight that the European Commission has within it , namely in terms of its voting system .
Furthermore , we would now say that if the CFCA is allocated a budget of EUR 10 100 000 ( financial year 2009 ) , the Member States are already being denied the possibility that the EU contribution to financing control activities could increase , in line with the proposal we tabled recently in Parliament , which was , unfortunately , rejected by the majority .
in writing . - ( PT ) Implementing control and inspection measures in relation to the application of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) in its own exclusive economic zone should be a competence of the Member States .
As such , they should be given adequate and sufficient backing , to which the European Union should contribute .
We do not deny the need for there to be ways for the various Member States to cooperate , link up and coordinate their activities to control and combat illegal fishing , but we were sceptical of the benefits of creating the Community Fisheries Control Agency ( CFCA ) because we believe that some of its competences clash with those of the Member States .
This is a centralisation that , apart from anything else , is not beneficial in terms of the necessary effectiveness of control activities .
We have also stated our disagreement in terms of the representativeness of the Administrative Board of the CFCA , its operational model and the excessive weight that the European Commission has within it , namely in terms of its voting system .
Furthermore , we would now say that if the CFCA is allocated a budget of EUR 10 100 000 ( financial year 2009 ) , the Member States are already being denied the possibility that the EU contribution to financing control activities could increase , in line with the proposal we tabled recently in Parliament , which was , unfortunately , rejected by the majority .
The Community Fisheries Control Agency was founded in 2005 to ensure that the common fisheries policy rules are complied with by Member States .
The Agency , which is located in Vigo in Spain , is very important in terms of fisheries control and coordination of Member States .
It is a good thing , in my view , that the Agency has adopted the multiannual work programme for 2011-2015 , as recommended in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The multiannual work programme will contribute to regional cooperation and to the sharing of resources under the deployment plans , something which will improve cost effectiveness .
I welcome the decision of the Court of Auditors to grant discharge , and it is clear that the Committee on Fisheries , which accepted an Opinion from me on this issue , is of the same mind .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , as the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Aviation Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
However , the Agency should remedy the shortcomings in the programming of its activities so that in future the procedures for drafting the budget are sufficiently rigorous and obviate any need to increase and / or decrease the appropriations against its budget headings .
Furthermore , the Agency has not yet drawn up a multiannual work programme .
I therefore believe that it is necessary to take the current observations into account .
Both the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control have delivered a positive opinion on the implementation of the budget of the Community Fisheries Control Agency .
For these reasons Parliament has today voted to grant budgetary discharge for 2009 .
The controls carried out have shown that the Agency 's budget is reliable and the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I wish , however , to point to the presence of some weaknesses , above all , in recruitment planning , in respect of which I hope a rapid improvement can be made in the procedures relating to future financial years .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the Community Fisheries Control Agency .
Nevertheless , I urge the Executive Director of the Agency to fully fulfil his obligation to include , in his report to the discharge authority summarising the Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) Report , all recommendations made ( including the ones which could be possibly refused by the Agency ) and all action taken on these recommendations ; I call therefore on the Executive Director of the Agency to provide information on the content of the IAS 's four ' very important ' recommendations and the action taken by the Agency .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report discharges the accounts of the Community Fisheries Control Agency ( CFCA ) in relation to its activities for 2009 , renewing the discharge granted by the European Parliament on 5 May 2010 , in relation to the implementation of the CFCA 's budget for the financial year 2008 .
As the Court of Auditors has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , and as a delegation from the Committee on Fisheries visited the CFCA in June 2010 and was very satisfied with the general state of its affairs , particularly the execution of the Joint Deployment Plans , I believe Parliament should adopt this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the Community Fisheries Control Agency ( CFCA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with CFCA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the CFCA discharge in respect of the implementation of the CFCA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the Community Fisheries Control Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the agency 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
With today 's resolution the European Parliament grants budgetary discharge 2009 to the Executive Director of the Community Fisheries Control Agency .
The European Parliament congratulates the agency on adopting a multiannual work programme for the period 2011-2015 and underlines the importance of such a document for the Agency to adopt efficient organisational arrangements with a view to implementing its strategy and achieving its goals .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the discharge .
The European Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for 2009 are legal and regular , and the revision of a multiannual work programme carried out in 2010 as well as the start of an initiative to review its budget procedure convince me that the Community Fisheries Control Agency is implementing the recommendations it has received .
In terms of what it is doing , the Agency - which was established in 2005 - is performing important - even essential - work , after the failure to achieve any of the aims agreed in 2002 and the fact that the common fisheries policy is considered to have been a failure to date .
The Agency will be indispensable in the immediate future in view of the appalling fact that 88 % of fish stocks in the EU are being overfished .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Aviation Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency should consider making a Gantt diagram part of the programming for each of its operational activities , with a view to indicating in a concise form the amount of time spent by each staff member on a project and encouraging an approach geared towards achieving results .
Furthermore , the Agency must implement an activity-based structure for the operational budget in order to establish a clear link between the work programme and the financial forecasts and improve performance monitoring and reporting .
The Agency should set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year , so as to enable the European Parliament to assess the Agency 's performance from one year to the next more effectively .
In addition , a report must be attached to each year 's budget on the unspent appropriations carried over from previous years , explaining why those monies have not been used and how and when they will be used .
The Agency still demonstrates deficiencies in staff selection procedures , which put at risk the transparency of these procedures .
I agree that the Agency must inform the European Parliament on the actions taken to redress this situation and make selection procedures more transparent .
I have voted in favour of discharge for 2009 for the General Budget of the European Aviation Safety Agency because , in spite of apparently dubious management of the funds available , the Court of Auditors has considered the accounts to be reliable and the underlying transactions legal and regular .
Moreover , I agree on the need for the agency to put in place more precise mechanisms for setting its objectives and for evaluating the results .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the decisions outlined in the report by the Court of Auditors that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I welcome and agree with the rapporteur 's observations , and I congratulate the European Aviation Safety Agency on the work it does .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , as the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Aviation Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
However , it expressed concern about the lack of coordination between the needs , staff and financial regulation of the Agency and , in particular , that staff selection procedures made it difficult to recruit appropriately qualified personnel .
I therefore believe that it is necessary to take the current observations into account .
With today 's vote budgetary discharge for 2009 has been granted to the European Aviation Safety Agency .
Financial control of the implementation of the Community budget takes place at three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control by the European Court of Auditors ; and the discharge procedure of the European Parliament .
Clearly , every debate on discharge has its own specific context and today 's discharge has taken place at a time of economic and financial crisis , which has created both financial and budgetary problems for some Member States .
In spite of such conditions , I wish , nonetheless , to express satisfaction at the results achieved by the Agency and have therefore voted in the manner proposed by the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Agency 's work programme for 2010 is a matter of some concern to me .
At the same time , I believe that it should be improved by establishing objectives and key performance indicators , as well as a better resource planning system .
I would also highlight the need to improve the monitoring system for certification projects to make sure that , over the entire project duration , the fees levied do not deviate significantly from the actual cost .
I ultimately decided to lend my support to the granting of discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Aviation Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Aviation Safety Agency but urge the Agency to implement an activity-based structure for the operational budget in order to establish a clear link between the work programme and the financial forecasts and improve performance monitoring and reporting ; note that the Agency prepares a multiannual plan every year , discussed with all stakeholders and approved by the Management Board , in which the budget per activity is presented ; and acknowledge the view of the Court of Auditors that the structure of the Agency 's operational budget ( Title III ) remained partially input-related and that the budget amendments were made without updating the work programme , even when they had a significant impact on the allocation of human and financial resources
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the EASA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the EASA discharge in respect of the implementation of the EASA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European Aviation Safety Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution , Parliament grants the Executive Director of the European Aviation Safety Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament welcomes the fact that the Court of Auditors found the Agency 's accounts for the financial year 2009 to be reliable and the transactions to be , in all material respects , legal and regular .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the discharge .
The European Court of Auditors stated that the annual accounts for 2009 were regular and commented positively on the reliability of the accounts .
At the same time , I should like to take this opportunity to emphasise the call in this report for a more transparent staff selection process .
In view of the responsible tasks that the European Aviation Safety Agency carries out and the stated difficulties of finding qualified personnel , this should be accorded full consideration .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for the financial year 2009 .
The Centre is an important institution that can strengthen and develop European disease surveillance and assess and communicate current and emerging threats to human health posed by infectious diseases .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Centre 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Centre must set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year , so as to enable the European Parliament to assess the Centre 's performance from one year to the next more effectively .
I also agree that the Centre 's powers must be strengthened so that the Union has an independent capacity to assess the severity of the risk of infection should a pandemic occur and so that coordination between the Member States can be improved .
in writing . - ( BG ) The budget of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for the financial year 2009 increased by 25.3 % compared with 2008 .
If similar growth is recorded in the coming years , how will we cope with the financial crisis with our ever-increasing spending ?
I think that the EUR 51 million could have been spent more effectively if they had been invested in regional disease monitoring systems in each individual Member State .
This will not only help combat infectious diseases , but will also strengthen the healthcare systems in Member States themselves .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control because the rapporteur has succeeded in identifying the most significant problems in terms of the transparency and accuracy of the accounts and because I am confident that this important and useful Agency will work on its administration in order to improve the areas pointed out , without undoing the good work that it has already done .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for the financial year 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
I believe it is a very important institution that can strengthen and develop European disease surveillance , and assess and communicate current and emerging threats to human health posed by infectious diseases .
I regret , however , that the principle of annuality has not been respected , and that there was a high number of carryovers .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the decisions outlined in the report by the Court of Auditors that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I would also like to mention the centre 's important contribution to the measures combating the pandemic of the H1N1 virus in 2009 , not least by publishing preliminary guidelines on the use of specific vaccines against the influenza during the pandemic of the H1N1 virus in 2009 .
I welcome and agree with the rapporteur 's observations , and I congratulate the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control on the work it does .
In view of the Court of Auditors ' statement that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable , and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control for the financial year 2009 .
Clearly , every debate on discharge has its own particular context , and the context of today 's debate is the economic and financial crisis , which has caused financial and budgetary problems for a number of Member States .
However , I think the Centre has done excellent work in strengthening European disease surveillance and assessing and communicating current and emerging threats to human health posed by infectious diseases .
Lastly , I should like to congratulate the Centre on its contribution to the measures to fight the H1N1 virus pandemic of 2009 .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and take the view that the Centre 's powers must be strengthened so that the Union has an independent capacity to assess the severity of the risk of infection should a pandemic occur , and so that coordination between the Member States can be improved .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDPC ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the ECDPC 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the ECDPC discharge in respect of the implementation of the ECDPC budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control discharge in respect of the implementation of the Centre 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control discharge in respect of the implementation of the Centre 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament calls once more on the Centre to set out , in a table to be annexed to the Court of Auditors ' next report , a comparison of the operations that were carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and during the previous financial year , so as to enable the discharge authority to assess more effectively the Centre 's performance from one year to the next .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting .
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control performs a very important task and has also justified its existence through its measures to combat the H1N1 pandemic ; however , I would have expected the discharge to be postponed until the content of the recommendations by the Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) that are called for in the report is available - the IAS made one ' very important ' recommendation and seven ' important ' recommendations - and the Centre has presented a plan for the implementation of these recommendations .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Chemicals Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency must reduce the proportion of carryovers ( the Agency has carried forward 29 % of the total appropriations ) to respect the principle of annuality .
I welcome the Agency 's initiatives for enhancing its customer focus and feedback procedures and congratulate the Agency for having conducted a stakeholder survey in 2009 and for having increased assistance activities for industry .
The Agency must also further develop the planning and monitoring of its procurement and budget execution so as to reduce the proportion of carry forward appropriations .
It is noted that the Agency has made a commitment to reduce the carryover of unspent funds to the following year and to limit those carryovers to a considerably lower level as compared to 2008 .
in writing . - ( BG ) What are we paying this sum of slightly more than EUR 70 million for ?
For an agency where , according to the Court of Auditors , delays in the operational activities are caused by a lack of qualified staff and difficulties in implementing the IT system ?
These two aspects are clearly crucial to the effective operation of an agency , but this makes me consider whether the agency can cope with the objectives it has been set in general .
I voted against the discharge because , in my view , this money can be spent more effectively than in a poorly operating agency .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 general budget of the European Chemicals Agency since the report shows that , despite several gaps and imperfections in the accounts , partly due to the recent creation of this Agency , its performance in terms of controls and budget management has steadily improved .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Chemicals Agency ( ECHA ) contributes to improving the European public 's quality of life by guaranteeing the safe use of chemical substances and fostering innovation .
In the face of the growing complexity and intensity of the use of and research into these types of substance , I believe the trend will be for the ECHA to become more important , which therefore justifies even closer scrutiny of how it generates the funds at its disposal .
The Court of Auditors has attested to the reliability of its accounts for the financial year 2009 and they seem to be on the road to overcoming all the teething troubles that are almost inevitable with bodies of this type .
I hope the ECHA will fulfil the purposes for which it was created , and will improve its budgetary rigour and its capacity for planning .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , as the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Chemicals Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
However , the Court of Auditors highlighted delays in the operational activities caused by difficulties in implementing the IT system and by a lack of qualified staff .
I therefore believe that it is necessary to take the current observations into account .
Financial control of the implementation of the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the European Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by the European Parliament .
Today 's vote sees the Executive Director of the European Chemicals Agency granted discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
I voted in favour because the audits carried out by the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control showed that all the transactions made by the Agency were perfectly legal and regular .
Lastly , I congratulate the Agency for having set up an Internal Audit Capability ( IAC ) to conduct internal audits and advise the Executive Director on risk management and internal control systems by issuing independent opinions and recommendations .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Chemicals Agency but call on the Agency to inform the discharge authority of the steps taken to improve its control system by strengthening its financial circuits , workflows , audits , action plans and risk assessments .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Chemicals Agency ( ECHA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the ECHA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the ECHA discharge in respect of the implementation of the ECHA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European Chemicals Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the European Chemicals Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament welcomes the Agency 's initiatives for enhancing its customer focus and feedback procedures .
In particular , Parliament congratulates the Agency for having conducted a stakeholder survey in 2009 and for having increased assistance activities for industry .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Stavrakakis , in which he calls on the European Court of Auditors to subject the ( operationally ) young European Chemicals Agency to performance audits .
Based on the available data , the discharge of the Agency was recommended , this Agency having already submitted information that will be required of the other agencies in the future ( such as an annexed table showing a comparison of figures from two consecutive financial years ) .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Agency is a reliable provider of independent environmental information for all Union institutions , the Member States and policy-making bodies .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency must set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year .
The Agency must further develop its communication methods in order to attract more media coverage for its findings and thus feed public debate on important environmental issues .
Such measures may lead to a more transparent working method and greater public interest in the Agency 's work .
in writing . - ( BG ) Why should we fund agencies which fail to implement recommendations made by the Internal Audit Service ?
In 2006 , 27 recommendations were made , of which only nine have been implemented so far .
This leads me to think that the European Environment Agency does not operate properly and its funding must be discontinued .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the European Environment Agency because I think the work it does is essential in this day and age .
I therefore think that the critical issues pointed out do need to be corrected , but without losing sight of long-term strategic goals .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge of the budget of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
I consider it a very important institution , specifically in relation to climate change adaptation , ecosystem assessment , sustainable consumption and production , and disaster prevention and management .
in writing . - ( PT ) The goal of the European Environment Agency ( EEA ) is to make available credible and independent information about the environment .
The EEA 's mandate includes two aspects : firstly , support for European Union Member States in formulating economic policy that incorporates environmental issues and sustainability ; secondly , coordinating environmental information through the Environment Information and Observation Network ( Eionet ) .
Relevant issues justifying close monitoring by the EEA include assessing the state of the environment ; identifying environmental trends , including the social and economic factors that environmental pressures are based on ; monitoring environmental policies and their effectiveness ; and predicting future trends and problems .
in writing . - ( PT ) The rapporteur makes some observations and recommendations that we consider relevant in terms of budgetary processes for the European Environmental Agency ( EEA ) to take into account .
At the same time , it highlights important failings in the EEA 's recruitment processes , which call into question the transparency of this process , specifically : the vacancy notices did not specify a maximum number of candidates to be put on the reserve lists , questions used during written tests and interviews were not decided on before the examination of the applications , the decisions of the selection boards were insufficiently documented , thresholds for being invited to interview or put on the reserve list were not set in advance , and minutes were not complete .
These are serious failings which urgently need to be corrected .
The EEA can and should have an important role in compiling objective , trustworthy and comparable information on the environment in Europe , and in making it available in an accessible and thorough way .
Nevertheless , it is important to be at pains to guarantee better cooperation , linkup and coordination with the competent institutions in the Member States , by promoting synergies and better circulation of information .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , as the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors reported insufficiently rigorous procedures for drawing up the budget leading to a considerable number of budgetary transfers affecting most of the budget lines ( equivalent to 8 % of the Agency 's budget ) .
It notes , in particular , that some of these transfers led to successive increases and decreases in the same budget headings whereas some appropriations were not used and were transferred to other lines during the year .
I therefore believe that procedures for drawing up the budget need to be more rigorous , because a large proportion of the financial resources stem from Union subsidies .
Financial control on implementing the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the European Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by Parliament .
Today 's vote sees discharge granted in respect of the implementation of the European Environment Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
I voted in favour because the audits carried out by the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control showed that all the transactions made by the Agency were perfectly legal and regular .
In addition , I think the Agency does a very important job and I support the recent efforts made to involve the public more on important environmental matters , such as climate change , biodiversity and the management of natural resources .
in writing . - I voted to give the European Environment Agency discharge on its budget .
However , I call on the Agency to improve , by the end of the year , the accuracy of the information provided by the operational departments on the estimation of accrued operational expenditure .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Environment Agency ( EEA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the EEA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the EEA discharge in respect of the implementation of the EEA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European Environment Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director of the European Environment Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament specifically welcomes the Agency as a reliable provider of independent and assured environmental information for all Union institutions , the Member States and policy-making bodies .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the discharge in view of the fact that the European Court of Auditors stated that it had obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts presented for 2009 were legal and regular .
The European Environment Agency has performed important work in recent years in providing independent , reliable information and data in the area of the environment , which is a major concern of a large proportion of Europe 's citizens , as evidenced by the annual reports of the Committee on Petitions .
I also welcome the report 's request that the European Court of Auditors undertake performance audits on the Agency .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Food Safety Authority for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Authority 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Authority should strengthen the planning and monitoring of budget processes related to differentiated appropriations .
The Authority must improve its budget management in order to reduce its high carryover amounts .
The Authority also needs to ensure its advice is high quality and independent in order to guarantee compliance with Union safety standards and scientific excellence and independence on all matters with a direct or indirect impact on food and food safety and plant protection .
I voted for this report because the Court of Auditors has stated that is has reasonable assurances that the 2009 accounts for the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , and because on 5 May 2010 Parliament granted the Executive Director of the European Food Safety Authority discharge in respect of the implementation of the EFSA 's 2008 budget .
I also voted in favour because , although it should strengthen the planning and monitoring of budget processes , I agree that the EFSA needs to ensure that its advice is of a high quality and is independent , in order to guarantee compliance with Union safety standards , scientific excellence and independence on all matters with a direct or indirect impact on food and feed safety , and plant protection .
in writing . - ( BG ) We cannot ignore the fact that for three successive years - 2006 , 2007 and 2008 - the European Food Safety Authority carried over a large part of its commitments for operational activities .
An even more controversial fact is that the Court of Auditors reported difficulties in the implementation of the agency 's 2009 work programme .
For these reasons , I think that this agency should not be discharged in respect of the implementation of its budget because European taxpayers do not deserve their money to be spent on an agency which is not coping with the commitments entrusted to it .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 general budget of the European Food Safety Authority , not only because the Court of Auditors has declared that the accounts are reliable and that the underlying transactions are regular and legal , but also because the Agency has allocated some funds from its reserve for the completion of a number of important projects in infrastructure , information technology development and scientific cooperation , for example .
However , I think further audits ought to be carried out on the use of some funds and budgetary management ought to be improved in order to reduce the high number of carryovers .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge of the budget of the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) for the financial year 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
I believe the EFSA should continue to guarantee scientific excellence and independence , meaning there is a need for measures relating to the declaration of interests by EFSA staff and experts working for the EFSA .
in writing . - ( PT ) The work of European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) takes in all stages of food production and supply , from primary production to supplying consumers with food , including the safety of animal feed .
It gathers information and analyses new scientific advances , so as to identify and assess all potential risks to the food chain .
It can go ahead with a scientific assessment of any issue that could have a direct or indirect impact on the safety of the food supply , including issues related to animal health or welfare , and plant health .
If food safety is one of the main requirements and greatest concerns of a market with over 500 million consumers , the way it is assessed and studied requires extremely high levels of professionalism , performance and impartiality .
The Union has been advocating the capacity for monitoring types of food ' from field to fork ' , but it is essential to recognise that there is still a lot to do .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , as the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Food Safety Authority for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
Firstly I should like to thank everyone who worked on the report and to congratulate the European Food Safety Authority itself , which has respected the need to provide high-quality , independent advice in order to guarantee compliance with safety standards as well as scientific excellence and independence on all matters with a direct or indirect impact on food safety .
Unfortunately I have to point out a few difficulties reported by the Court of Auditors following the audits carried out during the implementation of the 2009 work programme .
I therefore add my voice to the calls for the Authority to take the necessary measures to remedy these shortcomings which , in any case , have not nullified the general regularity and reliability of the budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Food Safety Authority , but regret that , for the third successive year , the Court of Auditors pointed out that commitments for operational activities carried over from the previous year had to be cancelled ( 19 % of commitments for operational activities carried over from 2008 , 37 % of commitments for operational activities carried over from 2007 and 26 % of commitments for operational activities carried over from 2006 ) .
Parliament urges the Authority to change this situation and to notify the Court of Auditors of the measures taken .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the EFSA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the EFSA discharge in respect of the implementation of the EFSA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European Food Safety Authority discharge in respect of the implementation of the Authority 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the European Food Safety Authority discharge in respect of the implementation of the Authority 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament congratulates the Authority for having set out , in the table annexed to the Court of Auditors ' 2009 report , a comparison of the operations that were carried out during 2008 and 2009 so as to enable the discharge authority to assess more effectively its performance from one year to the next .
Parliament also welcomes the fact that the Authority has increased its number of thematic papers and policy briefings .
in writing . - ( DE ) In the case of the European Food Safety Authority I have not gone along with the rapporteur 's recommendation to grant discharge ' on the basis of the data available ' ; the obvious deficiencies in budget management are simply too serious .
The Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) has made 48 recommendations on grant management , 27 of which even fall into the ' critical ' category .
In addition , there are concerns regarding possible conflicts of interest and lack of transparency .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Centre 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I welcome the Centre 's initiative to run a computerised network for the collection and exchange of information called the European information network on Drugs and Drug Addiction .
This network connects national drug information networks , specialist centres in the Member States and the information systems of international organisations working with the Centre .
I agree that the Centre should consider making a Gantt diagram part of the programming for each of its operational activities , with a view to indicating in concise form the amount of time spent by each staff member on a project and encouraging an approach geared towards achieving results .
I also believe that it is important for the Centre to improve the programming and the monitoring of activities with a view to reducing carry over to the following year .
I welcome the Centre 's initiative to provide the European Parliament with the Internal Audit Service 's Annual Internal Audit Report on the Centre , because this is a sign of transparency and best practice .
I voted for discharge of the implementation of the observatory 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
As in previous cases , the Court of Auditors has stated that its actions are legal and regular .
It should be taken into account that Parliament granted it discharge in May .
Its management seems crucial to me , and I was very pleased to welcome the creation of the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction ( REITOX ) , which enables increased contact between national drug information networks and specialist centres for the sharing of best practices .
I view the contribution of a framework for comparison with 2009 and 2008 positively , as it has facilitated the analysis of the increase in its activities .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 general budget of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction as it has managed its resources prudently and in line with expectations .
As the report shows , the management can still be improved , above all in terms of cash management and carryover analysis .
in writing . - ( PT ) This monitoring centre has an extremely important role in the European context .
Its remit is to provide objective , reliable and comparable information enabling the European Union and its Member States to have a wide-ranging perspective on the phenomenon of drug addiction and its consequences .
Rigour in terms of information means there is a need for equal rigour in accounting .
I hope the monitoring centre will not desist from truly and accurately carrying out the mission entrusted to it , and that it will do so whilst managing its budget the best it can .
I also hope that any information it gathers will help the Member States to follow closely the causes and consequences of this scourge , and to point to paths and solutions enabling affected Europeans to free themselves from the addiction destroying them and their families .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , as the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction for the financial year 2009 .
At the same time , the budget of the Centre was 2.25 % less than its budget for 2008 .
Financial control on implementing the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the European Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by Parliament .
Today 's vote sees discharge granted in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction for the financial year 2009 .
I voted in favour on the basis of the report by the Court of Auditors , which stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the accounts are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
Lastly , I welcome the Centre 's decision to build and run a computerised network for the collection and exchange of information called the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction .
The network will connect national drug information networks , specialist centres in the Member States and the information systems of international organisations working with the Centre .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addicition and , in doing so , welcome the fact that the Centre has further enhanced the annual forecast of its cash needs ; notes that this forecast is constantly updated and submitted as a supporting document to the relevant Commission services to justify the Centre 's quarterly request for payment of the next instalment of its annual subsidy allocated by the Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the EMCDDA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the EMCDDA discharge in respect of the implementation of the EMCDDA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction discharge in respect of the implementation of the Centre 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction discharge in respect of the implementation of the Centre 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament welcomes the Centre 's initiative to run a computerised network for the collection and exchange of information called the European Information Network on Drugs and Drug Addiction .
Parliament notes that this network connects national drug information networks , specialist centres in the Member States and the information systems of international organisations working with the Centre .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the discharge .
The annual accounts for 2009 were found to be regular .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) has been exemplary in the way it administers its budget .
The Monitoring Centre has already presented a table comparing financial years 2008 and 2009 - not just the figures ( which show a 2.25 % reduction in funds compared with 2008 ) , but also the measures implemented .
To fully ensure transparency the EMCDDA wishes to present the full report from the Internal Audit Service .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Maritime Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree that the Agency should consider making a Gantt diagram part of the programming for each of its operational activities , with a view to indicating in a concise form the amount of time spent by each staff member on a project and encouraging an approach geared towards achieving results .
The Agency should set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year so as to enable the European Parliament to assess the Agency 's performance from one year to the next more effectively .
In 2009 , the Court of Auditors again noted a high number of budget transfers ; therefore the Agency must continue to improve its planning and monitoring in order to reduce the number of budget transfers .
The Agency must also take steps to overcome deficiencies in staff selection procedures , which put at risk the transparency of these procedures .
I voted for this report .
The Court of Auditors states that this agency 's accounts are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
In reaching my position , I see the adoption of its five-year multiannual plan as positive , although - as the Court of Auditors says - it should improve budgetary planning and management .
However , the assessment of its activities has been positive .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 general budget of the European Maritime Safety Authority because , despite the previous absence of a multiannual programme and significant concern over the high number of budget transfers in 2008 , the Agency has shown improvements in its management and , taken as a whole , the Court of Auditors had a positive view of the annual accounts and the underlying transactions .
in writing . - ( PT ) The environmental disasters of the ships Erika and Prestige have laid bare the need to do more for maritime safety at European level .
The agency , which is based in Lisbon , fittingly , has important competences in this area and deserves to be supported in its demanding work .
This agency should , however , make efforts to improve its planning and monitoring policies .
Firstly I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Stavrakakis , for his excellent work .
I voted in favour today of granting discharge to the European Maritime Safety Agency in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
I would , however , like to draw attention to the fact that the Court of Auditors noted a high number of budget transfers in 2009 and add my voice to the request made to the Agency to work on improving its future budgetary planning and monitoring in order to reduce the number of budget transfers .
I welcome the work carried out by the European Maritime Safety Agency .
I also believe that the adoption in March 2010 of a five-year strategy represents progress in terms of its actions and improvements to future work .
I therefore decided to vote in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Maritime Safety Agency for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - I voted to grant discharge to the European Maritime Safety Agency for its 2009 budget but call on the Agency to further reduce the number of posteriori commitments ( i.e. legal commitments that were entered into before the corresponding budgetary commitments were made ) ; reminds the Agency that , since 2006 , the Court of Auditors has reported infringements of Article 62 ( 1 ) of the Financial Regulation ; welcomes , nevertheless , the Agency 's efforts to improve this situation by providing ad hoc training to avoid posteriori commitments .

in writing . - ( PT ) This report discharges the annual accounts of the European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) for the financial year 2009 .
As the Court of Auditors has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , I believe Parliament should adopt this report .
However , it should be stressed that the Court of Auditors has , once again , noted a high number of budget transfers in 2009 ( 49 in 2009 , 52 in 2008 and 32 in 2007 ) , so it is desirable that the EMSA improve its planning and monitoring to thus reduce the number of transfers .
It is also desirable that the EMSA set out , in a table to be annexed to the Court of Auditors ' next report , a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year , so as to enable the discharge authority to assess more effectively the EMSA 's performance from one year to the next .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the EMSA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the EMSA discharge in respect of the implementation of the EMSA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European Maritime Safety Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director of the European Maritime Safety Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament welcomes the fact that the Court of Auditors found the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 to be reliable and regarded the transactions underlying them , taken as a whole , as legal and regular .
With the vote on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) for 2009 , Parliament has been able to confirm the good governance of that Agency and the use of its appropriations for their intended purpose .
I welcome this vote , as it reaffirms Parliament 's commitment to the Agency , which plays a crucial role in monitoring and supervising Europe 's seas .
Given that the pressure on our maritime area is growing , we have a duty to be extremely vigilant regarding its use .
Hence I am particularly delighted that the proposals contained in my 2008 report on port State control have become key principles underpinning EMSA 's work .
They relate , for example , to ship inspections and coordination of the various national control systems by the Agency .
The sea is an area that belongs to all Europeans , and it is part of our heritage .
By promoting the exchange of good practice , relentlessly combating pollution and illegal activities at sea , and preventing accidents , we will be able to benefit from the sea 's growth potential for a long time yet .
in writing . - ( DE ) The funding of the European Maritime Safety Agency was also cut in 2009 , by 3.8 % .
The Agency 's tasks , which include environmental disasters at sea , are of particular importance in view of the state of EU waters .
I voted in favour of discharge since the deficiencies listed mainly concerned procurement and staff selection procedures , while the European Court of Auditors gave a positive verdict on the annual accounts for 2009 .
However , these deficiencies must be remedied in 2010 and the ' very important ' Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) recommendations must all be implemented if discharge is to be warranted in 2010 .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Network and Information Security Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency should strengthen its internal controls to make sure that contracts and procurement procedures are correctly applied .
The Agency must also provide regular information on its financial circuits and the responsibilities of the relevant financial and operational actors .
Deficiencies in Agency staff selection procedures still remain and put at risk the transparency of these procedures .
The Agency must redress this situation and inform the European Parliament on the actions taken .
I also agree that the Agency should put in place ex-post controls with the help of a professional supplier .
I voted for this report . I did so because the Court of Auditors says it has sufficient assurances that the 2009 accounts of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , and because on 5 May 2010 Parliament granted the Executive Director of the ENISA discharge in respect of the implementation of its 2008 budget .
However , I accept that it should improve transparency regarding estimates and who has responsibility for projects , procurement procedures , and follow-up of potential irregularities .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the European Network and Information Security Agency having read in this detailed report of the regularity of the procedures adopted and of the specific areas that appeared to lack transparency .
in writing . - ( PT ) The dematerialisation of contact between people and the increasing use of Web platforms make it advisable for the European Union to put cyber-safety in the ' essential ' category .
Indeed , ever greater amounts of information are being accumulated on the Internet , and people are making growing use of the net for a most diverse range of their day-to-day activities .
Such circumstances bring an exponential rise in the risks of privacy violation and of illicit use of data , information , sounds or images by third parties .
The Court of Auditors has attested to the reliability of its accounts , but highlights a range of corrections to be made .
Since its foundation , the European Maritime Safety Agency has been giving extremely important support to the European Commission and to Member States , especially in terms of maritime safety and the prevention of pollution from ships .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Network and Information Security Agency for the financial year 2009 .
However , the Court of Auditors found deficiencies in procurement procedures , particularly with regard to the under-estimation of the budgets of a framework contract .
The budget of the Agency for the year 2009 was 3.5 % less than its budget for 2008 .
I believe that the current deficiencies must be redressed .
Financial control on implementing the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the European Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by the European Parliament .
Today 's vote sees discharge granted in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Network and Information Security Agency for the financial year 2009 , thereby closing the procedure for 2009 .
I voted in favour on the basis of the statements made by the Court of Auditors , which has confirmed that it has received reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Network and Information Security Agency and , in doing so , I note with disappointment that there has been no progress since the previous year concerning the refund of EUR 45 000 which is the amount of VAT paid in advance by the Agency to the tax authorities of the host Member State ; urges , therefore , the Agency to inform the discharge authority when this refund is made by the host Member State .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the ENISA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the ENISA discharge in respect of the implementation of the ENISA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European Network and Information Security Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the European Network and Information Security Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament underlines that the Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
in writing . - ( DE ) I did not vote in favour of the discharge .
The deficiencies listed by the Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) are too numerous and too serious .
To name but one : after a re-examination of procurement by the European Network and Information Security Agency more weaknesses were found in this area .
The 18 recommendations by the IAS to improve the Agency 's services must be implemented comprehensively and without delay .
Since the Agency has refused a full five of the 18 recommendations , however , it seems that even the will required for this is lacking .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Railway Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors informed the European Parliament that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that using two locations ( Lille and Valenciennes ) for carrying out its activities exposes the Agency to additional costs .
I therefore believe that action must be taken by the Council to change the decision obliging the Agency to have a double seat .
I believe that the Agency should set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year so as to enable the European Parliament to assess the Agency 's performance from one year to the next more effectively .
I congratulate the Agency , following the Court of Auditors ' comments , on implementing a centralised system for registration of incoming invoices .
This measure is necessary to ensure the timely recording of all invoices and contributes to avoiding delays in processing payments .
I welcome the Agency 's initiative to set up an Internal Audit Capability that is dedicated to providing support and advice to its Director and management on internal control , risk assessment and internal audit .
I voted for discharge of the implementation of the budget of the European Railway Agency for the financial year 2009 , because Parliament granted its director discharge in May .
However , I agree - as the report says - that the carryover of appropriations needs to be better managed because they are in breach of the budgetary principle of annuality .
I also agree with the observations by the Court of Auditors about delays in procurement procedures .
I have a positive take on the effort made to bring in a centralised system for registration of incoming invoices , which is necessary to improve their management .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 general budget of the European Railway Agency since , as the report shows , it managed its resources well overall .
I also agree on the need to make a number of improvements in the area of auditing the accounts and managing the budget in order to reduce the level of carryovers and cancellations , which is still too high .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European railways sector suffers from the incompatibility of national technical and safety rules , representing a serious disadvantage for its development .
It is for the agency to reduce this gulf and to establish common safety objectives .
Having two separate headquarters leads to increased costs , which perhaps should not be the case .
The delay in carrying out a number of activities calls into question the principle of budgetary annuality , which has caused the carryover of budgetary appropriations .
in writing . - ( LT ) I abstained from the vote on this document , although the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Railway Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The budget of the Agency for the year 2009 was 16.6 % less than its budget for 2008 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
It is worrying that concern was expressed over the weaknesses in procurement procedures revealed by the Court of Auditors ' audit - cancellations and delays in procurement procedures , recurrent delays in the execution of payments and significant changes made to the work programme during the year .
The Court of Auditors identified shortcomings in the management of the fixed assets ' inventory , but notes the Agency 's assurance that this will be remedied in the 2010 accounts .
I feel that uncertainty about the location of fixed assets is another illustration of the problems and additional costs arising from using two sites .
This is also the reason for my abstention .
Through today 's resolution Parliament has granted the Director of the European Railway Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Unfortunately , the audit process revealed cancellations and delays in procurement procedures , recurrent delays in the execution of payments and significant changes made to the work programme during the year .
I believe that such problems ought to be avoided in future years .
To this end , I am very pleased with the Agency 's creation of an Internal Audit Capability ( IAC ) that is dedicated to providing support and advice on internal control .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Railway Agency for the financial year 2009 .
Nevertheless , I believe that the Council should take steps to eliminate one of the agency 's sites , since this is a source of unnecessary additional costs , and the agency does not need two sites to take efficient action .
Furthermore , I am concerned by the fact that the agency 's staff regulations and their implementing rules have not been followed .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Railway Agency for its 2009 budget .
However , I regret the shortcomings in the management of the fixed assets ' inventory identified by the Court of Auditors but note the Agency 's assurance that this will be remedied in the 2010 accounts ; considers that uncertainty about the location of fixed assets is another illustration of the problems and additional costs arising from using two sites .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Railway Agency ( ERA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the ERA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the ERA discharge in respect of the implementation of the ERA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Railway Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the agency 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director of the European Railway Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament is concerned that the Court of Auditors has again highlighted cancellations and delays in procurement procedures , recurrent delays in the execution of payments and significant changes made to the work programme during the year .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting in this instance because I would have preferred the discharge to be postponed .
This report shows that the annual activity report contains insufficient information on the planning , allocation and use of human resources .
Moreover , if a report on the non-deployment and planned use of resources is only required for next year , this takes only limited account of the concern expressed by the European Court of Auditors regarding the repeated cancellations and delays in procurement procedures .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Training Foundation for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors informed the European Parliament that the Foundation 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I welcome the Foundation 's intention to improve the performance of Vocational Education and Training systems in the Foundation partner countries and to develop a common methodology with international organisations and bilateral donors to improve its role .
I feel that the Foundation must set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year so as to enable the European Parliament to assess the Foundation 's performance from one year to the next more effectively .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Foundation must draw up budgetary procedures more rigorously .
This would help avoid the considerable number of budgetary transfers .
I also welcome the Foundation 's initiative to provide the European Parliament with the Internal Audit Service 's Annual Internal Audit Report on the Foundation .
I voted for this report . I did so because the Court of Auditors says it has sufficient assurances that the 2009 accounts of the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , and because on 5 May 2010 Parliament granted the Executive Director of the ETF discharge in respect of the implementation of its 2008 budget .
I agree with the entire content of the report and I would highlight the ETF 's initiative of providing the discharge authority with the Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) Annual Internal Audit Report , as it is a sign of transparency to be followed by all other agencies .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge in respect of the European Training Foundation since , as the report underlines , the management of the accounts and the transactions was , taken as a whole , legal and regular .
However , I think the lack of transparency in recruitment procedures and the inquiry opened by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) are worrying .
I hope that the Foundation will take the appropriate action on this issue in order to improve its performance .
in writing . - ( PT ) The objective of the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) is to contribute to the development of professional training systems , by strengthening cooperation regarding professional training and ensuring the coordination of aid .
The activities of the ETF cover candidate countries for accession to the European Union , the countries of the Western Balkans , of Eastern Europe and Central Asia , and Mediterranean partner countries .
There is a need for both caution and rigour when spending the available funds on issues related to professional training involving countries in the developing world .
I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Training Foundation for the financial year 2009 .
However , worryingly , concern was expressed over the findings of the Court of Auditors as regards the lack of transparency in recruitment procedures and the intervention of the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) , which has opened an inquiry ( OF / 2009 / 0370 ) .
All deficiencies must be overcome in order to achieve greater transparency and to eliminate any uncertainty concerning the work of the European Training Foundation .
In view of the Court of Auditors ' statement that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable , and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Training Foundation for the financial year 2009 .
Clearly , every debate on discharge has its own particular context , and the context of today 's debate is the economic and financial crisis , which has caused financial and budgetary problems for a number of Member States .
Despite these difficulties , I congratulate the Foundation on its intention to improve the performance of Vocational Education and Training ( VET ) systems in the Foundation partner countries ( ' Torino Process ' ) while at the same time undertaking a thorough review of its recruitment procedures .
in writing . - I voted to give the European Training Foundation discharge for its 2009 budget and welcome the Foundation 's initiative of providing the discharge authority with the IAS Annual Internal Audit Report concerning the Foundation .
Parliament considers this to be a sign of transparency and a best practice to be followed by all other Agencies .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the ETF 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the ETF discharge in respect of the implementation of the ETF budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Training Foundation discharge in respect of the implementation of the foundation 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
in writing . - ( DE ) Discharge has been granted .
The report comments positively that the 2009 budget provides a true picture of the Foundation 's financial situation .
The budget was reduced by 0.5 % compared with 2008 .
Further potential savings can be made through increased cooperation with the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( CEDEFOP ) .
The Foundation hopes to deal with the criticised lack of transparency in staff recruitment by means of a thorough review of the process .
I voted in favour of this report and endorsed discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors informed the European Parliament that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency must set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year so as to enable the European Parliament to assess the Agency 's performance from one year to the next more effectively .
I welcome the Agency 's initiative of launching foresight on the safety and health impact of technological innovations in green jobs by 2020 .
I believe that the Agency must reduce the increased cancellation rate and inform the European Parliament of the actions taken .
The Agency must also pay particular attention to the commitments still open at year-end with a view to using unspent funds to cover the subsequent financial and legal obligations .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 budget of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work because I think that , despite some inconsistencies identified by the Court of Auditors in the management of some funds and irregularities with respect to a procurement procedure , it can be said that the management on the whole has been good .
Furthermore , I support the Court of Auditors ' comments regarding the need for improvements in the programming and monitoring of activities with a view to using the available appropriations as efficiently as possible .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge of the budget of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work for the financial year 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
The effects of funding from this agency on measures relating to the health and safety of working women should be highlighted .
in writing . - ( PT ) This agency is responsible for providing useful technical , scientific and economic information on health and safety in the workplace to the Union authorities , to the Member States and to interested parties .
This information is essential to enable assessment of health and safety conditions in the workplace in the Union , and of what Europe 's current best practices in this field are .
Despite the Court of Auditors stating that the agency 's accounts are reliable , and the fact that the agency effectively coordinated the network of agencies during the process of discharging the budget for the financial year 2009 , the rapporteur singled out that it had not provided sufficient information for comparing actions carried out with subsequent years .
I deem such information relevant and there should be an accompanying table annexed to the next report by the Court of Auditors , as is suggested .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors identified an irregularity with respect to a procurement procedure ( use of a framework contract beyond its maximum value ) .
The Agency 's budget for 2009 was EUR 15 100 000 , which is an increase of 0.6 % from its budget of 2008 .
I believe that it is necessary for the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work to address the weaknesses in the procurement procedures .
In view of the Court of Auditors ' statement that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable , and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work for the financial year 2009 .
Clearly , every debate on discharge has its own particular context , and the context of today 's debate is the economic and financial crisis , which has caused financial and budgetary problems for a number of Member States .
Notwithstanding these difficulties , I commend the Agency on the progress it has made , despite a few mistakes , and on its effective work as coordinator of the network of Agencies during the 2009 discharge procedure .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work .
I welcome the Agency 's initiative of providing the discharge authority with the Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) ' s Annual Internal Audit Report .
I congratulate the Agency on its considerable progress in this respect .
Parliament acknowledges that all ' very important ' recommendations issued by the IAS to the Agency were adequately implemented and closed , except the recommendation on validation of accounting systems , which was downgraded to ' important ' as a result of its partial implementation ; it calls , accordingly , on the accounting officer of the Agency to describe the methodology used in the validation of its accounting system ; and it supports the idea of developing cooperation within the existing Inter-Agency Accountants Network in order to come up with common requirements and develop a common methodology for validation of the accounting systems in agencies .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the European Agency for Health and Safety at Work for the financial year 2009 , together with the agency 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the European Agency for Health and Safety at Work discharge in respect of the implementation of the agency budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work discharge in respect of the implementation of the agency 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament welcomes the Agency 's initiative of launching ' foresight ' on the safety and health impact of technological innovations in ' green jobs ' by 2020 .
Parliament notes also that data were collected on the safety and health of women at work .
in writing . - ( DE ) Discharge has been granted .
The European Agency for Safety and Health at Work , in which both employers and employees are represented and which advises companies on simple and effective ways to improve working conditions , is struggling with irregularities in the area of procurement as well as with the budgeting principle of annuality .
On the other hand , the Agency has already given its assurance that it will pay particular attention to these difficulties ; moreover , it has ensured maximum transparency by providing the Annual Internal Audit Report .
I voted in favour of this report and endorsed discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Euratom Supply Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors informed the European Parliament that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
In the absence of an autonomous budget , the Agency is de facto integrated into the Commission .
I agree with the rapporteur that this situation is at odds with the Agency 's Statutes and that it raises the issue of the need to maintain the Agency in its current form and organisation .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the Euratom Supply Agency because it has managed its finances accurately and carefully .
However , I think it is necessary , as the report states , to revise the legal position of the Agency , since it is still integrated into the Commission .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Atomic Energy Community ( Euratom ) works in areas linked to atomic energy , specifically research , and drawing up guidelines for the safe and peaceful use of nuclear energy .
Through the creation of this agency , Euratom aimed to ensure a regular and equitable supply of ores , raw materials and special combustible materials in the European Union .
Despite recent concerns deriving from the accident at the Fukushima plant , nuclear energy forms part of the European ' energy mix ' .
The supply of whatever materials enable the agency 's objectives to be achieved is therefore essential if Euratom is to remain active .
The rapporteur has confirmed that the agency is , in fact , part of Euratom and has no budget of its own , which is cause for reflection about the usefulness of it remaining organised as it is .
I do not have enough information to adopt a position , but I think that the solution that costs the EU least , and offers the greatest efficiency and transparency , should be chosen .

When the budget for Euratom is EUR 5.5 billion , compared to EUR 1.2 billion for renewable energy sources , I refuse , on principle , to grant discharge to the management of Euratom .
It is about time this trend was reversed , hence I abstained on this report .
Firstly , I should like to thank the rapporteur for the superb work he has accomplished .
As we know , financial control on implementing the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the European Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by the European Parliament .
Today 's vote concludes the financial control procedure with the discharge granted in respect of the implementation of the 2009 budget of the Euratom Supply Agency , whose accounts were found to be legal and reliable .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the Euratom Supply Agency .
In doing so , I note that , in 2009 , the agency did not receive any subsidy to cover its operations .
The Commission bore all expenses incurred by the agency for the implementation of the 2009 budget .
This situation has persisted since the creation of the agency in 2008 .
In the absence of an autonomous budget , the agency is de facto integrated into the Commission .
To me , this raises the issue of the need to maintain the agency in its current form and organisation .
in writing . - ( PT ) Taking into account the Court of Auditors ' report on the annual accounts of the Euratom ( European Atomic Energy Community ) Supply Agency ( ESA ) for the financial year 2009 , together with the ESA 's replies , I voted for this decision , which grants the Executive Director of the ESA discharge in respect of the implementation of the ESA budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Director-General of the Euratom Supply Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the agency 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director-General of the Euratom Supply Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament underlines that the Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable , and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting on the discharge of the Euratom Supply Agency , which has the task of ensuring the European Union is provided with fissile materials ( including any stores ) .
According to this report , there are currently inconsistencies as regards the present organisation of the Agency and its legal form .
This raises the issue of whether the Agency needs to be maintained in its current form and with its current organisation .
I would have liked to have seen this matter clarified , particularly in view of the current Europe-wide rethink on nuclear power .
I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors informed the European Parliament that the Foundation 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I welcome the Foundation 's intention to set out a comparison of operations carried out during the year for which discharge is to be granted and in the previous financial year .
This will enable the European Parliament to assess more effectively its performance from one year to the next .
I believe that the ex-post assessment exercise of the Foundation 's 2005-2008 work programme is extremely useful for the Foundation .
This exercise gives the Foundation helpful lessons and recommendations with regard to the challenges facing its future programming phase .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Foundation must further develop its Eurofound Performance Monitoring System to ensure that the results of its performance monitoring are fed back into management decision-making and planning .
I also believe that the Foundation must take steps to improve its evaluation and review procedure in the area of procurement to avoid future repetition of the assessment errors and inconsistencies identified by the Court of Auditors .
Furthermore , the Foundation must make sure that funds are only used when appropriations are approved .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions because the audit conducted by the Court of Auditors on the accounts and the underlying transactions shows that the Foundation has done correct , timely and transparent work .
Notwithstanding some weaknesses in recruitment and procurement procedures , I remain steadfast in my belief that there are good prospects for future improvement and that the Foundation is committed to putting them into action .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge of the budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Eurofound ) for the financial year 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
Although the Court of Auditors has declared the activities in relation to its annual accounts legal and regular , it should be highlighted that there were major gaps in the first accounts submitted by Eurofound .
In future , Eurofound should correctly implement year-end procedures , and respect the deadlines for submitting its accounts , by means of additional training and resources .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Eurofound ) is a tripartite Union body , set up in 1975 with the aim of contributing to planning and establishing better working and living conditions in Europe .
More specifically , it assesses and analyses working and living conditions , it gives authorised opinions and advice to key actors in the field of EU social policy , it contributes to improving quality of life , and it provides information on developments and trends , especially those that bring about changes .
The rapporteur was concerned about the transparency of Eurofound 's human resources management , and these concerns were echoed by the other members of the Committee on Budgets .
I think there would be advantage in those concerns being dispelled .
I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions for the financial year 2009 .
The Foundation 's budget for the year 2009 was EUR 20 200 000 , which is a decrease of 3.8 % from the financial year 2008 .
However , the Court of Auditors revealed errors and anomalies in the evaluation of one open procurement procedure which affected its quality .
The Foundation must therefore take steps to improve its evaluation and review procedure to avoid the repetition of such errors in the future .
It is regrettable that the Court of Auditors was compelled to comment on the budgetary and financial statement of the Foundation , especially to the effect that the initial provisional accounts presented by the Foundation contained serious shortcomings , pointing to significant weaknesses in the financial organisation of the Foundation .
I believe that the observations made and concern expressed must be taken into account and appropriate action taken .
Both the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control issued a positive opinion on the implementation of the budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions for the financial year 2009 .
For these reasons , Parliament today voted to grant discharge for the financial year 2009 .
However , I feel it is important to highlight the presence of some errors and anomalies that the Court of Auditors revealed in its evaluation of one open procurement procedure , which affected its quality .
I therefore add my voice to the call for the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions to take steps to improve its evaluation and review procedure .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working conditions but call on the Foundation to make sure that appropriations are made available only when the corresponding assigned revenue has been received ; notes , in fact , that the Court of Auditors reported that , contrary to its Financial Regulation ( Article 19 ) , the Foundation 's budget did not provide for specific headings for various programmes financed from assigned revenue ; notes , moreover , that under a programme financed by assigned revenue , the Foundation committed EUR 184 000 , although the assigned revenue actually received was only EUR 29 000 .
I regret that the Court of Auditors was compelled to comment on the budgetary and financial statement of the Foundation , especially to the effect that the initial provisional accounts presented by the Foundation contained serious shortcomings , pointing to significant weaknesses in the financial organisation of the Foundation ; welcomes the Foundation 's confirmation that it will ensure , through additional training and resources , that its implementation of year-end procedures and its adherence to the deadlines for the presentation of its accounts is correct
in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions discharge in respect of the implementation of the Foundation 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions discharge in respect of the implementation of the Foundation 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament notes that the Court of Auditors revealed errors and anomalies in the evaluation of one open procurement procedure which affected its quality .
Parliament therefore calls on the Foundation to take steps to improve its evaluation and review procedure to avoid repetition of such errors in the future .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting on this discharge .
The report lists a series of deficiencies , but at the same time it refers to assurances by the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions that it will effectively remedy these .
While this is to be welcomed , in view of the quality of the deficiencies ( shortcomings in recruitment procedures were found as far back as 2006 , the provisional accounts submitted to the European Court of Auditors contained serious errors resulting from weaknesses in the financial organisation ) it is not possible to vote in favour of discharge .
Qualified personnel should subject the Foundation in Dublin to a detailed audit , and we should vote on discharge only after the necessary changes resulting from this have been made .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of Eurojust for the financial year 2009 .
According to information provided by the Court of Auditors , Eurojust 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I welcome the Agency 's initiative to include Key Performance Indicators in its 2010 unit plans .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency must inform the European Parliament on these key indicators and their links to Eurojust 's objectives , budget and work programme .
Linking indicators to the objectives , budget and work programme of the Agency will allow stakeholders to evaluate Eurojust 's performance better .
It is noted that the Court of Auditors did not comment on the level of carryovers and cancellations of appropriations in 2009 .
I congratulate the Agency on establishing measures to estimate the market value of relevant products and services before commencing a procurement procedure .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to Eurojust since , as the report shows , it has managed its resources extremely well and , by using many indicators to explain its financial situation , has also done so extremely transparently .
I do however regret the continued requests that the Court of Auditors has had to make regarding public procurement and recruitment procedures , which have still not received an adequate response or solution .
in writing . - ( PT ) Eurojust is a European Union body which helps researchers and the representatives of public prosecutors across the EU work together in the fight against cross-border criminal activity .
It plays a key role in the exchange of information and in extradition processes .
The particular importance and sensitivity of these issues makes it necessary that Eurojust have means enabling it to pursue them effectively , although the necessary means are never enough , as is obvious when dealing with justice and crime fighting .
Effective human resources management appears to be Eurojust 's main problem .
The fact that 24 % of posts in Eurojust are vacant and various management positions are occupied by ineffective personnel gives rise to fears about the continuity and efficient pursuit of Eurojust 's activities .
in writing . - ( LT ) I abstained from the vote on this document , although the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of Eurojust for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I abstained because the Court of Auditors again found deficiencies in procurement procedures , as in the previous three years .
The Court of Auditors has once again also noted shortcomings in the planning and implementation of recruitment procedures , while the subsidy to the Agency in 2009 was 6.4 % more than in 2008 .
Financial control on implementing the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the European Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by Parliament .
Today 's vote sees Eurojust granted discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
I voted in favour because , following audits carried out by the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control , the Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to Eurojust and congratulate the agency for establishing measures to estimate the market value of relevant products / services before commencing a procurement procedure .
I consider this initiative an important practice to be followed by other agencies .
I welcome , in addition , the agency 's annual procurement plan for 2009 which greatly helped Eurojust 's units and services in the management of their tenders .
I consider that these initiatives improve the authorising officer 's guidance and control .
in writing . - This grants the Administrative Director of Eurojust discharge in respect of the implementation of Eurojust 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Administrative Director of Eurojust discharge in respect of the implementation of Eurojust 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament notes with satisfaction that the Court of Auditors does not comment on the level of carryovers and cancellations of appropriations in 2009 and that the discharge for the implementation of the budget for the Agency should be further based on its performance throughout the year .
in writing . - ( DE ) I did not vote in favour of the discharge .
This was mainly because , according to the report , just four of the 26 recommendations made by the Internal Audit Service in 2008 have been implemented and the implementation of 15 of the other recommendations is already more than 12 months overdue .
This circumstance must be remedied immediately before any further discharge can be granted .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document and endorsed discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( FRONTEX ) for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors reported that the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
In June 2009 , the Management Board of the Agency adopted a multiannual plan for the period 2010-2013 , which will enable the Agency to plan its activities and risk-assess them more effectively .
I welcome the Agency 's initiative of launching , in 2009 , the so-called Frontex Performance Management System to better inform the Agency 's Governing Board by providing it with data on the impact of the Agency operations .
I also agree with the rapporteur that it is necessary for the Agency to improve its financial management with regard to the reimbursement of costs incurred by Member States by identifying , with those Member States , deficiencies and difficulties so as to implement , together , the appropriate solutions .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) because , as the report states , its accounts and transactions , taken as a whole , are shown in the analysis to be positive , regular and legal .
However , I must agree with the report where it states that due to a number of inconsistencies , procedures lacking transparency and carryovers revealed in the budget , the Agency should improve its financial management .
in writing . - ( PT ) The duties of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) are to support Member States in the training of border guards , including the establishment of common training guidelines ; to carry out risk analysis ; to monitor the development of relevant research on the subject of controlling and observation of external borders ; to support the Member States in any circumstances requiring increased operational and technical assistance at external borders ; and to provide the Member States with the necessary support in the area of mass return operations .
The increasing migration pressure on the Union 's borders and the need for coordination between Member States amply justifies Frontex being equipped with sufficient means for carrying out the duties with which it has been entrusted .
However , I share the rapporteur 's concerns about the 27 % overstatement of the pre-financing costs to border authorities highlighted by the Court of Auditors and the advances made in excess .
in writing . - ( LT ) I abstained from the vote on this document , although the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( FRONTEX ) for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I abstained because the European Parliament is concerned that the Court of Auditors has reported carry-overs which were already reported in its 2006 , 2007 and 2008 annual reports , and regrets , in particular , the high level of carry-overs and cancellations since 2006 .
The Court of Auditors also reported , for the second year running , that the Agency paid out amounts on the basis of unilateral grant decisions signed by the Agency , while the rules in force make no provision for this type of instrument .
The Court of Auditors reported the overstatement by 27 % of the costs for pre-financing to border authorities in the 8 cases audited .
For the activities which ended in 2009 , more than 40 recovery orders had to be issued to recover advances made in excess .
The Agency 's budget for the year 2009 was nearly 28 % greater than the previous year .
I believe that the observations made and concern expressed must be taken into account and appropriate action taken .
Financial control on implementing the European Union budget takes place on three levels : internal control , within each institution ; external control , carried out by the European Court of Auditors ; and a discharge procedure carried out by Parliament .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of Frontex 's budget for the financial year 2009 because the audits carried out by the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control showed that the Agency 's transactions were all perfectly legal and regular .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to Frontex , but observe that the Court of Auditors reported , for the second year running , that the agency paid out amounts on the basis of unilateral grant decisions signed by the agency , while the rules in force make no provision for this type of instrument .
I note that the amount paid out was more than EUR 28 000 000 in 2009 , and was EUR 17 000 000 in 2008 .
I welcome , nevertheless , the agency 's initiative , made in response to the Court 's observation , of signing a framework Partnership Agreement with Member State border authorities .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Director of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament underlines that the Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
Parliament calls on the Agency to improve its financial management with regard to the reimbursement of costs incurred by Member States by identifying , with those Member States , the roots of the problem so as to adopt shared solutions .
Due to increased immigration flows , Frontex is required to play an active role in guarding the European borders .
According to Frontex , 95 % of illegal immigrants entering Europe enter via Greece .
Deporting an illegal immigrant costs EUR 6 500 and , under Dublin II , the country of entry is responsible for their deportation .
The Member States on the external borders of the EU are all under pressure from immigration and have turned into ' immigration camps ' for Europe .
We need to support Frontex both financially and operationally and make the external borders of the EU more secure .
We also need a mechanism for allocating the overall number of immigrants between all Member States .
The vote on this budget discharge definitively approves the increase in the expenditure of the European agency Frontex on its task of controlling our external borders .
That significant increase in the budget between 2006 and 2009 was both necessary and legitimate .
It corresponds to a need to strengthen coordination of the Member States in the fight against illegal immigration .
As the symbol of EU migration policy , Frontex must ensure that its budget is spent on concrete measures to control migration flows .
I welcome , in this connection , the launch of a performance management system to give the agency 's operations greater visibility .
The outcome-oriented system helps to compare operations over time and hence to evaluate them .
This ' yes ' vote is also , in my view , a strong political message from the European Parliament in favour of the European immigration policy developed under the French Presidency of the Union .
A sovereign responsibility that previously fell to the Member States , border security is now handled at European level .
This shared management of borders is an essential safeguard allowing for the full exercise of one of the EU 's fundamental freedoms : the free movement of persons within the Schengen area .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting .
The annual accounts for 2009 have been declared reliable on all essential points .
Frontex also initiated new initiatives to analyse its measures , including their impact , and to improve the transparency and objectivity of staff selection .
However , the European Court of Auditors found deficiencies again in 2009 that had already been highlighted every year since 2006 .
This repeated failure to address these deficiencies and successfully remedy them is unacceptable .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors judged that the Authority 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I welcome the fact that most of the activities and assets related to the EGNOS and Galileo programmes were transferred to the Commission in December 2009 .
It is noted that the final budget for 2009 did not include information on the Authority 's revenue .
Irregularities were also found in staff selection procedures .
The Agency must redress these deficiencies and inform the European Parliament as laid down .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 budget of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority because it has been well managed in accounting terms and the figures provided are considered reliable .
However , some irregularities remain in the field of human resources , particularly in terms of staff selection procedures , which are thought to lack transparency .
I therefore hope that the aforementioned Authority will strive to make improvements in this area .
in writing . - ( PT ) The duties of the Global Navigation Satellite Systems ( GNSS ) Supervisory Authority are to oversee the management of public interest with regard to related European programmes and to act as their regulatory body .
The competences of the Galileo joint venture , which came to an end on 31 December 2006 , were transferred to it from 1 January 2007 .
Temporarily based in Brussels , the regulation provides for it undertaking , inter alia , the following duties , which are currently being revised : management of the contract with the operator charged with running the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ( EGNOS ) , inherited from the Galileo joint venture ; coordination of action by Member States on the frequencies necessary for the system to operate ; cooperation with the Commission on drawing up proposals in relation to the programme ; modernisation of the system ; management of all aspects in relation to the system 's protection and safety ; activities as European authority for GNSS safety approval ; and management of the research activities necessary for developing and promoting European GNSS programmes .
This list of competences denotes the importance conferred on the GNSS Supervisory Authority and reinforces the demands placed on it to keep its activities and spending within the assigned budget , and to keep to the rules governing the budget 's implementation .
in writing . - ( LT ) I abstained from the vote on this document , although the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority for the financial year 2009 .
The Authority 's budget for the year 2009 was EUR 44 400 000 , which is a decrease of 64 % from the financial year 2008 .
I abstained because Parliament regrets the deficiencies in staff selection procedures , which put at risk the transparency of these procedures .
It is necessary to make procedures more transparent , so that in future uncertainty as regards the activities of this Authority can be eliminated .
Through today 's vote Parliament has granted the Executive Director of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority discharge in respect of the implementation of the Authority 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
I voted in favour on the basis of the evaluations and reports completed by the Court of Auditors and the Committee for Budgetary Control , which declared that they have obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European GNSS Supervisory Authority because the Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority discharge in respect of the implementation of the Authority 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the European GNSS Supervisory Authority discharge in respect of the implementation of the Authority 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament stresses deficiencies in staff selection procedures , which often put the transparency of these procedures at risk .
Parliament notes also that the final budget published by the Authority on 31 March 2010 did not reflect the final budget for 2009 approved by the Administrative Board and did not include its revenue .
Parliament therefore urges the Authority to remedy the situation and inform the discharge authority of the change .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
According to information provided by the Court of Auditors , the Joint Undertaking 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Joint Undertaking is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
The introduction of these systems needs to be successfully completed as a matter of urgency .
In 2009 the Joint Undertaking 's utilisation rates for commitment and payment appropriations were 81 % and 20 % respectively .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Joint Undertaking is still in a start-up period and therefore understand the relatively low utilisation rate for payment appropriations .
I also feel that , in view of the size of its budget and the complexity of its tasks , the Joint Undertaking should consider establishing an audit committee , reporting directly to the governing board .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the Artemis Joint Undertaking because it has managed its finances extremely well for an agency which is still in the start-up period .
I therefore think that improvements can be made in the future and that the inconsistencies reported in the accounts for this financial year can be corrected .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Artemis Joint Undertaking will implement a common technological initiative ( CTI ) in the area of incorporated information technology systems .
This public-private partnership is essentially aimed at supporting the cofinancing of research initiatives at European level , as well as improving cooperation between the various operators in the sector .
As the rapporteur rightly points out , it was created with a view to defining and implementing a ' research agenda ' for the development of key technologies for embedded computing systems across different application areas in order to strengthen European competitiveness and sustainability , and allow the emergence of new markets and societal applications .
The company is still in its infancy , allowing us great expectations in relation to its future achievements , and for the hope that it will do to the investment being made justice .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Joint Undertaking final 2009 budget included commitment appropriations of EUR 46 000 000 and payment appropriations of EUR 8 000 000 , and the utilisation rates for commitment and payment appropriations were 81 % and 20 % respectively .
I believe that the Joint Undertaking is still in a start-up period and therefore understand the relatively low utilisation rate for payment appropriations .
Both the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control issued a positive opinion on the implementation of the budget of the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
For these reasons , Parliament today voted to grant discharge for the financial year 2009 .
The audits carried out showed that the accounts of the Joint Undertaking were reliable and that the underlying transactions were legal and regular .
I do however think it would be helpful if the Joint Undertaking heeded the call for it to improve its documentation of IT processes and activities and the mapping of IT risks , and also to develop a business continuity plan and a data protection policy .
in writing . - I voted to grant discharge to the Artemis Joint Undertaking but I believe that , in view of the size of its budget and the complexity of its tasks , the Joint Undertaking should consider establishing an audit committee reporting directly to the governing board .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the Artemis Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the implementation of the Joint Undertaking 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the Artemis Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the implementation of the Joint Undertaking 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament underlines that the Joint Undertaking was set up in December 2007 to define and implement a ' Research Agenda ' for the development of key technologies for embedded computing systems across different application areas in order to strengthen European competitiveness and sustainability , and allow the emergence of new markets and societal applications .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
According to information provided by the Court of Auditors , the Joint Undertaking 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Joint Undertaking is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
The introduction of these systems needs to be completed .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that , in view of the size of its budget and the complexity of its tasks , the Joint Undertaking should consider establishing an audit committee , reporting directly to the governing board .
I also believe that the Joint Undertaking must further develop provisions on membership and cofinancing .
I hope that in future the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking will accelerate the development , validation and demonstration of clean air transport technologies in the EU , so that these can be deployed at the earliest opportunity .
in writing . - ( BG ) I have a few comments to make about the operation of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking , which is why I am not supporting the discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
First of all , ever since the Joint Undertaking was set up in 2007 , no agreement has been signed yet with Belgium concerning office accommodation , privileges and immunities and other support .
How can a company operate properly without these basic needs being guaranteed ?
It comes as no surprise that the research activities pre-financed in 2008 were not fully implemented during 2009 and that only 65 % of the pre-financing was used .
However , what concerns me the most is that the Joint Undertaking had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems , which jeopardises transparency in the spending of money coming from European taxpayers .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 budget of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking because , despite a number of irregularities in the Undertaking 's budget , I think that we can be confident of future improvements in its auditing performance since it is still in the start-up phase .
in writing . - ( PT ) The creation of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking is due to the need to promote the development , validation and demonstration of clean air transport technologies in the EU , to be implemented as soon as possible .
As with the Artemis Joint Undertaking , it is only just starting out .
This does not mean that there are not already procedures and practices in need of correction , in particular in areas concerning budgetary structure , as is rightly highlighted by the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
The Clean Sky Joint Undertaking was set up in December 2007 to accelerate the development , validation and demonstration of clean air transport technologies in the EU , so that these can be deployed at the earliest opportunity .
The Joint Undertaking is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
The Joint Undertaking final 2009 budget included commitment appropriations of EUR 91 000 000 and payment appropriations of EUR 60 000 000 , and the utilisation rates for commitment and payment appropriations were 98 % and 1 % respectively .
I believe that the Joint Undertaking is still in a start-up period and therefore understand the relatively low utilisation rate for payment appropriations .
Both the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control have issued a positive opinion on the implementation of the budget of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
For these reasons , Parliament today voted to grant discharge for the financial year 2009 .
The audits carried out showed that the budget of the Joint Venture was reliable and that the underlying transactions were legal and regular .
I do however think it would be helpful if the Joint Undertaking heeded the call for it to complete the implementation of its internal controls and financial information system , above all in view of the size of its budget and the complexity of its tasks .
Mr President , I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
I am aware that the Joint Undertaking is still in a start-up period .
Unfortunately , there have been many delays in the projects at this stage , with 65 % of pre-financing having been used .
In addition , no decisions have yet been taken regarding the headquarters in Belgium , which makes it significantly more difficult for the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking to function efficiently .
in writing . - I voted to grant discharge to the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking .
I recognise that the Joint Undertaking is still in a start-up period .
I am concerned , nevertheless , that the research activities pre-financed by the Commission in 2008 on behalf of the Joint Undertaking were not fully implemented during 2009 and that , as a result of delays in the projects , only EUR 8 700 000 or 65 % of the EUR 13 600 000 pre-financing was used .
I am particularly concerned that the adoption , structure and presentation of the approved budget of the Joint Undertaking for 2009 were not in line with Regulation ( EC ) No 71 / 2008 setting up the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking , or with the Financial Rules of the Joint Undertaking .
I therefore urge the Joint Undertaking to rapidly remedy this grave deficiency .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the implementation of the Joint Undertaking 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament is of the opinion that , in view of the size of its budget and the complexity of its tasks , the Joint Undertaking should establish an audit committee , reporting directly to the Governing Board .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Joint Undertaking for the implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines for the financial year 2009 .
According to information provided by the Court of Auditors , the Joint Undertaking 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Joint Undertaking is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
The introduction of these systems needs to be completed .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Joint Undertaking should further develop provisions on membership and cofinancing and complete the implementation of its internal controls and financial information system .
I hope that in future the Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the drug development process and will help the pharmaceutical sector produce more effective and safer innovative medicines .
in writing . - ( BG ) In my view , the Joint Undertaking for the implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines ought to be completely financed by pharmaceutical companies or by its other members who have the biggest interest in the operation of this undertaking .
For this reason , I do not support the discharge in respect of the implementation of this undertaking 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the Joint Undertaking for the Implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines because , as the report shows , the Court of Auditors has deemed the Undertaking 's accounts and the underlying transactions to be reliable .
I think , however , that even though it is to some extent justifiable as it is still in the start-up phase , the Undertaking should complete the implementation of its control systems and operate more carefully and transparently in the coming years .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Joint Undertaking is aimed at the process of developing pharmaceuticals that are more effective and efficient , so that the pharmaceutical sector can produce innovative medicines that are safer and more effective .
Therefore , the Joint Undertaking 's objectives are to contribute to the delivery of the Seventh Framework Programme , and to supporting pharmaceutical research and development in Member States , and in countries associated with the Seventh Framework Programme .
It encourages participation by small and medium-sized enterprises in its activities , and cooperation between the private sector and universities .
It is still at the embryonic stage , so we cannot foresee clearly how its budgeting will be implemented in future .
However , it should continue to finish off its internal control and information systems , in particular .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the Joint Undertaking for the implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking was set up in February 2007 to significantly improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the drug development process with the long-term aim of helping the pharmaceutical sector to produce more effective and safer innovative medicines .
The Joint Undertaking is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
At the same time , the Joint Undertaking final 2009 budget included commitment appropriations of EUR 82 000 000 and payment appropriations of EUR 82 000 000 , and the utilisation rates for commitment and payment appropriations were 97 % and 1 % respectively .
In view of the Court of Auditors ' statement that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable , and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular , I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Joint Undertaking for the Implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines for the financial year 2009 .
As we know , every debate on discharge has its own particular context , and the context of today 's debate is the economic and financial crisis , which has caused financial and budgetary problems for a number of Member States .
Therefore , also in view of more effective controls , I join in the request made to the Joint Undertaking to include in its Financial Rules a specific reference to the powers of the Internal Audit Service of the Commission as its internal auditor .
in writing . - I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Joint Undertaking for the implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines for the financial year 2009 .
I urge the Joint Undertaking to complete the implementation of its internal controls and financial information system as a matter of urgency .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the Joint Undertaking for the implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines discharge in respect of the implementation of the Joint Undertaking 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Through today 's resolution Parliament grants Executive Director of the Joint Undertaking for the Implementation of the Joint Technology Initiative on Innovative Medicines discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament calls on the Joint Technology Initiative to include in its Financial Rules a specific reference to the powers of the Internal Audit Service of the Commission as its internal auditor , on the basis of the provision set out in the framework Financial Regulation for Community bodies .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the SESAR Joint Undertaking .
According to information provided by the Court of Auditors , SESAR 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Joint Undertaking is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
The introduction of these systems needs to be completed .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Joint Undertaking must begin to put in place an integrated management system , allowing costs to be allocated to specific work packages and funding sources of operational costs to be identified .
Furthermore , it is important to set out the conditions under which unspent funds would be transferred to the following year .
in writing . - ( BG ) The Joint Undertaking to develop the new generation European air traffic management system ( SESAR ) is an important initiative .
However , at a time of financial crisis and difficulties in many Member States , I do not think that it is appropriate for us to be spending millions of euros in this manner .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the SESAR Joint Undertaking because that recently formed undertaking has convinced the Court of Auditors of its reliability .
The effort that the institution is making to complete the implementation of its internal control systems is already well known , but I think further endeavours ought to be made in this area in order to guarantee the transparency and reliability of the accounts .
in writing . - ( PT ) This Joint Undertaking aims to modernise the European air traffic management system , and it should bring together the Union 's efforts towards research and development under the scope of the Single European Sky Air Traffic Management ( ATM ) Research ( SESAR ) .
The safety of Europeans , who increasingly use the services of airlines , as well as of airline employees , necessitates a particular level of performance in seeking the best solutions for managing this type of traffic , as well as monitoring and comparing the methodologies already applied in the various Member States , with a view to everyone adopting the best practices and safe , economical and innovative solutions .
As with other companies in their early life , SESAR has not yet completely put its internal controls or its financial information systems in full working order .
It will need to do so as soon as possible .
I endorsed this document , because the Committee responsible decided to approve the closure of the accounts of the SESAR Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Joint Undertaking final 2009 budget included commitment appropriations of EUR 325 000 000 and payment appropriations of EUR 157 000 000 , and the utilisation rates for commitment and payment appropriations were 97.1 % and 43.2 % respectively .
The Court of Auditors found that important steps were taken in 2009 to establish control systems , but expresses concern that an integrated tool to manage financial , budget and operational information was not in place at year-end .
However , in response the Joint Undertaking stated that financial systems were ready and in place by May 2010 .
Cases where internal controls do not operate correctly must be eliminated .
Notwithstanding a few gaps and irregularities revealed by the Court of Auditors during its analysis and assessment of the budget of the SESAR Joint Undertaking , I voted in favour of granting discharge for the financial year 2009 .
However , I think that , in order to avoid the same mistakes being made in future procedures , SESAR should complete and implement internal control systems and a financial information system which would allow for the most reliable and accurate assessment possible of the budgetary transactions for each financial year .
in writing . - I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the SESAR Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2009 .
Nevertheless , I am concerned that an integrated management system - allowing costs to be allocated to specific work packages and funding sources for operational costs to be identified - was not in place by December 2009 .
in writing . - This grants the Executive Director of the SESAR Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the implementation of the Joint Undertaking 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Executive Director of the SESAR Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament welcomes the fact that the Court of Auditors found the Joint Undertaking 's annual accounts for 2009 to be reliable and the underlying transactions to be , in all material respects , legal and regular .
Responsibility for public statements made by MEPs lies , first and foremost , with the people who make them .
Intervention from Parliament in terms of analysing the context , the occasion or whether the person who made the public statement was entitled to do so or not only happens in exceptional cases .
However , this action is obligatory when the person who made the statement is held accountable for the content of the idea expressed .
Such an exceptional case , which it was the European Parliament 's duty to investigate , is that involving MEP Luigi de Magistris , summoned before the courts in his own country in connection with an interview given to an Italian newspaper as a member of a political party represented in European structures .
Looking beyond making the statement or its implications in domestic policy terms , the right of an MEP to express himself or herself must be recognised as a freedom and therefore defended .
Just like Luigi de Magistris , any other MEP enjoys immunity from any inquiry or detention resulting from opinions expressed or votes cast .
In this respect , any attempt to prevent MEPs from expressing their opinions on matters of public interest cannot be approved in a democratic society .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report is on the request for defence of the immunity and privileges of our fellow Member , Mr De Magistris , requested under the terms of Articles 8 and 9 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Union , and Article 68 of the Constitution of the Italian Republic , as amended by Constitutional Law No 3 of 29 October 1993 , because he was summoned before the Court of Benevento by a Member of this House , Mr Mastella , following an interview with an Italian newspaper .
Taking into account established practice in this Parliament , considering that the legal proceedings are of a civil or administrative law nature , and mindful of the Opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I am voting in favour of waiving the parliamentary immunity of our fellow Member , Mr De Magistris .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report , because the Committee on Legal Affairs believes that in giving the interview in question , Mr Luigi de Magistris was acting in performance of his duties as a Member of the European Parliament and carrying out political activities by expressing his opinion on a matter of public interest to his constituents .
Attempts to prevent Members of Parliament from expressing their opinions on matters of legitimate public interest and concern , and from criticising their political opponents , by bringing legal proceedings are unacceptable in a democratic society and represent a breach of Article 8 of the Protocol , which is intended to protect Members ' freedom of expression when performing their duties in the interests of Parliament as an institution of the European Union .
On the basis of the above considerations and pursuant to Article 6 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , after considering the reasons for and against defending the Member 's immunity , the Committee on Legal Affairs recommends that the European Parliament should defend the parliamentary immunity of Mr Luigi De Magistris .
in writing . - I voted for this report because the committee responsible considers that , in giving the interview in question , Luigi de Magistris was acting in the performance of his duties as Member of the European Parliament and carrying out political activities by expressing his opinion on a matter of public interest to his constituents .
To seek to prevent Members of Parliament from expressing their opinions on matters of legitimate public interest and concern and from criticising their political opponents by bringing legal proceedings is unacceptable in a democratic society and in breach of Article 8 of the Protocol , which is intended to protect Members ' freedom of expression in the performance of their duties in the interests of Parliament as an institution of the European Union .
in writing . - Mr de Magistris was summoned to court on charges of slander .
In connection with this , he asked the European Parliament for protection of his parliamentary immunity and privileges .
In line with the report , the Committee on Legal Affairs recommends that the European Parliament should protect the immunity of Mr de Magistris .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Parliament has received a request to waive the parliamentary immunity of our fellow Member , Mr De Magistris , who has been summoned by the Court of Benevento , on behalf of Mr Mastella , Member of the European Parliament , in relation to an interview which Mr De Magistris gave to an Italian newspaper , on 31 October 2009 .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has made a statement on the issue , having adopted a report in which it was decided not to lift parliamentary immunity .
In fact , it was thought Mr De Magistris was carrying out his duties as a Member of the European Parliament when he made his comments .
According to the report , he was acting in performance of his duties as Member of the European Parliament and carrying out political activities by expressing his opinion on a matter of public interest to his constituents .
I voted in favour because I advocate freedom of expression for Members when performing their duties , and in order to defend the interests of the European Parliament as an institution .
However , I should add that I believe those with political responsibilities in general , including Members , should always tell the truth and use language respectful of their interlocutors , which does not always happen .
in writing . - This is to defend the immunity of Mr de Magistris , as in giving the interview in question Mr de Magistris was acting in performance of his duties as an MEP and carrying out political activities by expressing his opinion on a matter of public interest to his constituents .
in writing . - ( BG ) I defend the privileges and immunity of Bruno Gollnisch and I think that the persecution he is being subjected to is of a purely political nature .
His immunity must be defended so that he can continue to carry out his duties as a fully-fledged Member of the European Parliament .
In such cases , a vote is taken on defending an MEP 's immunity during a part-session ( naturally when he or she belongs to a large political group ) , which leads me to think that double standards are occasionally applied in the European Parliament , thereby sweeping away confidence in the entire institution .
You know how committed I am to democratic values ...
Bruno Gollnisch , MEP and intellectual guru of the Front National , has requested the defence of his parliamentary immunity in connection with measures applied by the French authorities as part of a criminal investigation involving Mr Gollnisch in his role as President of the Front National in the Rhône-Alpes Regional Council and in which the International League against Racism and Anti-Semitism brought a claim for compensation in January 2009 for incitement to racial hatred .
Article 8 of the chapter on law and procedure on the immunity of Members of the European Parliament stipulates that the latter shall not be subject to any form of inquiry , detention or legal proceedings in respect of opinions expressed or votes cast by them in the performance of their duties .
Article 26 ( 2 ) of the Constitution of the French Republic stipulates the same thing .
At a time when the Front National is riding high in the French polls and when one may question that party 's move into the mainstream ( in both media and political terms ) , I am satisfied that the European Parliament will not defend Mr Gollnisch 's parliamentary immunity and have called for it to be lifted so that the courts can do their job .
This report is on the request for the defence of the privileges and immunity of our fellow Member , Mr Gollnisch .
The request was made when the French police attempted to arrest him , in order to appear before the French judicial authorities in a case concerning the expression of political opinions .
The case concerns an accusation of incitement to racial hatred made by the International League against Racism and Anti-Semitism ( LICRA ) following the publication of a press release on the site of the Front National Group in the Rhône-Alpes Regional Council , of which Mr Gollnisch was president .
Taking into account established practice in this Parliament and the Opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I agree with the rapporteur 's position and am voting in favour of waiving the parliamentary immunity of our fellow Member , Mr Gollnisch .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report , because Article 8 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Union was not invoked by Bruno Gollnisch in his request for defence of immunity and it is not applicable in this case .
In order to decide whether or not to defend parliamentary immunity , Parliament applies its own consistent principles .
The Committee responsible has found no evidence of a sufficiently serious and precise suspicion that the case has been brought with the intention of causing political damage to the Member .
Secondly , the case does not come within the scope of Bruno Gollnisch 's political activities as member of the European Parliament .
It concerns instead activities of a purely regional and local nature of Bruno Gollnisch as regional councillor for Rhône-Alpes , a mandate which is distinct from that of a Member of the European Parliament .
Thirdly , Bruno Gollnisch has given an explanation of the publication of the incriminated press release by his political group in the Rhône-Alpes Regional Council , stating that it had been written by the Front National team in that region , including its head of communications .
The application of parliamentary immunity to such a situation is considered to constitute an undue extension of those rules , which are intended to avoid any interference with the functioning and independence of Parliament .
Finally , it is not for Parliament but for the competent judicial authorities to decide , whilst respecting all democratic guarantees , to what extent French law on incitement to racial hatred has been broken and what the judicial consequences might be .
Having considered all the arguments , the Committee on Legal Affairs recommends that the European Parliament should waive the parliamentary immunity of Bruno Gollnisch .
in writing . - After considering the reasons for and against defending the Member 's parliamentary immunity , I agree with the recommendation of the Committee on Legal Affairs that Parliament should not defend the immunity of Bruno Gollnisch .
Stigmatisation and incitement to hatred on the grounds of religious affiliations are considered offences in France and this situation is equivalent to flagrante delicto .
Mr Gollnisch publicly took a stand in support of an outrageous press release .
This press release equates Muslims with thugs .
It talks about ' invasion and destruction of our cultural values by Islam ' .
Mr Gollnisch will be able to present his defence .
Waiving his immunity allows this to happen .
I am therefore voting against his request to protect his parliamentary immunity .
Mr Gollnisch has requested that the European Parliament defend his parliamentary immunity in connection with measures which he claims restrict his freedom applied by the French authorities as part of the judicial investigation of an action and claim for compensation ( plainte avec constitution de partie civile ) brought by the International League Against Racism and Anti-Semitism on 26 January 2009 against an unnamed person for incitement to racial hatred .
It was concluded that the case does not fall within the scope of Mr Gollnisch 's political activities as Member of the European Parliament , concerning instead activities of a purely regional and local nature as a Rhône-Alpes regional councillor , a mandate to which Mr Gollnisch was elected by direct universal suffrage and which is distinct from that of Member of the European Parliament .
There is no evidence in the investigation carried out of fumus persecutionis : in other words , the intention of causing political damage to the Member .
I voted for this report , which decides not to defend Mr Gollnisch 's privileges and immunity , leaving it to the competent judicial authorities to decide , whilst respecting all democratic guarantees , to what extent French law on incitement to racial hatred has been broken and what the judicial consequences might be .
in writing . - The case concerned does not fall within the scope of Mr Gollnisch 's political activities as an MEP but it relates to his purely regional and local capacity as Rhône-Alpes regional councillor .
Thus we have decided not to defend the immunity .
in writing . - ( BG ) I defend the privileges and immunity of Bruno Gollnisch and I think that the persecution he is being subjected to is of a purely political nature .
His immunity must be defended so that he can continue to carry out his duties as a fully-fledged Member of the European Parliament .
This is why I voted against the withdrawal of his immunity .
in writing . - I voted against the removal of the Parliamentary immunity of Bruno Gollnisch because : 1 .
I believe in free speech and the words complained of were not incitements to violence and were not abusive or insulting .
The comments were about the intolerance of Islamic regimes towards people deemed to be heretics .
2 .
No debate was allowed before these most important votes ( dealing with the fundamental rights of an MEP ) were taken .
3 .
The proposal to lift Bruno Gollnisch 's immunity ( and the eventual decision to lift it ) were inconsistent with the proposal to allow the German MEP Elmar Brok to retain his immunity from prosecution for an ( alleged ) greed offence of tax evasion .
It is clear that the prosecution is a vexatious one , by a private organisation , designed to deprive Mr. Gollnisch of his elected position and his good name .
in writing . - ( NL ) The mere fact that a fellow member of ours who risks losing his parliamentary immunity has not been given the chance to defend himself in plenary is reason enough to vote against this report which argues for the abolition of such immunity .
It is , moreover , outrageous and not in keeping with the nature that members of parliament should lose their immunity and be taken to court for expressing their opinions .
If the European Parliament wants to be taken seriously by the voters in the future , then it must , unambiguously and without any compromise , stand up for the right of its own members and of all of Europe 's citizens to freedom of expression .
This report is on the request to waive the privileges and immunity of our fellow Member , Mr Gollnisch , submitted to the European Parliament by the Prosecutor at the Court of Appeal of Lyon concerning the investigation carried out as a result of an action and claim for compensation brought , on 26 January 2009 , by the International League against Racism and Anti-Semitism ( LICRA ) regarding the publication of a press release on the site of the Front National Group in the Rhône-Alpes Regional Council , of which Mr Gollnisch was president .

Taking into account established practice in this Parliament , given that the application for parliamentary immunity is misused in this case , and in the light of the Opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I agree with the rapporteur 's position and am voting in favour of waiving the parliamentary immunity of our fellow Member , Mr Gollnisch .
in writing . - I voted to oppose the removal of the Parliamentary immunity of Bruno Gollnisch because : 1 .
Free speech is a core value of our society and the cornerstone of our democracy .
It should not be curtailed by political opponents .
The comments attributed to Mr Gollnisch were not incitements to violence and were not abusive or insulting .
The comments were about the intolerance of Islamist regimes towards Unbelievers .
2 .
No debate was allowed before the votes on this issue , which affect the fundamental rights of an MEP .
3 .
The proposal to lift Bruno Gollnisch 's immunity ( and the politically motivated decision to lift it ) were inconsistent with the proposal to allow the German MEP Elmar Brok to retain his immunity from prosecution for an ( alleged ) greed offence of tax evasion .
It is clear that the prosecution is a vexatious one , by a private organisation , designed to deprive Mr Gollnisch of his elected position and his good name .
It is equally clear that , in the increasingly intolerant atmosphere of Political Correctness that is permeating the Parliament , some MEPs are more equal than others .
I endorsed this document , because firstly , the Committee responsible has found no evidence of a sufficiently serious and precise suspicion that the case has been brought with the intention of causing political damage to the Member .
Secondly , the case does not come within the scope of Bruno Gollnisch 's political activities as a Member of the European Parliament .
It concerns instead activities of a purely regional and local nature of Bruno Gollnisch as regional councillor for Rhône-Alpes , a mandate which is distinct from that of a Member of the European Parliament .
Thirdly , Bruno Gollnisch has given an explanation of the publication of the incriminated press release by his political group in the Rhône-Alpes Regional Council .
The application of parliamentary immunity to such a situation is considered to constitute an undue extension of those rules , which are intended to avoid any interference with the functioning and independence of Parliament .
Finally , it is not for Parliament but for the competent judicial authorities to decide , whilst respecting all democratic guarantees , to what extent French law on incitement to racial hatred has been broken and what the judicial consequences might be .
It is noted that by adopting a decision to waive the Member 's immunity , the European Parliament is allowing the competent national authority to hold the person accountable ( given that there is no interference with the functioning and independence of the institution ) and by no means does this decision confirm the Member 's guilt or express an opinion as to whether certain actions or views justify investigation .
Having considered all the arguments , the Committee on Legal Affairs recommends that the European Parliament should waive the parliamentary immunity of Bruno Gollnisch .
My long spell as a parliamentarian both in the French National Assembly and in the European Parliament ( 27 years ) enables me to say that the attitude of the latter in lifting Mr Gollnisch 's parliamentary immunity was particularly abhorrent .
The MEP was not allowed to take the floor to defend himself before his fellow Members , who incidentally did not take the trouble to read up on the facts of the case .
Had they done so , they would have learnt that Mr Gollnisch was only indirectly responsible in this affair and that it related to his freedom of political expression .
To give lessons on democracy and respect for human rights is one thing ; to respect them in one 's own institution is quite another .
Using a judicial procedure to try to prevent Members of Parliament from expressing their point of view on matters of legitimate public interest and concern and from criticising their political opponents is unacceptable in a democratic society and constitutes a breach of Article 8 of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities of the European Union , which aims to protect its members ' freedom of expression .
I wholly support this concept .
However , as far as Mr Rapkay is concerned it only applies to Mr De Magistris , who is being prosecuted for libel , and not to Bruno Gollnisch , who is being prosecuted for expressing political opinions .
This is a case of double standards .
How is it more in the public interest and more democratic for us to know what Mr De Magistris thinks of a fellow Member than for us to know what the Front National thinks about the riots in Romans or the dangers of mass immigration ?
It is precisely because the opponents of Bruno Gollnisch did not like the press release in question , even though it is of greater public interest , that he is losing his immunity .
Freedom of expression for this Parliament 's elected representatives should not be a movable goalpost and should not depend on whether or not a person 's face fits .
It is unworthy of you to adopt this report .
in writing . - I support the waiver of Bruno Gollnisch 's immunity so that he can stand trial for the offence of incitement to racial hatred .
Stigmatisation and incitement to hatred on the grounds of religious affiliations are considered offences in France and this situation is equivalent to flagrante delicto .
Mr Gollnisch publicly took a stand in support of an outrageous press release .
This press release equates Muslims with thugs .
It talks about ' invasion and destruction of our cultural values by Islam ' .
Mr Gollnisch will be able to present his defence .
Waiving his immunity allows this to happen .
I am therefore voting against his request to protect his parliamentary immunity .
I voted against the waiver of Bruno Gollnisch 's immunity because the explanatory statement given by the Committee on Legal Affairs , which recommended the waiver to plenary , was entirely arbitrary .
If Mr Gollnisch is charged over a press release written by the political office of the Front National , then of course this activity should be seen as falling within the scope of his EU mandate .
The argument that this took place as part of his activities as a regional councillor is not decisive because the EU mandate cannot be seen as a part-time occupation or similar .
Had Mr Gollnisch made the same statement in a part-session of the European Parliament or in one of his committees , would the same argument be being made ?
The content of the press release serving as a basis for extradition is moreover 100 % covered by freedom of expression .
If politically unpopular statements are now to form a basis for extraditions then it shows once again what the European Parliament thinks of real democracy .

This report is on the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of our fellow Member , Mr Gollnisch , at the request of a French public prosecutor , so that a complaint alleging incitement to racial hatred can be investigated and so that , if appropriate , Mr Gollnisch can be tried before the French Court of First Instance , Appeal Court and Court of Cassation .

The waiver of Mr Gollnisch 's immunity relates to an alleged offence of incitement to racial hatred as a result of a press release issued on 3 October 2008 by the Rhône-Alpes Region Front National Group , of which Mr Gollnisch was president , so these activities were of a purely regional and local nature as a Rhône-Alpes regional councillor , a mandate to which Mr Gollnisch was elected by direct universal suffrage and which is distinct from that of Member of the European Parliament .
There is no evidence in the investigation carried out of fumus persecutionis : in other words , the intention of causing political damage to the Member .
I voted for this report , which decides not to defend Mr Gollnisch 's privileges and immunity , leaving it to the competent judicial authorities to decide , whilst respecting all democratic guarantees , to what extent French law on incitement to racial hatred has been broken and what the judicial consequences might be .
in writing . - The case is identical to the previous one ( see , but here the request for the waiver of immunity was forwarded by the French authorities .
The Prespa Lakes basin ( Prespa Park ) is shared between Greece , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) and Albania .
The first is a Member State of the European Union , the second is a candidate for EU accession and the third is a potential candidate for EU accession .
Albania and the FYROM have concluded a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU , and the development of a sustainable economy and green infrastructure , which will naturally lead to job creation at local level , will create a significant potential for employment , thereby contributing to the realisation of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Furthermore , better use of resources , sustainable economic development and nature conservation can and must go hand-in-hand , and should likewise reinforce cooperation with neighbouring countries for their integration into Europe .
For all of the aforementioned reasons , I am voting for this draft agreement .
I am in favour of consenting to the European Union 's participation in the Agreement on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Prespa Park Area entered into by Greece , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania .
I take this view because the park is a natural area of international importance , owing to its geomorphology , ecology , biodiversity and cultural significance .
I also support the objectives and the principles outlined in the agreement , which are based on the sustainable use of natural resources , a focus on the conservation of ecosystems and biodiversity , and the prevention , control and reduction of water pollution in the Prespa Lakes .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the efforts made by Member States to work alongside non-EU countries to make resource use more sustainable .
As such , I am voting to conclude the Agreement on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Prespa Park Area , since I believe it is important for the development of the three countries that share it : Greece , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania .
I also believe this park is important for the environment , for natural conservation and for a whole series of positive knock-on effects that could arise from this type of collaboration , not least the strengthening of good relations in the Balkans region .
I welcome the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union , Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) , which aims to establish cooperation between all those sharing the Prespa Lakes basin , so as to ensure integrated protection of the ecosystem and the park 's sustainable development .
This agreement demonstrates the successful application of the Union 's Water Framework Directive , to protect the environment , to raise the standard of living of the region 's inhabitants and to lead to cooperation between the three countries : Greece , Albania and the FYROM .
This will strengthen the spirit of good neighbourliness between the parties , in this particularly sensitive region of the Balkans .
in writing . - ( PT ) This recommendation is on the draft Council decision concerning the conclusion , on behalf of the European Union , of the Agreement on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Prespa Park Area , which has been classified as such since 1977 and designated a protected cross-border area under the declaration of 2 February 2000 , issued by the Prespa countries : Greece , Albania and the Republic of Macedonia .
The European Union is aware of the urgent need to protect and safeguard natural resources , so , starting in the 1970s , it has adopted a legislative package , the ultimate expression of which is the 2000 Water Framework Directive .
The objective of the agreement concerned is to establish cooperation between the EU and the above countries in order to promote the region 's sustainable development and to protect its ecosystem , in particular through plans for the integrated management of the Prespa hydrographic basin .
At a time when disasters resulting from climate change are increasing , I congratulate the Council on this project and would like to see it concluded as soon as possible .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Prespa Lakes basin ( Prespa Park ) is shared between Greece , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania .
It is extremely important to establish a living habitat for the conservation of many rare and / or endemic species of flora and fauna , also as a nesting place for birds threatened at global level , and as a place with a wealth of important cultural and heritage assets .
The objective of the agreement is to establish cooperation in order to guarantee the integrated protection of the ecosystem and the sustainable development of the Prespa Park area , including the development of plans for the integrated management of the hydrographic basin .
To this end , the countries involved in the agreement undertake to adopt the necessary measures , individually or in cooperation , in accordance with the principles of sovereign equality , territorial integrity , mutual benefit and good faith , with a view to the management of the waters of the Prespa , the prevention , control and reduction of pollution , the protection and conservation of the biodiversity , protection of the soil , the prudent use of natural resources and sustainable development .
Therefore , we vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Prespa Park , or the Prespa hydrographic basin , shared between Greece , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania , is extremely important for establishing a living habitat for the conservation of numerous rare and / or endemic flora and fauna species , also as a nesting place for birds threatened at global level , and as a place with a wealth of important cultural and heritage assets .
The objective of the agreement is to establish cooperation in order to guarantee the integrated protection of the ecosystem and the sustainable development of the Prespa Park area , including the development of plans for the integrated management of the hydrographic basin .
To this end , the countries involved in the agreement undertake to adopt the necessary measures , individually or in cooperation , in accordance with the principles of sovereign equality , territorial integrity , mutual benefit and good faith , with a view to the management of the waters of the Prespa , the prevention , control and reduction of pollution , the protection and conservation of the biodiversity , protection of the soil , the prudent use of natural resources and sustainable development .
Therefore , we vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - On February 2010 , in the presence and with the participation of the European Union , Greece , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania signed the Agreement on the protection and sustainable development of the Prespa Park Area .
The aim of this Agreement is to ensure the protection of Prespa Park Area and also a comprehensive ecosystem protection .
Not only do lakes and their surroundings have ecological importance , but also this area is naturally unique due to its geomorphological , ecological , biodiversity and cultural significance .
It is a vital habitat for the conservation of numerous rare fauna and flora species , as a nesting place of globally threatened birds , and as a depositary of significant archaeological and traditional heritage .
It was therefore desirable to obtain the consent of Parliament to make sure that Agreement could be adopted .
The Prespa area river basin on the borders between Greece , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania is an important natural area .
The agreement to be signed by the European Union will contribute towards reaching some of the important objectives for protecting this area , defending the ecosystem and introducing the sustainable use of renewable energy .
That it why I will vote in favour of the recommendation .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report , because the purpose of this agreement is to establish cooperation so as to ensure the integrated protection of the ecosystem and the sustainable development of the Prespa Park Area , including the drawing up of integrated river basin management plans , in accordance with international and EU standards .
The Prespa Lakes Basin ( Prespa Park Area ) is shared between Greece , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania .
The first is a Member State of the European Union , the second a candidate country for EU membership and the third a potential candidate country for EU membership .
Albania and the FYROM have also concluded a Stabilisation and Association agreement with the EU .
The Prespa Park Area is a natural area of international importance owing to its biodiversity and geomorphologic , ecological , and cultural significance .
It is vitally important as a habitat for the conservation of numerous rare and / or endemic flora and fauna species , as a nesting place of globally threatened birds , and as a depositary of significant archaeological and traditional heritage .
For these reasons , on 2 February 2010 these three countries signed the Agreement on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Prespa Park Area , with the participation of the EU , which also requires the consent of the European Parliament .
In order to attain this objective , the parties have committed themselves to taking the necessary measures and applying the best available techniques , individually and in cooperation , on the basis of sovereign equality , territorial integrity , mutual benefit and good faith .
in writing . - I welcome this agreement on the protection and sustainable development of Prespa Park .
The Prespa Park area is a natural area of international importance owing to its geomorphological , ecological , biodiversity and cultural significance .
It is a vital habitat for the conservation of numerous rare and / or endemic fauna and flora species , as a nesting place of globally threatened birds , and as a depositary of significant archaeological and traditional heritage .
This report is on the Prespa Lakes basin , whose geomorphological , ecological , biodiversity and cultural significance make it an internationally important natural space .
It is a habitat vital to the conservation of numerous rare or endemic species of flora and fauna , as a nesting place for birds endangered at global level , and as a repository for valuable heritage in terms of archaeology and tradition .
As such , an agreement is being concluded between Greece , Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , which share this natural space , so as to establish cooperation on managing the waters of these lakes to prevent , control and reduce their pollution ; to protect and conserve the area 's biodiversity and protect its soil from erosion ; to promote the sensible use of natural resources and sustainable development ; to prevent the introduction of alien animal and plant species ; and to regulate human activities with a negative impact on the area .
I am convinced of the need to increase cooperation between the involved parties , always on the basis of respect for the principle of equality , of territorial integrity and of mutual benefit , so as to protect this area of exceptional value .
I am therefore voting for this agreement .
in writing . - ( PT ) The basis of this report is the draft decision of the Council relating to the signing of the agreement on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Prespa Park Area ; the Prespa hydrographic basin .
The European Union has longstanding legislation protecting its waters , namely the 2000 Water Framework Directive , which establishes the objective of protecting all waters - rivers , lakes , ground-waters and coastal waters - and which , in the case of shared hydrographic basins extending beyond administrative and political borders , provides for the coordination of efforts in order to achieve this objective .
The Prespa hydrographic basin is shared between Greece , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) and Albania .
The FYROM is a candidate for EU accession and Albania is a potential candidate .
It has therefore become necessary to establish an international agreement for pursuing the objectives of the Water Framework Directive , namely protecting biodiversity and the ecosystem services of this area .
I voted in favour of this report , previously adopted unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Prespa hydrographic basin is shared between Greece , Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
As a source of biodiversity of undisputable ecological interest , and therefore also as a natural climate regulator , its protection is worthy of the efforts of the European Union in line with the Water Framework Directive ( 2000 / 60 / EC ) .
Pursuant to this directive , in the case of a hydrographic basin that extends beyond the territorial limits of the Union , it is necessary to implement coordination efforts between the countries involved and for this reason , on 2 February 2010 the Agreement on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Prespa Park Area was concluded ; the Commission was also involved , representing the EU .
However , its final adoption by the Council requires the consent of the European Parliament .
For the above reasons , I voted to adopt this agreement .
in writing . - The Prespa Park area is a natural area of international importance owing to its geomorphological , ecological , biodiversity and cultural significance .
It is a vital habitat for the conservation of numerous rare and / or endemic fauna and flora species , as a nesting place of globally threatened birds , and as a depositary of significant archaeological and traditional heritage .
For these reasons , the three countries concerned signed the Agreement on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Prespa Park Area on 2 February 2010 , with the participation of the EU .
The purpose of the agreement is to establish cooperation so as to ensure the integrated protection of the ecosystem and the sustainable development of the Prespa Park area , including the drawing up of integrated river basin management plans , in accordance with international and EU standards .
Under Article 218 ( 6 ) ( a ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the Council must secure the consent of the European Parliament in order to adopt the agreement .
The European Union is equipped with long-standing legislation protecting its waters , of which the most important part is the Water Framework Directive .
Under this legislation , where river basins extend beyond the territory of the Union , Member States shall endeavour to establish coordination with the non-Member States which share the river basin district .
Where coordination takes the form of an international agreement , participation of the European Union as a Party is necessary to the extent that the agreement covers matters falling within the Union 's competence .
The Prespa Park Area is a natural area of international importance owing to its geomorphology , ecology , biodiversity and cultural significance .
The text adopted today aims to establish cooperation so as to ensure the integrated protection of the ecosystem and the sustainable development of the Prespa Park Area , including the drawing up of integrated river basin management plans , in accordance with international and EU standards .
The Agreement will contribute to the successful implementation of the Water Framework Directive , to protecting the environment , improving the living standards of local inhabitants and strengthening good neighbourly relations in a particularly sensitive area of the Balkans .
in writing . - Last year the Commission and the other EU institutions reflected on the fact that we have not met our biodiversity targets .
This is a deeply regrettable situation which must be changed , quickly and effectively , in order to protect biodiversity and the invaluable eco-services it provides us with .
Cooperation with third countries is to be encouraged as much as possible , as this is also a global problem , so this agreement is to be warmly welcomed .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am voting for Mrs Fraga Estévez 's recommendation welcoming the European Commission 's efforts toward the approval of the resolutions based on the Port State Measures Agreement by the Regional Fisheries Management Organisations ( RFMOs ) .
In the course of the plenary session of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission ( IOTC ) held in March 2010 in Busan . South Korea , a port state measures resolution tabled by the EU was adopted ( resolution 2010 / 11 ) .
Similar proposals were also tabled by the EU in other RFMOs , with a view to strengthening the port state measures they currently have in force and bringing them in line with the requirements of the agreement .
Unfortunately , they could not be adopted in several cases owing to the opposition of a number of countries , such as some Latin American and small Pacific island countries .
As advocated by the rapporteur , I too urge the European Commission to continue applying pressure to approve these proposals , as the measures provided for in the agreement will only be truly effective at combating illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing if and when they are applied in a comprehensive , uniform and transparent manner , in order to avoid loopholes that could be easily exploited by the IUU fishing operators .
I supported the recommendation because the European Union must send out a strong message against illegal , unregulated and unreported fishing .
The European Union is a major international player on issues regarding the management of fishing .
As such it must lend its support to anything relating to the enforcement of international rules on infringements .
Mrs Fraga Estévez has welcomed the efforts made by the European Commission for the adoption of resolutions based on the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation 's Port State Measures Agreement .
In committee , we strongly supported the idea of continuing to push for these proposals .
Indeed , illegal fishing includes declared ships that fish for undersized species as well as fishing by unauthorised boats in protected areas or too close to coastlines .
Unfortunately , illegal fishing accounts for some 60 % of the products that arrive on our markets , and this causes uncertainties about their quality and makes them difficult to trace .
This is why we believe that Europe should set an example to all other countries operating in this sector , which end up gaining an advantage on international markets because they do not have to respect any of the limits imposed on our fishermen .
I voted for Mrs Fraga 's recommendation on the draft Council decision on the approval of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing .
I voted in favour because the content of the initiative will be a crucial contribution to the current global struggle against illegal fishing .
Its content will be effective if it is comprehensively , uniformly and transparently applied .
The shortage of fish stocks at global level and not , therefore , only in our own seas , is gradually becoming an urgent problem .
We know that marine life is essential not only for a substantial part of the human diet , but also for the health of the entire ecosystem .
It is therefore important that all levels of government - from the regions and central governments right up to the European Union - should do everything in their power to bring in regulatory measures and legislative instruments that will help protect fish stocks , which is the only guarantee of the long-term sustainability of fishing activities .
I voted in favour of this parliamentary recommendation to the Council so that the Council may proceed , on behalf of the EU , to adopt the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing .
If implemented correctly by national bodies , this international agreement will be an important tool for ensuring the long-term protection of marine life and the sustainable exploitation of fish stocks .
I voted for this report , because with it the European Parliament consented to the approval of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation Agreement , which would promote responsible exploitation of fishery resources and marine eco-systems .
This agreement provides for specific instruments to combat illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing in EU territorial waters more effectively .
These instruments provide for minimum standards which should underpin the adoption of measures by States in order to monitor , control and inspect foreign-flagged fishing vessels wishing to use their harbours .
The instruments in this agreement could be applied not only to fishing vessels , but also vessels used for fishing related activities , such as transport vessels which may be used to carry fisheries products .
The fight against IUU fishing constitutes an essential component of the common fisheries policy and the EU should be able to foster international cooperation on this matter by participating actively and constructively in the adoption of an international instrument on port state measures .
Illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing is considered as one of the main threats to the resources of the fishing market where the European Union enjoys an important global position .
In this case , devising a common EU-level fisheries policy , aimed at protecting the sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources is an absolutely natural concern .
The agreement being proposed to the Council for adoption has been drafted precisely to meet these international requirements on preventing , deterring and eliminating illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing through the implementation of effective measures by the state where the port is located .
These are measures which , once the Agreement has been adopted , should go from being a voluntary model to a package of mandatory minimum standards for port states , with the aim of monitoring , controlling and inspecting foreign-flagged fishing vessels using their harbours .
The fact that the set of measures whose implementation comes under the remit of the port states are produced , all the same , by an international instrument is a bonus .
The global overview of this practice of IUU fishing can result in better monitoring of fishing activities overall .
It is more cost-effective in terms of organisation and implementation .
I voted in favour of the text presented by Mrs Fraga Estévez , to whom I should like to express my appreciation for the work carried out .
Indeed , I believe that the European Union should use every instrument at its disposal to prevent and combat illegal trade while at the same time preserving the fishing market , which has always been a robust pillar of the common fisheries policy .
It is therefore high time for stringent rules to be adopted and , above all , respected .
Ships that do not observe European and international rules on fishing should be banned and greater information on all ships that request access to ports should be guaranteed .
Let us not forget that Europe - which is ranked third among the world 's fishing powers - has been working for years to ensure that Member States and third countries respect the rules , in order to guarantee a sustainable fishing market and protect the marine environment from possible damage .
in writing . - ( PT ) I agree with the draft Council decision on the approval , on behalf of the European Union , of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing .
I believe that the effectiveness of such measures is essential to guaranteeing the conservation and sustainability of marine ecosystems , and therefore to the exploitation of the seas and corresponding industries .
To guarantee this effectiveness , it is necessary for these measures to be applied harmoniously by the Member States by controlling the unloading of boats , transhipments and other operations performed at their ports .
Therefore , I wish to emphasise the importance of the point proposed relating to the information-sharing mechanism , which must underpin this agreement .
in writing . - ( PT ) Illegal fishing is a phenomenon that endangers all the measures that the international community and the European Union in particular have taken to allow robust and dynamic fishing activity to be balanced with the necessary replenishment of fish stocks .
In 2007 , the Committee for Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations ( FAO ) agreed to draw up a legally binding international instrument on port state measures to deter illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
Later , in 2009 an agreement was adopted in Rome , and the intention now is to approve it on behalf of the EU .
In view of the importance of this issue , particularly for a maritime nation such as Portugal , I am voting to approve this agreement .
In 2001 , the United Nations Organisation for Food and Agriculture ( FAO ) created an International Plan of Action to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing ( IPOA-IUU ) .
In 2005 , the FAO approved a series of measures that port states for fishing or fish-transportation vessels must adopt to combat illegal fishing .
The preservation of natural resources , particularly marine resources , is a constant concern of the European Union , which seeks to prevent illegal fishing with all the means at its disposal .
It has therefore closely followed all the measures approved by the FAO , playing an active and constructive role , not least in drawing up the agreement adopted at the 36th session of the FAO Conference held in Rome 18-23 November 2009 .
I agree with the position adopted by the rapporteur with regard to urging the European Commission , not only to conclude the present agreement , but also to continue to apply pressure to international agencies , particularly the FAO , with a view to the approval of the envisaged measures .
This agreement was approved at the 36th session of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) Conference held in Rome in November 2009 , rounding off a debate process that had been preceded by a set of other agreements and codes of conduct adopted over the last two decades under the umbrella of the FAO .
Illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing constitutes a global threat to the sustainable exploitation of live aquatic resources .
Therefore , the fight against IUU fishing must be a central concern of any fisheries policy , as well as an essential element of international fisheries management of at the competent forums .
The objective of this agreement is to prevent , deter and eliminate IUU fishing through the use of effective port state measures , thereby guaranteeing the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems .
Experience proves the good cost-effective relationship and the crucial role played by port state measures , in conjunction with other instruments , in the fight against IUU fishing .
This agreement also supports an expanded definition of IUU fishing , in order to include a wide range of unregulated fishing operations .
Therefore , we voted in favour of this report .
This agreement was approved at the 36th session of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) Conference held in Rome in November 2009 , rounding off a debate process that had been preceded by a set of other agreements and codes of conduct adopted over the last two decades under the umbrella of the FAO .
Illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing constitutes a global threat to the sustainable exploitation of live aquatic resources .
Therefore , the fight against IUU fishing must be a central concern of any fisheries policy , as well as an essential element of international fisheries management of at the competent forums .
The objective of this agreement is to prevent , deter and eliminate IUU fishing through the use of effective port state measures , thereby guaranteeing the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems .
Experience proves the good cost-effective relationship and the crucial role played by port state measures , in conjunction with other instruments , in the fight against IUU fishing .
Therefore , we voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - In November 2009 , the FAO Conference approved the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing that may help to minimize this type of fishing and ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems , as well .
As the European Union is one of the main representatives of international fisheries and one of the main global markets for fishery products , it is suitable and appropriate to promote the adoption of such proposals by the European institutions , too .
The aim of the FAO Conference , to which this decision relates , is to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal , unregulated and unreported ( IUU ) fishing through effective port state measures .
Basically , ' port state measures ' means those measures that coastal states may apply to vessels that are not allowed to fly their flags in port or are seeking permission to enter a port .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because the objective of the agreement is to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing through the implementation of effective port state measures , thereby ensuring the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems .
The agreement will be applied by parties , in their capacities as port states , for vessels not entitled to fly their flags , while seeking entry to ports or while they are in port .
It covers not only fishing vessels , but also vessels used for fishing related activities , such as transport vessels which may be used to carry fisheries products .
It also endorses a broad definition of IUU fishing , so as to include a wide range of unregulated fishing operations .
The annexes , as an integral part of the agreement , specify the information to be provided in advance by vessels seeking entry to the parties ' ports as well as guidelines for inspection procedures , the handling of inspection results , information systems and training requirements .
Parties should cooperate to establish an information-sharing mechanism , preferably coordinated by the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) , in conjunction with other relevant multilateral and intergovernmental initiatives , and to facilitate the exchange of information with existing databases relevant to the agreement .
According to scientific forecasts , by the mid-21st century it will become normal for Earth 's seas and oceans to be empty , as a result of our unwise management of the natural resources of fish and seafood .
In spite of the restrictions and bans which have been introduced , much illegal fishing goes on , or even fishing that can be considered pillaging .
It is therefore necessary to step up monitoring , in order to prevent the destruction of aquatic ecosystems , and a subsequent ecological disaster .
A rational fisheries policy is particularly important in view of the food crisis , which is a threat we are facing at the same time as the human population is growing .
As the largest market for such products , the European Union should therefore support measures aimed at preventing violations of fisheries legislation .
in writing . - I welcome this agreement , the objective of which is to prevent , deter and eliminate IUU fishing through the implementation of effective port State measures , thereby ensuring the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems .
I voted for this report on the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing , because I believe that this type of fishing implies a serious global threat to living aquatic resources .
The market is insatiable and exhausts natural resources .
We must curb industrial , pillaging fishing techniques .
The exhaustion of fisheries resources is an environmental problem , but also a social one .
I therefore welcome this positive report on the agreement adopted by the 36th session of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) Conference , which brings to a close a long period of debate that had already led to the adoption of a number of codes of conduct .
I believe that combating illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing must be a key element of any fisheries policy worthy of the name .
I am therefore voting for this report on an agreement whose established goals are to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal fishing by applying effective measures in the port state and , in this way , to enable long-term conservation , and the rational and sustainable exploitation of marine ecosystems .
in writing . - I know that the objective of the Agreement is to prevent , deter and eliminate IUU fishing through the implementation of effective port state measures , thereby ensuring the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems .
As of 31 January 2011 , 23 FAO Members had signed the Agreement and two instruments of accession had been deposited .
As the European Union is a major player in international fisheries and one of the main global markets for fishery products , the rapporteur proposes that Parliament gives its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement and firmly supports and encourages the European Commission to continue to push for the adoption of these proposals .
I voted ' in favour ' .
The objective of the agreement concerned is to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal , undeclared and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing through the use of effective port state measures , thereby ensuring the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems , including not only fishing vessels , but also ships that may be used to transport fish products .
It also supports an expanded definition of IUU fishing to include a wide range of unregulated fishing operations .
This agreement is part of the International Plan of Action to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing ( IPOA-IUU ) , created by the United Nations ( UN ) Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) as part of the UN code of conduct on responsible fishing .
Since IUU fishing is one of the major scourges of the current fishing industry , this agreement is particularly important , especially at a time when the EU is working on the new common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
I therefore voted for this report .
in writing . - The approval of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing ( the Agreement ) is to be welcomed .
The Agreement is a vital tool in ensuring that the EU is well equipped to combat illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing in our waters .
Ireland , and in particular Ireland South , has a thriving fishing industry and this Agreement will help to fight against IUU fishing as one of the most serious global threats to the sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources .
It is incredibly important that the EU has participated in this process from the start and has played an active and constructive role in the drafting of the Agreement , as the fight against IUU fishing constitutes an essential component of the common fisheries policy .
Illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing constitutes a serious obstacle to sustainable development in so far as it may affect ' living aquatic resources ' .
The Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing has been concluded , under the aegis of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) , and it requires European Parliament approval to be permanently binding for the Union , so I voted in favour of concluding this agreement , as it is a central point of the common fisheries policy .
By adopting the report by Mrs Fraga Estévez at lunchtime today , Parliament has given its approval for the European Union to enter into a binding international agreement to combat illegal fishing , thereby demonstrating its commitment to responsible fishing also .
It is worth reminding ourselves that illegal fishing is still one of the greatest threats to sustainable exploitation of marine biological resources and is as great a threat as intensive fishing .
To combat this type of fishing , which depletes marine biological resources and ecosystems , is a vital goal for the European Union .
Commissioner Damanaki 's recent announcement of a new fishing control system , which will mean fish can be traced from their place of capture to the dinner table , is encouraging .
The introduction of a new points system ( building up to suspension of a licence ) on 1 January 2012 is particularly important .
This system aims to ensure that serious infringements are dealt with in the same way , with deterrent fines of a minimum of five times the market value of the illegally caught fish .
This system of traceability , combined with control and sanction powers for inspectors deployed throughout European territory , is a vital tool for curbing illegal fishing .
in writing . - Illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing remains one of the most serious global threats to the sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources .
The fight against IUU fishing is an essential component of the common fisheries policy , and the EU should be able to foster international cooperation on this matter by participating actively and constructively in the adoption of an international instrument on port state measures .
The EU is a member of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and of 13 regional fisheries management organisations ( RFMOs ) .
Port state mechanisms adopted within RFMOs have been implemented through EU law , which also provides for comprehensive rules on access to port services , landings and transhipments of fisheries products by third-country vessels in EU ports , and cooperation and assistance mechanisms between the EU and third countries .
Illegal fishing represents one of the most serious global threats to the sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources .
The fight against this form of exploitation constitutes an essential component of the common fisheries policy and the EU should be able to foster international cooperation on this matter by participating actively and constructively in the adoption of an international instrument on port state measures .
In 2001 , the Food and Agriculture Organisation developed an International Plan of Action to Prevent , Deter and Eliminate Illegal , Unreported and Unregulated Fishing .
The plan adopted a holistic approach , elaborating actions to be taken by flag , coastal and port states .
The document adopted today aims to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal fishing through the implementation of effective port state measures , thereby ensuring the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems .
in writing . - Port State Measures are an important tool in the fight against illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing .
IUU fishing is an international criminal activity which is damaging our marine ecosystems , threatening our food security , and ruining the livelihoods of those in the legitimate fishing industry .
But our action against IUU fishing must not only comprise Port State Measures ; we must also campaign to end the use of ' flags of convenience ' , which often allow vessels to operate illegally and with impunity .
A global registry of fishing vessels could also be an important step , as could traceability of fishery products .
in writing . - ( PT ) Preventing , deterring and eliminating illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing is a fundamental priority for the success of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
The objective of the agreement is to prevent , deter and eliminate IUU fishing through the use of effective port state measures , thereby ensuring the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources and marine ecosystems .
IUU fishing continues to be one of the most serious global threats to the sustainable exploitation of living aquatic resources , and the EU has had an active and constructive role in the preparation of the present draft agreement .
Through the facility provided by the international instrument relating to port state measures , the parties will deny entry to their ports if they have sufficient proof that the ship intending to enter has been involved in IUU fishing or related activities .
In view of these considerations , I regard the agreement mentioned as an important contribution to the current international fight against IUU fishing and I am voting in favour of its approval .
in writing . - ( LT ) Although Lithuania is small , the fishing sector plays an important economic and social role for small communities in my country .
Illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing poses a major threat to the sustainability of fishing in Lithuania .
Fish stocks are wasted , the marine environment is destroyed and honest fishermen find themselves in an uncomfortable position .
In the Baltic Sea alone , 3800 jobs are under threat because of illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
According to the Pew Environment Group , unreported fishing costs Lithuanian fishermen more than EUR 1.1 million every year .
This is a huge sum of money given the size of my country and the fact that these problems can be avoided .
Unregulated fishing is particularly destructive for cod fishing in the Baltic Sea , which is already in a poor state .
Cod is the most valuable fish in the Baltic Sea and the majority of Lithuanian fishermen are dependent on cod stocks .
However , our cod fishermen are faced with illegal , unreported and unregulated catches of 40 % above official landings .
If illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing came to an end , cod fishing in the Baltic Sea could recover .
However , for that to happen we must fill the gaps enabling illegal operators to profit from their activities .
We must impose harsher penalties against offenders .
Millions of Europeans use the right to trade in the EU Internal Market , and to live , work and travel throughout the EU .
The EU has legislation that allows cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of national courts ' judgments .
However , obtaining a legal judgment is only part of the process : citizens and companies must have the right to ensure that these judgments are effectively enforced .
A necessary component of effective enforcement is that the courts may , as an interim measure , act swiftly to order disclosure and freezing of the debtor 's assets .
Without such a measure , rogue traders and other debtors can evade their responsibilities by simply moving their assets to another jurisdiction , thereby denying the creditor effective enforcement of the judgment in the Single Market .
The citizen or small business will have spent both money and time in securing a court judgment , only to have to go before another Member State 's courts with no guarantee of success or justice .
This report threfore indicates the need for an effective regime for freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets , as such I am voting for it .
The Internal Market is without doubt the most important instrument that the European Union has to foster growth in the wake in the recent financial crisis .
The millions of citizens and businesses that reap the benefits of the Internal Market must be able to exercise their rights and be able to travel , work and live freely anywhere in Europe .
This is why they must also have access to effective remedies if they intend to make a claim against another citizen or business that endangers these rights .
Today , the European Union has instruments in place to enable cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of judgments of national courts .
However , the actual right to have judgments enforced is still lacking .
Establishing an effective system for the freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets , and stepping up cooperation between enforcement authorities in the Member States , are the best ways of filling these gaps .
That is why I voted in favour of Mrs McCarthy 's report .
One necessary component of effective enforcement of judgments is that courts must be able , as an interim measure , to act swiftly to order a disclosure of the debtor 's assets and to freeze them .
Without such a measure , rogue traders and other debtors may evade their responsibilities by simply moving their assets to another jurisdiction , thus denying the creditor effective enforcement of the judgment in the Single Market .
That is why we need to establish a genuine 28th system , by which I mean an additional , autonomous European protection mechanism to go alongside those available in the national courts .
This preventive measure will also provide a further deterrent against payment delays and will force the disclosure of assets in cross-border claims .
This report is important in terms of extending the Single Market to the area of cross-border pre-financing .
At the moment , this activity is partially blocked due to the reluctance of creditors in one Member State to grant loans to debtors living in another Member State .
One specific example is where a resident of one Member State wants to take out a mortgage with a bank located in another Member State .
At present , this transaction is not possible , which means that consumers do not actually have the right to purchase products ( banking , in this case ) from any EU Member State .
The reason for a bank refusing to give mortgages to anyone other than residents of the same Member State ( even when the relevant bank is a multinational and is represented in a number of Member States by subsidiaries or branches ) is that , in the event of a default on the loan , the bank is obliged to proceed with a forced execution procedure in accordance with lex rei sitae ( the law of the state where the property for which the mortgage has been arranged by the lending bank is located ) and not with the law of the state where the creditor has its registered office .
If a 28th regime procedure is going to be instituted , in keeping with this report , this would facilitate cross-border credit-based transactions .
The level of success in recovering unpaid debts is remarkably low .
The removal of the debtor 's assets to another country has become a major problem for many creditors .
A regulation providing for free-standing remedies that would allow interim measures to be ordered before , during and after the main proceedings will represent significant progress for European citizens in the fight against these dishonest debtors .
The majority of European citizens are employees , and during this time of economic crisis they are becoming caught up too often in insolvency proceedings as the companies they work for go bankrupt .
As shadow rapporteur on Mrs Girling 's draft opinion on insolvency proceedings , I felt there was a need for employees to be given greater legal protection and certainty , which should be harmonised , and above all to have effective remedy .
I propose that when main insolvency proceedings are begun against an employer who is in debt the receiver should be allowed within a six-month period to order the preservation of assets , with backdated effect , where the company has taken steps to move its funds .
in writing . - ( CS ) I agree that the European Order for the Preservation of Assets ( EOPA ) and the European Order for the Disclosure of Assets ( EODA ) should be independent corrective resources supplementing the resources available under national law , and should be applied only in transboundary cases .
The issuing of an EOPA should be wholly at the discretion of the national court .
The burden of proof should also rest with the applicant , who should submit proper evidence of the legal plausibility ( fumus boni juris ) and urgency ( periculum in mora ) of a case .
These criteria should be assessed by national courts on the basis of the existing case-law of the European Court of Justice .
The effect of an EOPA must apply only to the freezing of bank accounts and the temporary freezing of bank deposits , and it should not grant creditors any form of ownership rights to the assets of the debtor .
Further thought should be given as to whether the order might apply to other kinds of asset , such as immovable property or a future asset ( a receivable due soon or an inheritance ) .
A very large number of companies in the EU carry out their business activities within the Internal Market , while European citizens enjoy the right to settle , work or travel freely throughout the EU .
As we also pointed out when we discussed the Single Market Act intended to deepen the Internal Market and promote cross-border transactions , including e-commerce , we need guarantees to be able to recover any cross-border debts .
I fully support the notion in this report of asking the Commission to propose more effective instruments for implementing the legislation , to supplement those which already exist for dealing with cross-border claims , such as the Brussels I Regulation or the Small Claims Procedure .
Courts should have the necessary instruments available to act swiftly and freeze the assets of the debtor or alleged debtor , however not under any circumstances .
We must strike a balance between protecting creditors and protecting the rights of debtors to avoid any arbitrary situation .
The possibility of obtaining an EOPA without any notification and prior hearing for the relevant party is an infringement on the debtor 's rights and is contrary to current case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union .
The report does not therefore provide the necessary balance as better protection is required for the rights of debtors .
I voted in favour of Mrs McCarthy 's report , which requests the Commission to propose a European Order for the Preservation of Assets and a European Order for the Disclosure of Assets .
Both instruments should be free-standing remedies additional to those available under national law .
There is a need for an effective system to prevent and penalise non-payment situations when these occur between subjects whose assets are located in different countries , because otherwise , the free movement of persons , goods , services and capital within the EU would compromise the legal certainty of the European public .
Therefore , I welcome and agree with the recommendations to the Commission on the proposed measures relating to the freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets in cross-border cases .
Late payments and unpaid debts harm businesses and consumers alike .
Even when the courts have delivered a judgment , in practice it is often difficult for creditors to recover debts if no information is available on the whereabouts of the debtor and his assets .
It is even more difficult when the debtor is domiciled in another Member State .
At present the number of cross-border debts successfully recovered is particularly low , and the cost of cross-border debt recovery can be prohibitive and can deter parties from engaging in legal proceedings .
The time has come to simplify and speed up the recovery procedure .
In order to improve debt recovery within the European Union and thereby protect consumers more effectively and encourage trade between Member States , the Commission must propose new legislation on the freezing and transparency of debtors ' assets .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report , because it tables a range of measures that will help to prevent rogue traders and other debtors from evading their responsibilities by transferring their assets to other jurisdictions , thereby denying the creditor effective enforcement of the judgment in the Single Market .
At the time of the adoption of the Stockholm Programme , the Commission was asked to table specific proposals aimed at a simple and autonomous European system for the seizure of bank accounts and the temporary freezing of bank deposits .
Current European legislation allows cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of national courts ' judgments , but still fails to ensure that the resultant legal judgments are effectively enforced .
As such , and following Parliament 's adoption of various resolutions reinforcing this idea , in this own-initiative report , the rapporteur asks the Commission to introduce two instruments - a European Order for the Preservation of Assets ( EOPA ) and a European Order for the Disclosure of Assets ( EODA ) - to be implemented in national law and to concern only cross-border cases .
These instruments aim to ensure the rapid implementation of measures by the courts , enabling the freezing of debtors ' assets and preventing the relocation or transfer of their assets .
Therefore , I congratulate the rapporteur and believe that these are necessary measures , ensuring greater legal certainty and security , and also defending a better functioning of the Internal Market .
The opportunism and greed of members of the public and certain businesspeople are leading them to take advantage of the freedom of movement of people and goods throughout the European Union to harm third parties .
In spite of current regulations , such as the Brussels I Regulation , the European Enforcement Order , the European small claims procedure and the order for payment procedure , it is not always not possible - and certainly not fast - to achieve effective enforcement of a legal judgment in the Single Market This report , containing a set of recommendations to the European Commission relating to the proposals tabled on the freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets in cross-border cases earns my full support , and I hope that in June , we will have a specific proposal with the measures to be adopted in this respect .
We acknowledge the need to defend consumer rights in the EU Internal Market , particularly those of the most vulnerable .
The EU currently already has legislation in place enabling cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of national courts ' judgments , including the Brussels I Regulation , the European Enforcement Order , the European small claims procedure and the order for payment procedure .
However , obtaining a legal judgment is only part of the process .
The aim of this report is for members of the public and businesses to have the right to ensure these judgments are effectively enforced .
A necessary component of effective enforcement is that the courts may , as an interim measure , act swiftly to order disclosure and freezing of the debtor 's assets .
There is a need for this measure , to guarantee the rights of individuals and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
Naturally , this does not bring an end to our opposition to and reservations about fundamental aspects of the Single Market , its nature , objectives and impact .
In the Internal Market created by the European Union , it is becoming increasingly necessary to defend the rights of consumers , particular those lacking adequate resources .
The EU has legislation in place enabling cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of national courts ' judgments , including the Brussels I Regulation , the European Enforcement Order , the European small claims procedure and the order for payment procedure .
However , obtaining a judgment is only one part of the process .
The rapporteur 's aim with this report is for members of the public and businesses to have the right to ensure these judgments are effectively enforced .
A necessary component of effective enforcement is that the courts may , as an interim measure , act swiftly to order disclosure and freezing of the debtor 's assets .
Without such a measure , rogue traders and other debtors may evade their responsibilities by simply moving their assets to another jurisdiction , thus denying the creditor effective enforcement of the judgment in the Single Market .
The individual or small business will have spent both money and time in securing a legal judgment , only to have to go before another Member State 's courts with no guarantee of success or justice .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because the EU has legislation in place to enable cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of judgments of national courts , including the Brussels I Regulation , the European Enforcement Order , the Small Claims Procedure and the Order for Payment Procedure .
However , getting the judgment is only one part of the process ; citizens and businesses must have the right to have their judgments effectively enforced .
One necessary component of effective enforcement is that courts must be able , as an interim measure , to act swiftly to order a disclosure of the debtor 's assets and freeze them .
Without such a measure , rogue traders and other debtors may evade their responsibilities by simply moving their assets to another jurisdiction , thus denying the creditor effective enforcement of the judgment in the Single Market .
The European Institutions have drawn attention to the need for an effective regime for freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets .
in writing . - ( CS ) I am personally in favour of the European Order for the Preservation of Assets and the European Order for the Disclosure of Assets becoming part of EU law .
This is particularly true in view of legislative developments in recent years , when measures such as the European Enforcement Order , the Small Claims Procedure and the European Payment Order were incorporated into Union law , because these measures cannot be fully realised without the implementation of the European Order for the Preservation of Assets and the European Order for the Disclosure of Assets .
Although I support the Commission 's call to submit a proposal for legislative amendments to both measures , this does not mean automatic support for the Commission proposal .
In assessing this proposal I will place emphasis above all on its specific form , stressing its use exclusively in transboundary cases , the jurisdiction for the exercise of these measures and also the restriction on the exercise of these measures only to cases where it is absolutely necessary .
in writing . - I welcome this report which , if followed through by the Commission , should help victims of fraud .
The current legal set-up protects the fraudster , leaving the victim lost in a quagmire of paperwork and expensive legal action .
These proposals would reverse this unfair situation , giving victims a better chance of getting their money back .
This report raises the problem of the banks ' debt reimbursement guarantees .
Banks benefit from preferential interest rates in order to guarantee their profits .
However , they continue to levy disproportionately high rates on the debts of States and citizens .
The urgent need is to save citizens and States who are victims of the banks , not the reverse .
I shall vote against this report .
In the current context of the European Internal Market , it is increasingly important to defend the rights of consumers , in particular those who are less well-off .
European legislation allows for cross-border claims , as well as the mutual recognition of the decisions of national courts , but the current procedure for cross-border debt recovery is arduous and prohibitively expensive .
The purpose of the report with recommendations on proposed interim measures for the freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets in cross-border cases is for European citizens and businesses to have the right for these decisions to actually be enforced .
The lack of this type of measure sends a signal of impunity to recalcitrant debtors and makes it easier for rogue traders to evade their responsibilities , as they can simply move their assets to another jurisdiction to prevent a court judgment from actually being enforced .
This forces citizens to go before another Member State 's courts , with no guarantee that this costly process will have a favourable outcome .
I have therefore been unable to vote against this report , which sets out measures aimed at protecting these rights .
Freedom of trade and the smooth operation of the Internal Market in the EU come with rights and obligations attached .
One of the public 's basic rights is to suitable means of recourse in the event that they have a claim against an individual or against a company that has caused them a loss .
In addition , care must be taken to ensure that any court judgments are enforced quickly , so that the individuals or companies responsible and liable for compensation have no margin to evade their responsibility by simply transferring their assets to another jurisdiction , thereby denying effective enforcement of the judgment on the debtor within the Single Market .
This practical , yet important , loophole is identified in the own initiative report , which I voted in favour of .
The most important instrument that the EU has to promote growth in the heat of the financial crisis is its Internal Market .
At the moment , EU law is not effectively applied , particularly in the area of civil justice .
In fact , the current level of payment of cross-border debts is very low , both with regard to the assets of private individuals and of businesses .
This fact in itself discourages cross-border trade by sending a message of impunity to debtors , and damages the economic performance of the EU .
In fact , the cost of the cross-border settlement of debts is currently prohibitive for creditors in cases where the debtor has assets in different Member States .
This prevents the Internal Market from working properly .
European Union measures are essential , in order to put an end to this situation and provide EU citizens with effective recourse should they have a claim against another citizen or company ; measures that simplify and accelerate this payment process .
Therefore , I voted in favour of this report , in which the European Parliament calls on the Commission to table legislative proposals on measures for the freezing and disclosure of the assets of debtors and alleged debtors in cross-border cases .
To create a Single Market , parties must be given the necessary mechanisms that allow their debts to be settled throughout the Union .
This concept gave rise to the Brussels I Regulation , for example , with the aim of setting up a single system for recognising legal judgments within the EU .
However , it continues to be extremely difficult for a creditor to enforce a debt if the debtor 's assets are divided between several Member States , which - there is no harm in repeating it - creates serious difficulties for the implementation of a true Single Market .
The European Order for the Preservation of Assets ( EOPA ) and the European Order for the Disclosure of Assets ( EODA ) may prove to be good instruments for this requirement .
Therefore , I voted for this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report because millions of citizens of the European Internal Market need effective legal means of asserting their claims against other citizens or against enterprises .
People who exercise their right to live , work and travel within the EU should not in future be allowed to fall victim to unscrupulous profiteers and other debtors who evade their responsibilities simply by moving their assets to another country .
In such cases creditors are often refused enforcement of the judgment in the Internal Market , as a result of which citizens or small enterprises lose money and time because they are referred to courts of other Member States once court proceedings have already been initiated .
Moreover , to guarantee effective enforcement the courts must be able to order the disclosure and freezing of the debtor 's assets within the context of measures to provide interim legal protection .
The current legal provisions in the European Union , which allow the reciprocal recognition of national court rulings and cross-border claims , are not sufficient .
Citizens and enterprises also need to have the right to have such rulings enforced effectively .
This report signifies an important step against swindlers and in favour of the citizens and enterprises of the European Internal Market .
in writing . - Millions of businesses make use of the right to trade in the EU 's Internal Market .
Millions of citizens make use of the right to live , work and travel across the EU .
It is essential that in the Internal Market citizens have effective remedies in the event they have a claim against another citizen or business .
The EU has legislation in place to enable cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of judgments of national courts , including the Brussels I Regulation , the European Enforcement Order , the Small Claims Procedure and the Order for Payment Procedure .
But getting the judgment is only one part of the process ; citizens and businesses must have the right to have their judgments effectively enforced .
One necessary component of effective enforcement is that courts must be able , as an interim measure , to act swiftly to order the disclosure of the debtor 's assets and freeze them .
Millions of businesses operate in the European Union 's Internal Market and millions of citizens make use of the right to live , work and travel in all Member States .
It is therefore essential that in the Internal Market citizens have access to necessary and effective remedies in the event they have a claim against another citizen or business .
Today , the European Union has legislation in place to enable cross-border claims and the mutual recognition of judgments of national courts .
However , obtaining a judgment is often only one part of the process .
The more than 500 million European citizens and their businesses must have the right to effective enforcement of judgments .
One necessary component of effective enforcement is that courts must be able , as an interim measure , to act immediately to order a disclosure of the debtor 's assets and to freeze them .
The aim of the report we are adopting today is to call on the Commission to swiftly bring forward proposals on interim measures for the freezing and disclosure of debtors ' assets in cross-border disputes .
in writing . - I support this own-initiative report because it supports the creation of a European Order for the Preservation of Assets and a European Order for the Disclosure of Assets .
I am voting for this proposal , because I agree with the discharge procedures , with suitable appropriations being proposed for each heading .
in writing . - ( NL ) I cannot support discharge being granted to the European Commission or to the other institutions and bodies .
The most important reason for that is that the error percentage remains too high .
The report on the European Commission by rapporteur Chatzimarkakis spells out the areas of concern brilliantly .
However , the Committee on Budgetary Control has failed to conclude that the grant of discharge should be postponed , despite the fact that that is exactly the tool we should be using to exert pressure on the European Commission and Member States to make improvements .
For example , the national declarations of assurance .
They help improve shared management , and that also means structural funds .
The many complicated rules connected with structural funds and research grants present another major difficulty .
This is why I have tabled an amendment to the report by Mr Garriga Polledo from the Special Committee on the Policy Challenges and Budgetary Resources for a Sustainable European Union after 2013 .
With my amendment , I request that the European Commission ensures every proposal is accompanied by an impact assessment .
That impact assessment must be carried out independently , not by the European Commission itself .
To conclude , reduction of the regulatory burden and national declarations of assurance should lead to fewer errors in financial management .
By granting discharge , the European Parliament is throwing away the most important tool it has ever had at its disposal .
The Chatzimarkakis report deserved a better fate .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge to the European Commission because , despite the difficulties in managing these funds , the result obtained by the Court of Auditors shows objective improvements .
The greater audit transparency and the improved performance shown by all those involved in the management of European funds are the two main reasons that lead me to support this discharge .
The vote on granting discharge to the Commission for the 2009 financial year has come at a very significant political moment , since the negotiations on the next multiannual financial framework will be marked by a revision of the financial regulation .
This was therefore an opportunity for Parliament to give new impetus and vitality to a procedure that is not always taken seriously .
Parliament has approved the Commission 's budget spending for 2009 , having obtained undertakings aimed at giving Member States more responsibility and improving control by national authorities of Union expenditure .
More effective management and control systems must be established .
In future , national political bodies will be obliged to sign national management declarations making them accountable for the way in which Union funds have been spent in their countries .
The financial crisis that is currently shaking Europe also has implications for the EU budget .
We cannot tolerate any scandal or mismanagement of expenditure .
We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to grant discharge to the Commission for the financial year 2009 .
However , we chose not to support the paragraphs relating to the EU 's Staff Regulations .
We believe that there may be a need for Commission staff to have additional travel days - some can have long distances to travel and may need to change planes or other forms of transport several times .
In addition , changes to the EU 's Staff Regulations can only be made within the framework of a codecision procedure between Parliament and the Council .
Therefore , the discharge process is not the right forum for these issues .
The reform of the Staff Regulations will be dealt with at a later date in the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs .
I welcome the continuous improvements made in the last few years by the Court of Auditors with regard to the performance of all those in charge of funds .
The transparency , sound management and responsibility of all the entities involved must always be a priority and example of the European Union .
However , there is still a need to create real Member State responsibility with regard to their role in the shared management of Union cohesion funds , whilst it remains essential to introduce a system for analysing the viability of data submitted by national agencies and a mandatory national management declarations system .
It is crucial that the Member States take responsibility for the proper use of EU funds , and develop serious and transparent control and simplification policies .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report on the 2009 Commission discharge because it gives an assurance of better management of payments in cases where funds are misused .
I could not support some of the paragraphs from the report , which referred to the forthcoming review of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities .
The reasons behind my decision are that revision of the Staff Regulations goes beyond the remit of the Committee on Budgetary Control and does not belong in the 2009 discharge report , but falls instead within the competence of the Legal Affairs Committee , which will be dealing with these issues in the near future .
I believe that we have to take an overall approach and make a comprehensive review of the Regulations as a whole , rather than a fragmented one with various reports addressing various regulations .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Commission for the financial year 2009 , because it provides a better guarantee of management as regards payments , particularly when funds are misused .
By adopting this decision the European Parliament grants the Commission discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2009 and sets out its comments in related documents .
I feel that it is necessary to simplify and reduce public procurement rules in order to reduce the overall incidence of errors .
Governance problems between the Financial Regulation and the cohesion regulations can be avoided by better alignment of eligibility rules across various policies .
Simplification , in particular in connection with the revision of the Financial Regulation , needs to ensure stable rules and management schemes in the long term .
I regret that in considering the implementation of the budget for the 2009 financial year , the Court of Auditors has again chosen to focus on energy and research policies rather than on transport policy .
There is nevertheless a need for greater transparency through the provision of proper information to taxpayers and budget authorities , and for regional and transport policies to be more closely coordinated , as at present only cursory consideration is given to the potential European added value of projects and , consequently , funds are not used as effectively as possible to eliminate bottlenecks and problems relating to border crossings or inadequate connections .
in writing . - I strongly believe this report indicates the need for the Commission to undertake a thorough spending review in order to identify possible savings which would reduce pressure on the budget during this period of austerity .
in writing . - I voted against the proposals to discharge the Commission of its obligation to report on its expenditure because the report was unclear .
I did vote in favour of the motion for a resolution , as the general idea of cost efficiency in the EU is raised many times .
I am in favour of cutting costs in relation to the Commission and its agencies .
However , this may not be at the expense of rank-and-file workers in the Commission , as was suggested in Paragraph 81 .
I do not accept that workers should be forced to work longer as a result of cuts , regardless of who their employer is .
Workers ' rights should be guaranteed and defended .
If their function has become obsolete , they should have access to similar jobs with the same conditions .
Elected representatives enforcing a slashing of living standards for workers should , at the very least , accept that their own privileges undergo the same treatment .
I will continue to urge that public representatives be paid an average skilled worker 's wage and to advocate the elimination of unnecessary costs , perks , benefits and other privileges .
in writing . - This grants the Commission discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , and sets out its observations in the resolution that forms an integral part of the Decisions on discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , Section III - Commission and executive agencies , and in its resolution on conclusions concerning the special reports issued by the Court of Auditors .
Under Article 17 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union , the Commission shall execute the budget and shall do so , under Article 317 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , in cooperation with the Member States , on its own responsibility , having regard to the principles of sound financial management .
By adopting this report , Parliament approves the granting of discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have neither granted nor refused discharge for the Commission .
The reason for this is that , on the one hand , the European Court of Auditors was once again unable to issue a positive statement for the Commission in 2009 ; on the other , the report makes it sufficiently clear that this is mainly due to the inadequate cooperation of the Member States as recipients of funding .
Granting discharge to a deficient system does nothing to help this situation .
Controls must be ensured before funds are handed out .
in writing . - ( SK ) The Court of Auditors estimates that financial irregularities or even possible embezzlement of resources in 2009 account for 2-5 % of all payments .
This is far more than the annual contribution of Slovakia to the EU budget .
We are expected to approve the accounts of the 27 European agencies , although I suspect that Europe would be better off without these agencies .
What is more , in the draft budget for next year we are going to increase precisely those sectors in which the audit found the greatest discrepancies .
Saddest of all is the fact that it makes no difference whether this Parliament gives or does not give its blessing to the management of the European agencies and institutions .
Everything will continue as usual .
The stricter rules for the redistribution and accounting of these resources will solve nothing , because they will lead to more bureaucracy and slower payments , thereby ultimately undermining the effectiveness of support programmes .
I would therefore like to advocate a phasing out of redistribution , which is becoming a less than transparent instrument for the social engineering of today .
It distorts the market , reduces competitiveness and deprives people of initiative and responsibility for how and where they live .
The less money we redistribute on the basis of political priorities , the less risk of corruption there will be and the more viable will be Europe 's regions and our entire economy .
I support this report , especially what it says about the Special Report of the Court of Auditors on the reform of the sugar sector .
That report drew attention to the significant problems evident in the sugar sector since it was reformed in 2006 and to the problems that former sugar producers now face .
Without the report of the Court of Auditors those difficulties would not be reported .
The sugar plants played an important role in the agricultural sector , particularly in Ireland , where there were processing plants in Cork and in Carlow , and it could be argued that the reform put an end to the sugar sector in Ireland .
As stated in the report , insufficient information was provided about the impact on the processing regions , the impact of quota refusals on local economies , the jobs that would be lost and the distribution of compensation .
There was a lack of transparency and information associated with the reform process for those working in the sector and for European taxpayers and there must now be clarity and honesty about the impact of the reform throughout the European agricultural sector .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
Every year the Court of Auditors presents special reports in the context of the Commission discharge .
These special reports are of great importance when reflecting on and changing and adapting programmes and projects because they can result in a more efficient use of human and budgetary resources .
On the basis of these reports , the Commission can take prompt action to remedy most of the shortcomings noted by the Court of Auditors .
I was the rapporteur responsible for the working document of the Committee on Budgetary Control on the Special Report of the European Court of Auditors entitled " Improving transport performance on Trans-European rail axes ” .
I believe that the Commission must take the necessary action in order to adapt the rail infrastructure to cater for trans-European services while creating missing links at cross-border locations , replacing or upgrading the old rail infrastructure and helping the Member States to alleviate various complications related to the different gauges and providing the necessary financial assistance .
I voted in favour of granting 2009 discharge in respect of the general budget of the European Union because I take the view that the funds have been managed in a transparent and , overall , efficient way , including in the light of the particular circumstances that the European economy encountered in the period in question .
I view the assessment made by the Court of Auditors in these special reports positively , because it is through these reports that we are able to access more clearly the information relating to how funds are spent , and also the need to reassess or adapt programmes and projects .
All the information now provided by the Court of Auditors must be taken into consideration by the EU , particularly by the Commission as the main executive and management body of the EU budget .
We must aspire to an exemplary optimisation of how the funds are handled and spent , based on simple and transparent rules founded on the principle of direct responsibility .
I voted in favour of this document , because the Court of Auditors has managed to produce , every year , more and better special reports .
Unfortunately , they do not always get the political attention they deserve because of the rules applicable in Parliament .
These special reports are of great importance when reflecting on and changing and / or adapting programmes and projects , because they can result in a more efficient use of human and budgetary resources .
I appreciate the positive attitude of the Commission to these processes and its willingness to take prompt action to remedy most of the shortcomings noted by the Court of Auditors in these reports .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which underlines the need for more rigorous examination of projects at the application stage in order to prevent shortcomings , and , accordingly , invites the Commission to further improve the use of guidance and checklists by providing clearer criteria for assessing grant applications in order to enhance the effectiveness and consistency of the procedures and their results , and to ensure proper follow-up action in cases of non-provision of required information or action .
in writing . - This welcomes the fact that the Court of Auditors has managed to produce , every year , more and better special reports ; regrets the fact that , unfortunately , they do not always get the political attention they deserve because of the rules applicable in Parliament ; points out that those special reports are of great importance when reflecting on and changing and / or adapting programmes and projects , because they can result in a more efficient use of human and budgetary resources ; and appreciates the positive attitude of the Commission to those processes and its willingness to take prompt action to remedy most of the shortcomings noted by the Court of Auditors in those reports .
By adopting this report Parliament emphasises the fact that the Court of Auditors has managed to produce , every year , more and better special reports .
Unfortunately these reports do not always receive the political attention they deserve , even though they are of great importance when reflecting on , changing and adapting programmes and projects because they can result in a more efficient use of human and budgetary resources .
Today 's text underscores once again our appreciation of the positive attitude of the Commission and its willingness to take prompt action to remedy most of the shortcomings noted by the Court of Auditors in the reports in question .
I am voting for this proposal , because I agree with the discharge procedures , with suitable appropriations being proposed for each heading .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Parliament for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors found the payments as a whole to be free from material error .
It found no material weaknesses when assessing the compliance of supervisory and control systems with the Financial Regulation .
The Secretary-General of the European Parliament certified his reasonable assurance that Parliament 's budget has been implemented in accordance with the principles of sound financial management and that the control framework put in place provides the necessary guarantees as to the legality and regularity of the underlying operations .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is necessary for Parliament , along with all Union institutions , to find the most cost effective ways of using financial and staff resources , including possible savings , as well as electronic tools and methods , to provide efficient services .
I believe that the Secretary-General of the European Parliament must propose arrangements to ensure that use of the general expenditure allowance is transparent in all cases and that it is used for the purposes intended .
I also agree that Parliament should only have one workplace in the same location as the other Union institutions .
Currently the decision to change this situation - and to make some EUR 160 000 000 of savings annually , as well as to considerably lessen Parliament 's carbon footprint - lies exclusively with the European Council .
We need to further rationalise the missions between the three working places , justifying and monitoring them better in order to avoid unnecessary missions and costs .
I voted for this discharge .
As far as I am concerned , the European Parliament 's operating budget is in keeping with the financial climate .
Several of the comments on increasing transparency are along the right lines .
I also consider it reasonable for Parliament to award prizes , especially for the purpose of supporting European cinema .
Added to this , the sums in question are basically symbolic .
I voted for the report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , in relation to the European Parliament .
I should like to stress that , in the section on major changes in budget management during 2009 , I voted for item 5 because I understand that the general expenditure allowance paid into our accounts must be handled transparently in all cases and must be used for the purposes intended .
Therefore and to that end , I agree that it should be the Secretary-General who adopts the appropriate measure .
I voted in favour of granting Parliament discharge in respect of its 2009 budget because I take the view that , overall , the resources have been managed wisely .
I remain highly sceptical about the division between the three places of work : it creates waste and stress and , symbolism aside , I think there is a fairly urgent need to take steps to get rid of this tripartite system , which has an economic and environmental cost .
In view of the current economic situation , the European Parliament has a duty to set an example in terms of cutting costs .
Among the intended cost-saving measures , it has been decided that an interpretation service will automatically be provided for meetings of working groups in six languages only ( French , German , English , Polish , Spanish and Italian ) , whilst other languages will only be made available if Members request them .
Other demands include rules restricting long distance journeys by official Parliament cars .
The resolution also calls for a long-term review of Parliament 's budget with a view to reducing costs .
This vote also provided an opportunity to revive the debate on where the seat of the European Parliament should be .
However , this situation is linked to a historical background and to legal statutes that cannot be challenged on the basis of often mistaken attacks concerning the costs or problems associated with the dispersal of the European Parliament 's premises .
There is no question of choosing between Strasbourg and Brussels in this instance , since according to the Treaties that founded our Union in the beginning , Strasbourg is the rule and Brussels the exception .
Once again , I voted in favour of this report which points out that real savings could be made if Parliament only had one workplace , in the same city as the European Union 's other institutions ( in other words Brussels ) .
The report of the Secretary-General on Parliament 's preliminary draft estimates for 2011 itself draws attention to the huge annual costs arising from the geographical split of Parliament , estimated at some EUR 160 000 000 , which accounts for 9 % of Parliament 's total budget .
It is true that at present the decision to change this situation , and in doing so to make some EUR 160 000 000 of savings per year , whilst at the same time considerably lessening Parliament 's carbon footprint , lies solely with the Council .
However through this vote , I call upon Parliament 's President and the Members who are negotiating the Union budget on behalf of Parliament to suggest to the Council that it take steps to ensure that the Union can make these savings .
I voted for the report on discharge of the European Parliament budget 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
I believe that it would be useful to review the European Parliament budget in the long term , in order to reduce costs and create resources for the efficient functioning of the Parliament in the context of its increased competences arising from the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - ( SV ) I would like to emphasise that , as a public institution , the European Parliament must strive to demonstrate as much openness and transparency as possible .
I also believe , particularly in view of the current economic situation , that Parliament must review its expenditure and identify savings and ways to increase efficiency .
Parliament ought to have a more in-depth debate on these issues , which is why I would like to provide more room for the discharge debate .
I also have a positive view of the principle that the European Parliament should have a common air miles system to provide the benefit of cheaper air travel .
Finally , I do not believe it is wrong for Parliament to award cultural prizes .
However , I am highly critical of Parliament 's Prize for Journalism , and I do not believe that it is appropriate for Parliament to award prizes to journalists whose task it is to critically examine the European Parliament .
I therefore believe that this prize should be abolished .
in writing . - On the discharge Report of the European Parliament for 2009 , I voted in line with my political Group against paragraph 143 on airmiles .
The same concept is already covered by paragraph 199 on which I voted in favour .
Paragraph 119 is more comprehensive and more practical for implementation purposes .
We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to grant discharge to the European Parliament for the financial year 2009 .
We would like to emphasise that , as a public institution , the European Parliament must strive to demonstrate as much openness and transparency as possible .
We therefore chose to support paragraph 5 , which calls for greater transparency with regard to Members ' expenditure allowance .
We also believe , particularly in view of the current economic situation , that Parliament must review its expenditure and identify savings and ways to increase efficiency .
Parliament ought to have a more in-depth debate on these issues , which is why we would also like to provide more room for the discharge debate .
We also have a positive view of the principle that the European Parliament should have a common air miles system to provide the benefit of cheaper air travel , even though we find it difficult to see how this could be implemented in practice .
Finally , we do not believe it is wrong for Parliament to award cultural prizes .
However , we are highly critical of Parliament 's Prize for Journalism , and do not believe that it is appropriate for Parliament to award prizes to journalists whose task it is to critically examine the European Parliament .
We therefore believe that this prize should be abolished .
in writing . - ( LT ) I abstained from the vote on this document , although the audit of the Court of Auditors states that , as regards administrative expenditure in 2009 , all the institutions satisfactorily operated the supervisory and control systems required by the Financial Regulation and the transactions tested were free from material error .
The Secretary-General also certified , on 2 July 2010 , his reasonable assurance that Parliament 's budget has been implemented in accordance with the principles of sound financial management and that the control framework put in place provides the necessary guarantees as to the legality and regularity of the underlying operations .
I believe that the current financial situation necessitates that the Parliament , along with all Union institutions , finds the most cost effective ways of using financial and staff resources , including possible savings , as well as electronic tools and methods , to provide efficient services .
We need to carry out a long-term review of the European Parliament budget and determine the money that can be saved in the future , in order to reduce costs and find the funds to enable Parliament to operate efficiently as one of the legislative bodies .
I would also point out that citizens have the right to know how the money they pay in taxes is spent and how the Union 's institutions and political bodies use the powers they are given .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Liberal Party is opposed to paragraph 112 .
It is vital that there continues to be equality for the European languages in the EU .
Apart from this paragraph , the report contains a number of sensible initiatives .
in writing . - ( DE ) As regards paragraph 129 of the report on the ' 2009 discharge : EU general budget - European Parliament ' , which concerns the ' voluntary pension fund ' , I wish to state that I am categorically voting against this because it involves using taxpayers ' money to finance pension funds for Members of the European Parliament ( paragraph 129 ( i ) ) .
There is no reason not to raise the retirement age for the Scheme from 60 to 63 ( paragraph 129 ( ii ) ) .
It is a good thing for the managers of the Fund to be called upon to adopt a more prudent and balanced investment strategy ( paragraph 129 ( iii ) ) .
As a matter of principle I am in favour of phasing out the present pension scheme .
in writing . - ( DE ) As regards paragraph 129 of the report on the ' 2009 discharge : EU general budget - European Parliament ' , which concerns the ' voluntary pension fund ' , I wish to state that I have categorically voted against this because it involves using taxpayers ' money to finance pension funds for Members of the European Parliament ( paragraph 129 ( i ) ) .
There is no reason not to raise the retirement age for the Scheme from 60 to 63 ( paragraph 129 ( ii ) ) .
It was a good thing for the managers of the Fund to be called upon to adopt a more prudent and balanced investment strategy ( paragraph 129 ( iii ) ) .
As a matter of principle I am in favour of phasing out the present pension scheme .
in writing . - I voted for the amendment which calls for greater transparency when signing off MEPs ' General Expenditure Allowance .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this report as I think that some measures are needed , aimed at both making MEPs ' activities more efficient and improving the performance of the institution 's officials and infrastructure in terms of security , IT , visitor access and reducing the carbon footprint .
The security policy must be reviewed by implementing a smart , state-of-the-art security system for Parliament , using measures inside buildings and access control procedures , as well as in the area of the EU institutions .
On the ICT front , improvements are required with regard to wireless network access inside the institution 's buildings .
On the other hand , the ICT department should propose specific measures for replacing hard copy administrative documents with environmentally-friendly , electronic versions .
The EU 's institutions are a major tourist attraction in Brussels .
Surveys show that the influx of tourists is higher during holiday periods and at weekends .
The operation of the visitors centre and visit programme ought to be adapted to these demands .
Meeting the 30 % reduction target in carbon emissions by 2020 is a priority .
I support the initiative in favour of replacing the current car fleet with environmentally-friendly vehicles , given the small distances travelled , which is appropriate for the battery life of electric vehicles .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution as the general idea of cost efficiency in the EU is brought up .
I am in favour of cutting costs related to the European Parliament .
However , savings cannot be made at the expense of ordinary workers working in the European Parliament ; their rights should be safeguarded at all times .
I support spending on the promotion of accessible artistic and cultural events which can enrich the lives of the population ; this is why is supported the LUX film prize , despite misgivings on the seemingly large budget spent on this particular award .
Savings can , and should , be made by limiting the expenses and wages of MEPs , for instance by linking the daily allowance to vouched-for expenses .
I also supported the raising of the retirement age for MEPs from 60 to 63 .
I feel that representatives enforcing a slashing of living standards for workers should at the very least accept that their privileges undergo the same treatment .
However , I do not agree that the retirement age for workers should be raised .
I will continue to support workers and trade unionists in their struggle against the increase in the retirement age .
in writing . - ( DE ) I cannot vote for the discharge of the European Parliament budget on the basis that the wandering circus between Brussels and Strasbourg alone is unsustainable for taxpayers .
The European Parliament should have a single location rather than relocating lock , stock and barrel for one week a month .
in writing . - Among other things , the adopted text establishes that the EP takes note of the budgetary constraints many Member States face as a result of the financial and economic crisis and the need to critically review potential savings at all levels including at Union level ; and , in light of this situation , stresses that real savings could be achieved if Parliament only had one workplace in the same location .
The audit carried out by the Court of Auditors indicates that , as regards administrative expenditure in 2009 , all the institutions satisfactorily operated the supervisory and control systems required by the Financial Regulation , and the transactions tested were free from material error .
On 2 July 2010 , the Secretary-General certified with reasonable confidence that Parliament 's budget had been implemented in accordance with the principles of sound financial management and that the control framework put in place provides the necessary guarantees as to the legality and regularity of the underlying operations .
The report that we are adopting today grants the President discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Parliament budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - I support greater transparency in the Parliament and I especially welcome transparency in regard to the GEA .
I voted in favour of Mr Itälä 's report , but I have reservations about recital 113 .
I totally disagree with this recital , which proposes a new system for interpretation services for ' working groups ' .
I cannot agree with it , because the proposed system : does not square with the principle of equal treatment of the Union 's official languages and of their users ; will eventually undoubtedly lead to the exclusion of languages other than the six mentioned ; will , in practice , be impossible to run in a workable fashion , for the simple reason that the member concerned will have to submit a request for interpretation in a supplementary language before they get to see the agenda ; risks turning the language policy into a power game .
If we really want to make savings when it comes to languages , then we should demand that this system apply equally to everyone .
If we cease to attach so much importance to the principle that some members should be allowed to speak in their own language , this will become less important for other members , too .
There is , therefore , only one alternative if we have to economise on interpretation services in the ' working groups ' : use of English , and English only , as the medium of both speaking and listening .
In that case , everyone will be equal before the law and we will be able to make savings .
in writing . - I was unable to support granting discharge to the European Parliament as some concerns remained unresolved .
Although Parliament has taken steps to improve its budget and make savings , questions remain over some issues such as funding for prizes , which are currently paid for by the tax payer .
In addition to this , the final report failed to acknowledge the amount of money being wasted on Strasbourg .
The report did , however , show that some progress is being made .
Following today 's vote , new rules will need to be put in place to ensure that MEPs from all EU countries take steps to ensure the transparency of their office expenses .
The report also called for a review of Parliament 's expenditure in order to guarantee savings are made in future .
I am voting for this proposal , because I agree with the discharge procedures , with suitable appropriations being proposed for each heading .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and agreed that the European Parliament should postpone its decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Council for the financial year 2009 .
The Council has not accepted any invitation to officially and formally meet Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control , responsible for the discharge procedure , or its rapporteur to discuss matters concerning the Council budget execution for 2009 .
The Council also refused to provide a written answer providing Parliament with the information and documents it requested .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Council must provide Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control with comprehensive written answers , as well as all the required documents , by 15 June 2011 at the latest .
The Council must also be accountable to the public for the funds entrusted to it , and in order to facilitate the exchange of information in the discharge procedure , it must follow the same approach as the other institutions .
I voted against granting discharge in respect of the 2009 general budget of the Council because the Council has refused to respond to questions from Parliament on this topic and has failed to provide the essential documents that Parliament has requested .
I am therefore in favour of postponing the 2009 discharge .
Once again , the decision just adopted reflects the persistent lack of cooperation by the Council in the implementation and transparency of its budget .
In the name of transparency , which the public needs , and rigour , I do not consider the Council exonerated from its responsibility of publishing accounts for the funds available to it .
Therefore , I agree with the rapporteur regarding his decision to postpone the decision on discharge of the Council 's accounts until the latter supplies the information and documents requested by the rapporteur and also a complete list of budget carryovers .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because it postpones its decision on granting the Secretary-General of the Council discharge in respect of the implementation of the Council budget for the financial year 2009 .
The reasons for the postponement of the discharge decision are as follows : Firstly , the Council has not accepted any invitation to officially and formally meet Parliament 's Committee responsible for the discharge procedure or its rapporteur to discuss matters concerning the Council budget execution for 2009 .
Secondly , the Council refused to provide a written answer providing Parliament with the information and documents requested from the Council in the annex to a letter of 14 December 2010 signed by the rapporteur .
Thirdly , Parliament has not received fundamental documents from the Council , such as the full list of budgetary transfers .
I voted in favour of this decision , because it is my deep conviction that citizens have the right to know how the money they pay in taxes is spent and how the institutions and political bodies use the powers they are given .
As required each year , the European Parliament has delivered its opinion on whether or not the Union budget has been properly implemented by the various agencies and institutions who are responsible for it .
The allocated sums are earmarked for specific purposes , and the aim of the discharge procedure is to check in retrospect that these purposes have been adhered to .
This is an important prerogative of Parliament , as illustrated for example by its influence on the resignation of the Santer Commission in 1999 .
This year , together with the vast majority of Members of the European Parliament , I refused to grant the Council of Ministers discharge in respect of its activity in the 2009 financial year .
The institutions whose activities are audited by Parliament through the Committee on Budgetary Control , of which I am a member , are obliged to cooperate with that committee , for example by providing it with all the documents that are needed to ascertain that public money is being properly used .
However , in this instance the Council 's cooperation was completely inadequate .
This is why we decided to postpone the discharge until the autumn , so that the checks required for the sake of budgetary transparency can be carried out .
in writing . - IN FAVOUR of the following : 1 .
Postpones its decision on granting the Secretary-General of the Council discharge in respect of the implementation of the Council budget for the financial year 2009 ; 2 .
Sets out its observations in the resolution below ; 3 . Instructs its President to forward this Decision and the resolution that forms an integral part of it to the Council , the Commission , the Court of Justice of the European Union , the Court of Auditors , the European Ombudsman and the European Data Protection Supervisor , and to arrange for their publication in the Official Journal of the European Union ( L series ) .
Through today 's report Parliament postpones its decision on granting the Secretary-General of the Council discharge in respect of the implementation of the Council budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - I supported Parliament 's decision to postpone granting discharge to the Council as I believe the Council has not provided Parliament with sufficient information regarding its accounts .
The Council needs to be scrutinised in the same way as every other European institution , and written documents must be provided in order for discharge to be granted .
The report put a number of questions to Council , many of which have not been answered .
Without concrete explanations from the Council on specific issues , it is not possible to give them the green light for their accounts .
The decision to grant discharge will be taken at a later date , when sufficient information has been provided .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of postponing the decision on the Council discharge for 2009 .
In the light of the new situation created by the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon the continuing refusal of the Council to be subjected to a discharge procedure - thereby taking accountability into account - is unacceptable .
The Council 's expenditure needs to be monitored just as much as that of the other Union bodies if due account is to be taken of the European Transparency Initiative .
I am voting for this proposal , because I agree with the discharge procedures , with suitable appropriations being proposed for each heading .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Court of Auditors for the financial year 2009 .
For the financial year 2009 , the accounts of the Court of Auditors were audited by an external firm , PricewaterhouseCoopers .
In its conclusions it did not make any significant observations relating to the Court of Auditors .
I welcome the audit strategy of the Court of Auditors for the period 2009-2012 and support its priority goals - maximising the overall impact from its audits and increasing efficiency by making best use of resources .
I expect the Court of Auditors to demonstrate the progress in this direction .
I agree with the rapporteur that in future the Court of Auditors must include more complete information in its reports on the agencies , in particular as regards the conclusions of internal auditors ' reports .
I welcome the measures the Court of Auditors is taking to reform and continuously improve its role in line with Parliament 's call for its assessments and audits to have a broader and deeper impact , and for its data to be more reliable .
It is also noted that there has been steady improvement as regards the proportion of men and women on the staff of the Court of Auditors .
There has been a reduction in the disparity at assistant , head of unit and director levels .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the 2009 general budget of the Court of Auditors because the majority of the pre-established objectives relating to the budget have been met , and detailed and transparent information has been provided .
I welcome the exhaustive analysis carried out by an external consultant , confirming that the financial statements of the European Court of Auditors give a true and fair picture of its financial situation , and also that funds were correctly used for their intended purposes .
I also welcome the 2009-2012 audit strategy of the Court of Auditors , which aims to maximise the global impact of its audits and increase efficiency through better use of resources .
I therefore congratulate the Court of Auditors on its excellent performance in 2009 and agree with the rapporteur with regard to all his conclusions .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because the Secretary-General of the Court of Auditors is granted discharge in respect of the implementation of the Court of Auditors budget for the financial year 2009 .
It is also important that the Court of Auditors is urged to consider the possibility of reorganisation , so that some members would be responsible for certain policy areas and other members for groups of Member States , if national audit authorities are unable to control expenditure from the Union budget effectively .
It is also noted that recently the number of members of the Court of Auditors has practically doubled , while the number of policy areas have not , and the Court of Auditors could exercise this option .
Independence , integrity , impartiality , excellence and professionalism are the core values of the Court of Auditors and , in my opinion , we need to underline and uphold them .
I voted in favour of granting discharge in respect of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section V - Court of Auditors .
As we know , the external audit of the EU 's budget is carried out by the Court of Auditors itself .
Therefore , as in the two previous financial years , an external firm , PricewaterhouseCoopers , was appointed to audit its budget .
The Court of Auditors was commended for the quality of its Annual Activity Report , which showed that its transactions and activities were legal and completely reliable .
in writing . - I voted for this report and in doing so welcome the audit strategy of the Court of Auditors for the period 2009-2012 and support its priority goals ( maximising the overall impact from its audits and increasing efficiency by making best use of resources ) .
I expect the Court of Auditors to report on the steps taken to implement this audit strategy as well as to demonstrate the progress in this direction using the Key Performance Indicators ( KPI ) , in particular with the introduction of KPI 1 to 4 in 2010 .
I particularly welcome the plan to publish follow-ups in respect of the special reports to increase their impact .
in writing . - This grants the Secretary-General of the Court of Auditors discharge in respect of the implementation of the Court of Auditors budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Secretary-General of the Court of Auditors discharge in respect of the implementation of the Court of Auditors budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament is concerned by the decrease of detailed information in the Court of Auditors ' specific annual reports on the agencies and encourages the Court of Auditors in the future to include more complete information in its reports on the agencies , in particular as regards the conclusions of internal auditors ' reports .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted against the decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of budget of the European Economic and Social Committee for the financial year 2009 .
On 11 March 2011 , the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) decided to open an investigation into dubious practices by the EESC 's secretariat .
I agree with the rapporteur that the EESC and OLAF should report to the European Parliament on the progress and outcome of the case .
The EESC and must cooperate fully with OLAF and provide all necessary assistance to OLAF agents to carry out their investigation .
I believe that the European Parliament Committee on Budgetary Control , responsible for the discharge procedure , must follow up the issue closely in order to obtain additional information on the impact of the OLAF investigation and to take into account the outcome in the 2010 discharge .
Furthermore , I believe that the allegations presented to OLAF clearly affect the reputation of the Union , because they are directed against one of the European Union 's institutions .
in writing . - ( BG ) I did not support the discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2009 , Section VI - European Economic and Social Committee .
Everyone is aware that this institution 's 2009 budget was investigated by OLAF .
I think that the European Parliament requires more information about events to be able to make the correct decision about this discharge .
Based on the information provided so far , there are internal breaches in this European institution , described as serious problems relating to the operation of its secretariat .
I voted in favour of granting the European Economic and Social Committee discharge in respect of its 2009 budget because , despite the issues raised by the recent European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) investigation , I am confident that it is possible to clarify the aspects that were not transparent and to improve reporting procedures for the future .
We Swedish Social Democrats chose not to grant discharge at this stage to the European Economic and Social Committee for the financial year 2009 .
Following an internal notification OLAF decided to open an investigation , and therefore , in order to be in possession of all the necessary facts , we would like to await the result of this investigation before we grant discharge .
It is with considerable concern that I note the whistle-blowing in the case of possible mismanagement of the European Economic and Social Committee ( EESC ) , and that it is now the subject of a pending action of the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
I agree with the rapporteur when he insists that both the EESC and OLAF keep the discharge authority informed about the progress and outcome of the case in question .
The allegations just made may have a detrimental effect on the EU 's reputation , since they refer to the internal workings of one of its institutions , and we need to know whether the identified disruption practices are limited to an isolated action or represent continuous irregularities .
Nevertheless , I would congratulate the Court of Auditors on the report it has drawn up relating to the EESC and the developments it achieved during the financial year 2009 , and I agree with the rapporteur 's conclusions .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because the Secretary-General of the European Economic and Social Committee is granted discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Economic and Social Committee budget for the financial year 2009 .
The European Economic and Social Committee is urged to carry out a comprehensive review of expenditure in 2011 in all areas of activity , in order to ensure that all expenditure pays off and it is possible to ascertain areas where savings might be made , which would reduce pressure on the budget in this period of austerity .
I am pleased that the Court of Auditors indicated in its Annual Report that the audit did not give rise to any significant observations as regards the EESC .
In 2009 , the EESC had commitment appropriations available amounting to a total of EUR 122 000 000 ( EUR 118 000 000 in 2008 ) , with a utilisation rate of 98.02 % , which is above the average of the other institutions ( 97.69 % ) .
in writing . - In voting on this report I call on the EESC , and in particular on its Secretary-General , to cooperate fully with OLAF and to provide all necessary assistance to OLAF agents in carrying out their investigation in relation to allegations of maladministration .
in writing . - This grants the Secretary-General of the European Economic and Social Committee discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Economic and Social Committee budget for the financial year 2009 .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants the Secretary-General of the European Economic and Social Committee discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Economic and Social Committee ( EESC ) budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament considers that the allegations presented to the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) clearly affect the reputation of the Union as they refer to the internal functioning of one its institutions , the EESC , and relate to a serious malfunctioning by its secretariat .
Parliament also considers that the identified disruption practices are not limited to a single action , but may represent continuous irregularities that constitute an alleged case of maladministration .
I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Committee of the Regions ( CoR ) for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors indicated in its annual report that the audit did not give rise to any significant observations as regards the CoR .
I welcome the fact that in 2009 the CoR updated its budget-analytical monitoring tool ( BudgetWatch ) , providing more comprehensive information on the CoR 's budget , facilitating the implementation of the CoR 's budgetary resources and identifying the areas which require management attention .
I agree with the rapporteur that CoR members must declare their financial interests , disclosing relevant information on declarable professional activities .
The CoR must follow up this issue in its Annual Activity Report .
in writing . - ( BG ) I do not support the discharge in respect of the implementation of the Committee of the Regions ' budget because this institution is only a consultative body .
As it is also a body representing the interests of the European regions , I think that its funding should come entirely from the regions .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of authorising discharge of the 2009 general budget of the Committee of the Regions .
I did so not only because the annual activities reports been admirably prepared , but also because the techniques for editing and collecting information have been innovated and improved in pursuit of greater transparency .
I welcome the conclusions of the audit of the Court of Auditors , whose annual report states that the audit did not give rise to any significant findings .
I also welcome the excellent performance and high quality that continues to characterise the annual reports on the activities of the Committee of the Regions .
Finally , I agree with the rapporteur 's conclusions and commend the Committee of the Regions on including the follow-up given to Parliament 's previous discharge decisions .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because the Secretary-General of the Committee of the Regions ( CoR ) is granted discharge in respect of the implementation of the CoR budget for the financial year 2009 .
The CoR is urged to carry out a comprehensive review of expenditure in 2011 in all areas of activity , in order to ensure that all expenditure is beneficial and to ascertain possible savings , because this would reduce pressure on the budget in this period of austerity .
In 2009 , the CoR had commitment appropriations available amounting to a total of EUR 88 000 000 ( EUR 93 000 000 in 2008 ) , with a utilisation rate of 98.37 % , which is above the average of the other institutions ( 97.69 % ) .
At the same time , the Court of Auditors indicated in its annual report that the audit did not give rise to any significant observations as regards the CoR .
I commend the CoR for the consistently high quality of its Annual Activity Reports , and welcome the inclusion of the follow-up to the Parliament 's previous discharge decisions .
in writing . - ( IT ) First of all , I would like to thank all those who worked on the text as well as to congratulate the Committee of the Regions , whose audit has not given rise to any significant observations .
I would highlight , moreover , that in 2009 the Committee of the Regions had a total of EUR 88 million of available commitment appropriations ( 2008 : EUR 93 million ) , with a utilisation rate of 98.37 % , which is higher than the average of other institutions ( 97.69 % ) .
All transactions and activities carried out by the Committee of the Regions were completed in a wholly legal and regular manner .
in writing . - I voted for this report giving discharge to the Committee of the Regions ( CoR ) , and I am pleased that , in our resolution , Parliament ' reconfirms its position that , in the interests of transparency , declarations of financial interests of members of all Union institutions should be accessible on the Internet via a public register ; reminds the CoR of its request that CoR members declare their financial interests , disclosing relevant information on declarable professional activities and remunerated posts or activities ; notes with satisfaction the CoR response on the matter , in particular the letter of the president of the CoR of 11 February 2011 ; [ and ] requests the CoR to follow up this issue in its Annual Activity Report ' .
in writing . - This grants the Secretary-General of the Committee of the Regions discharge in respect of the implementation of the Committee of the Regions budget for the financial year 2009 .
in writing . - ( IT ) With today 's resolution , Parliament grants discharge to the Secretary-General of the Committee of the Regions for the implementation of the budget of the Committee of the Regions for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament commends the Committee of the Regions for the consistently high quality of its Annual Activity Reports and welcomes the inclusion of the follow-up to Parliament 's previous discharge decisions .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and endorsed the European Parliament 's decision to grant the Commission discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds ( EDF ) for the financial year 2009 .
The EDF is the main instrument for providing Union development aid to the people of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries and the overseas countries and territories .
The Court of Auditors judges that the final annual accounts of the Eighth , Ninth and Tenth EDFs present fairly , in all material respects , the financial position of the EDFs as of 31 December 2009 .
I also agree with the rapporteur that there should be EDF budgetisation , which will strengthen the democratic control , accountability and transparency of funding and will provide more coherence in Union policy concerning ACP countries .
I also believe that , within the scope of the revision of the guidelines on budgetary support by the Commission , particular attention must be given to supervisory and control systems .
The Commission must strengthen monitoring and annual reporting on compliance .
in writing . - ( BG ) During a financial crisis , the European Union needs to focus its expenditure on dealing with the crisis .
Around 15 % of citizens in the European Union live below the poverty threshold .
What significance do the Eight , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds have for these people ?
I am not against the European Development Funds , but I think that , in order to support the other countries , the European Union needs to deal with its own problems first .
I am sure that these 15 % of European Union citizens expect the same .
I voted in favour of the authorisation to discharge the Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds for 2009 .
I did so because , on reading the report , I was able to see how effectively the resources have been managed with respect to achieving the established objectives .
Moreover , I agree with the development priorities and believe that the accounting procedures are perfectly calibrated for the ex-ante prevention of errors , fraud and hoarding by subjects with no entitlement .
The European Development Funds ( EDF ) continue to constitute the principal instrument that the EU has for granting development aid to the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries and the Overseas Countries and Territories ( OCTs ) and , though implemented according to specific financial rules , remain outside the EU budget .
It therefore urgently needs to be integrated with the EU budget to enable increased democratic control , accountability and transparency of financing .
This report makes an exhaustive analysis of the budgetary situation of the eighth , ninth and tenth EDF , drawing attention to some important questions that urgently require the review and implementation of ex ante controls in the delegations and internal control systems of the partner countries , particularly with regard to public tender procedures .
Finally , this report shows once more that there is still a long way to go with regard to management of the EDF and their proper use , which is why I agree with all the rapporteur 's conclusions and congratulate him on his work .
Greater consistency is needed in EU development aid and cooperation policy , particularly with regard to the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries .
This is even more important now , when these countries are faced with enormous pressures - and even blackmail - from the EU to accept impositions in the form of the ' Economic Partnership Agreements ' that threaten their interests and compromise the effectiveness of the support provided under instruments such as the European Development Funds ( EDF ) .
The rapporteur maintains that the incorporation of the EDF into the Union budget will strengthen democratic control , accountability and transparency of financing .
We would stress the warning that this incorporation of the EDF into the EU general budget must not lead to an overall reduction in development spending with regard to the two current finance instruments .
As the rapporteur mentioned it , we would also stress the need to study and assess the best ways to increase destination countries ' capacities for absorbing EDF aid , which immediately means the profound involvement of both governments and peoples in outlining and implementing programmes , and in setting priorities .
As the rapporteur says , full knowledge of appropriate expenditure is also necessary .
We are well aware that greater consistency is needed in EU development aid and cooperation policy , particularly with regard to the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries .
This is even more important now , when these countries are faced with enormous pressures - and even blackmail - from the EU to accept impositions that threaten their interests and compromise the effectiveness of the support provided under instruments such as the European Development Funds ( EDF ) ; the so-called Economic Partnership Agreements are a good example .
The report maintains that the incorporation of the EDF into the Union budget will strengthen democratic control , accountability and transparency of financing .
We would stress the warning that this incorporation of the EDF into the EU general budget must not lead to an overall reduction in development spending with regard to the two current finance instruments .
As the rapporteur mentioned it , we would also stress the need to study and assess the best ways to increase destination countries ' capacities for absorbing EDF aid , which immediately means the profound involvement of both governments and peoples in outlining and implementing programmes , and in setting priorities .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the European Development Funds .
I welcome the fact that Parliament , in its report , reiterates its support for EDF budgetisation , which will strengthen the democratic control , accountability and transparency of funding and will provide more coherence in Union policy in relation to the ACP countries .
The report refers to the Commission 's statement to the effect that it wants to propose to incorporate the EDF into the Union budget during discussions on the next financial framework , and that it will keep Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control fully informed of this initiative .
Parliament insists , however , that the incorporation of the EDF into the Union budget must not lead to any overall reduction in development spending with respect to the two current funding instruments .
It urges the Council and the Member States to respond positively to the Commission 's proposal and to agree that the EDF will be fully incorporated in the Union budget from 2014 onwards , as part of the next financial framework .
It believes this measure to be long overdue , and that budgetisation of the EDF should take place at the earliest possible date .
in writing . - This grants the Commission discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds for the financial year 2009 .
With today 's resolution , Parliament grants the Commission discharge for the execution of the budget of the Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds ( EDFs ) for the financial year 2009 .
I stress that Parliament notes that the EDF is not integrated in the EU budget , despite being the main instrument for providing Union development aid to the populations of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries as well as the Overseas Countries and Territories ( OCT ) .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of Mr Staes ' report , because among other things he speaks once again in favour of the European Development Funds ( EDFs ) being included in the budget , thereby fulfilling the principles of democratic control , accountability and transparency of funding .
On the other hand , he was also critical of certain weaknesses found , such as those found by the European Court of Auditors relating to public procurement procedures and a wide variety of other controls .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report and agree that the European Parliament should postpone its decision to grant discharge in respect of the implementation of budget of the European Medicines Agency for the financial year 2009 .
In its report on the accounts of the Agency , the Court of Auditors qualified its opinion on the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions .
The Court of Auditors found errors in the procurement procedures corresponding to a significant amount of the Agency 's total budget for the financial year 2009 .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency must improve the quality of its procurement procedures in order to put an end to the shortcomings identified by the Court of Auditors .
The Agency 's Internal Audit Service found particularly serious shortcomings in the area of medicine evaluation .
I find it unacceptable that the Agency does not apply the relevant rules effectively , meaning that there is no guarantee that the evaluation of human medicines is performed by independent experts .
The Agency is not complying effectively with its code of conduct by setting out principles and guidance on independence and confidentiality applicable to the management board and committee members , experts and Agency staff .
I agree that the Agency must inform the European Parliament of the steps it has taken since its inception to ensure the independence of its experts .
I voted against the authorisation to discharge the 2009 general budget of the European Medicines Agency .
I did so because , as reported by the Court of Auditors , there were some irregularities in the transactions on which the accounts are based , which cause concerns about the correct use of funds .
I am therefore in favour of postponing the closure of accounts for the financial year 2009 so that further management checks can be carried out .
In the absence of sufficient guarantees as to the independence of the experts recruited to perform scientific assessments on medicines for human use , we have voted to postpone granting the Executive Director of the European Medicines Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
In particular , this issue of independence concerns the assessment of the appetite suppressant benfluorex , the active ingredient in the product Mediator , which may have suffered from conflicts of interest .
It appears that this drug may have been responsible for the deaths of an estimated 500-2 000 people and caused severe heart damage in thousands of others .
This case reveals a degree of failure of expert assessments and raises the question of the experts ' skill and independence in our risk society .
We must therefore be seen to be extremely vigilant .
This is why we refused to give our blanket approval .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on discharge of the budget of the European Medicines Agency for the financial year 2009 , since it contributes to scrutiny of how funds are used by the European institutions .
However , I consider it necessary to introduce improvements with regard to the identification and management of conflicts of interest , and to procurement procedures .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because it postpones the decision on granting the Executive Director of the European Medicines Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 and postpones the closure of the accounts of the European Medicines Agency for the financial year 2009 .
The main reasons are as follows : failure to issue a formal invitation to tender , failure to prepare detailed technical specifications in advance , failure to clearly define in the technical specifications all the products to be purchased before the negotiation started , failure to appoint an evaluation committee and failure to prepare an evaluation report .
The shortcomings indicated in the report also need to be remedied , because the Agency is a source of important scientific advice , science-based recommendations , and best practice for medicine evaluation and supervision in the Union .
With today 's vote Parliament has decided to postpone the closure of the accounts of the European Medicines Agency for the financial year 2009 .
We felt unable to grant discharge because , as a result of the checks and assessments carried out , the Court of Auditors revealed several matters of significant importance .
The main concerns regard the management of procurement procedures and criteria used for recruiting staff .
I therefore add my voice to the request for information made to the Agency , in which the Agency is also urged to inform the discharge authority , by 30 June 2011 , of the measures taken and improvements achieved regarding all these worrying issues .
As it is required to do each year , the European Parliament has been asked for a decision on whether the Union budget has been properly implemented by the various agencies and institutions who are responsible for it .
The sums are allocated for specific purposes and the aim of the discharge procedure is to check in retrospect that these purposes have been adhered to .
This is an important prerogative of Parliament , as illustrated for example by its influence on the resignation of the Santer Commission in 1999 .
This year , together with the vast majority of Members of the European Parliament , I refused to grant the European Medicines Agency discharge in respect of its activity in the 2009 financial year This is because the independence of experts recruited to perform scientific assessments on medicines for human use has not been properly guaranteed .
For example , doubts still remain about possible conflicts of interest in relation to the assessment of the appetite suppressant benfluorex .
The agency 's procurement procedures and criteria for recruiting staff have also attracted criticism .
While the Mediator scandal prompts us to reinforce our precautions before allowing medicines to be placed on the market , the serious malfunctioning of the European Medicines Agency must be penalised .
in writing . - The report on the 2009 discharge for the European Medicines Agency provided for postponement of the discharge .
I voted in favour of this report for three main reasons .
Firstly , the European Court of Auditors found serious irregularities in several procurement procedures , including in one IT contract worth around EUR 30 million .
Because of these errors , best value for money was not ensured .
Secondly , the European Medicines Agency breached personnel selection rules , and thirdly it failed to prevent conflicts of interest : a month after retiring from the Agency , the former Executive Director joined a consultancy which , inter alia , advises pharmaceutical companies on developing new medicinal products and reducing the time period to their market introduction .
Although the European Medicines Agency Management Board eventually decided to set limits with regard to the former Executive Director 's new and future professional activities , the discharge authority needs further explanations from the Agency on how cases of conflict of interest are actually handled .
I voted in favour of postponing the decision on discharge for the 2009 financial year , as the Court of Auditors qualified its opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts for the 2009 financial year .
Among other things , the Court drew attention to carryovers and cancellations of significant budget appropriations : for example 38 % of the budget under the title ' Buildings , Equipment and Miscellaneous Operating Expenditure ' was carried over to 2010 .
EUR 14.8 million of this carryover was for activities as yet not implemented ( or , in some cases , for goods not received ) at the year-end , which is at odds with the budgetary principle of annuality .
The Court of Auditors highlighted weaknesses in the management of fees , with significant delays in issuing recovery orders ( up to 21 months ) , as well as weaknesses in the Agency 's treasury policy and failings in its management of procurement procedures .
The report notes that , of the 32 recommendations drawn up by the Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) , one recommendation , on the Agency 's implementing procedures regarding experts , was classed as ' critical ' and 12 , relating primarily to human resources management and management of conflicts of interest calling staff members into question were classed as ' very important ' .
in writing . - This postpones Parliament 's decision on granting the Executive Director of the European Medicines Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
With today 's resolution , Parliament postpones the decision to grant discharge to the Executive Director of the European Medicines Agency for the execution of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament 's decision to postpone is due to the fact that in its report on the annual accounts for 2009 , the Court of Auditors has qualified its opinion as to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions .
I voted in favour of the Stavrakakis report proposing to postpone the decision on discharge for the European Medicines Agency ( EMEA ) in respect of the 2009 financial year .
The Court of Auditors qualified its opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying its accounts for the 2009 financial year .
I consider that Members of Parliament need further evidence before they can propose to grant or refuse discharge to this agency .
A hearing with EMEA has been scheduled to this effect for mid-July .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights for the financial year 2009 .
According to information provided by the Court of Auditors , the Agency 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
I agree with the rapporteur that the Agency must improve its budgetary and recruitment planning in order to redress the lack of consistency between its budgetary and staff forecasting , and to make progress in ensuring , as far as possible , a realistic evaluation of tenders .
The Agency must inform the European Parliament of the actions taken to improve the programming and monitoring of its contracts , in order to avoid , in future , the deficiencies reported by the Court of Auditors .
The Agency must take all the measures necessary to implement the recommendations made by the Court of Auditors .
The agency 's purpose is to provide the institutions and authorities of the European Union and its Member States with assistance and skills in the field of fundamental rights , and to help them adopt measures and define appropriate action , within the scope of EU law .
The agency 's main tasks are to collect , analyse and publish objective , reliable and comparable information on the fundamental rights situation in the EU ; to improve the comparability and reliability of data using new methods and rules ; to carry out and / or promote research work and studies in the field of fundamental rights ; to formulate and publish conclusions and opinions on specific issues , either on its own initiative or at the request of the European Parliament , Council or Commission ; and to promote dialogue with civil society in order to make the general public more aware of fundamental rights .
I am pleased to note that , having opened its investigation of the agency in 2008 , the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) closed it with no further action .
I voted in favour of this document , because the Director of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights is granted discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
The Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
It goes without saying that out of the nine recommendations of the Internal Audit Service ( IAS ) , following an audit on financial management , four are still to be implemented by the Agency .
These concern financing decisions , information needs for reporting and monitoring purposes , work programmes showing all available resources of the budget , and financial procedures and checklists .
The Agency must take measures to implement the recommendations .
The Court of Auditors has been able to obtain reasonable assurances that the annual accounts of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights for the financial year 2009 are in all material respects reliable and that the underlying transactions , taken as a whole , are legal and regular .
The Court of Auditors commented that the Agency could improve its budgetary and recruitment planning , notably as regards transfers between titles , the high vacancy rate ( 21 % ) and the high volume of appropriations carried forward .
The Agency must take all necessary steps to improve the situation .
In today 's vote I have given my backing to the request for discharge with respect to the implementation of the budget of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights for 2009 .
After careful assessment of the Agency 's budget , the Court of Auditors , which is responsible for external financial control , declared that it has obtained reasonable assurances as to the legality and reliability of the pertinent transactions .
I believe , however , that the request made to the Agency to make efforts to improve its budgetary and recruitment planning is absolutely fair .
In the same vein , I applaud the resolve shown by the Agency to avoid future recurrences of the shortcomings highlighted by the Court of Auditors in its report .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution on the Agency for Fundamental Rights and I support calls on the Agency to make progress in ensuring , as far as possible , a realistic evaluation of tenders .
The resolution notes that the Court of Auditors reported on this issue in respect of the award of three framework contracts of a total amount of EUR 2 575 000 , and stresses , in particular , that in these three cases the financial offers differed considerably both in unit prices and in the tenderers ' estimates of the number of man-days necessary for implementation of the same scenario .
in writing . - This grants the Director of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
With today 's resolution Parliament grants discharge to the Director of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights for the implementation of the Agency 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament welcomes the Agency 's pledge to improve the planning and monitoring of its contracts to avoid , in the future , the deficiencies reported by the Court of Auditors .
Parliament therefore calls on the Agency to inform the discharge authority of the action taken in this respect .
in writing . - ( LT ) I endorsed this report and discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy for the financial year 2009 .
According to information provided by the Court of Auditors , the Joint Undertaking 's annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The Joint Undertaking is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
The introduction of these systems needs to be completed immediately .
The Joint Undertaking 's utilisation rate for payment appropriations was 65.3 % .
I agree that the Joint Undertaking is still in a start-up period and that the underspending mostly relates to delays in the progress of the Euratom fusion programme , as was also reported by the Court of Auditors in 2008 .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is important to provide for the conditions under which unspent funds are transferred to the following year .
In view of the size of its budget , the Joint Undertaking should establish an audit committee .
I voted in favour of authorising the 2009 discharge in respect of budget of the Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy because the report shows that the accounts and the pertinent transactions are held to be reliable .
Some inconsistencies were found , though these were due to the fact that the Joint Undertaking concerned is still in its start-up phase .
I therefore believe that , under the careful guidance of the Commission , the auditing system and budgetary management could be improved and that the Joint Undertaking could finish implementing its internal controls and financial reporting systems .
The objectives of the joint undertaking are to provide the contribution of the European Atomic Energy Community ( Euratom ) to the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor ( ITER ) International Fusion Energy Organisation and to ' Broader Approach ' activities with Japan for the rapid realisation of fusion energy , and to prepare and coordinate a programme of activities in preparation for the construction of a demonstration fusion reactor ( DEMO ) and related facilities including the International Fusion Materials Irradiation Facility ( IFMIF ) .
In addition to its other activities , the main tasks of the joint undertaking are to oversee the preparation of the site for the ITER project , to provide the ITER organisation with material , financial and human resources , to coordinate scientific and technological research and development activities in the field of fusion , and to act as an interface with the ITER organisation .
The Court of Auditors identified , and the rapporteur emphasised , the existence of various aspects of the budget to be improved , in particular those relating to the exceptions to budgetary principles , to the role of the Commission 's Internal Audit Service , to the creation of an audit committee , to the late payment of members ' contributions , and to the rules relating to the award of grants .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because the Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year 2009 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
The European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy is in a start-up phase and had not yet fully established its internal control and financial reporting systems by the end of 2009 .
It should also be recognised that consequently the underspending mostly relates to delays in the progress of the Euratom fusion programme , as was also reported by the Court of Auditors in 2008 .
The Joint Undertaking must amend its Financial Regulation in order to integrate the Court of Auditors ' recommendations made in its Opinion No 4 / 2008 on that Regulation .
I believe that further improvement is necessary in relation to the exceptions to budgetary principles , the role of the Internal Audit Service , the establishment of an audit committee , late payment of members ' contributions , the rules on the award of grants and the transitional provisions set out in Article 133 of the ITER Financial Regulation .
in writing . - I voted to give discharge to the Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy .
I am of the opinion that , in view of the size of its budget and the complexity of its tasks , the Joint Undertaking should establish an audit committee , reporting directly to the Governing Board .
in writing . - I have voted AGAINST granting the Director of the European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy discharge in respect of the implementation of the Joint Undertaking 's budget for the 2009 financial year .
Through today 's resolution Parliament grants discharge to the Director of the European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy for the implementation of the Joint Undertaking 's budget for the financial year 2009 .
Parliament urges the Joint Venture to amend its Financial Regulation in order to integrate the Court of Auditors ' recommendations .
Parliament has approved the implementation of the 2009 budget of the forward-looking international scientific project ITER .
I welcome this vote , which negates the futile polemics about the viability of this undertaking , which is the only one of its kind in the world .
Parliament has drawn attention to the problems and delays during the start-up phase and has called for its internal audit system to be improved .
I see in this a signal of encouragement aimed at guaranteeing the long-term future and success of this undertaking in which the world 's major powers are participating .
I wanted to use my vote to reaffirm my confidence in this extremely ambitious scientific adventure , which is expected to have significant benefits .
Fusion is designed to provide the world 's population with energy that is clean , permanent and safe .
It will contribute towards our steps to combat global warming and towards our energy independence .
We must set aside resources that are in keeping with the significance of the issues at stake , and I would like to explain for information purposes that the size of the budget allocated and the delays we have noted relate to the technical and organisational complexity of this unique project .
It is down to the EU to preserve its image by strengthening its commitment to ITER and demanding that its partners do the same .
I am voting for this proposal , because I agree with the discharge procedures , with suitable appropriations being proposed for each heading .
The times of crisis we are experiencing require us to pay particular attention to the way the EU 's financial resources are spent .
The priorities set out by Parliament must be fully respected in order to increase savings by exercising increasingly rigorous financial management .
Results can only be improved through continuous self-criticism , which will enable the correction of all trajectories that deviate from the objectives set by the EU .
Since the Committee on Budgetary Control proposes the adoption of this discharge , I agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations and am voting for this report .
In the wake of the floods that devastated Pakistan in 2010 , the Council called for emergency measures to support the country .
I tabled an amendment rejecting the regulation proposed by the Commission , as trade preferences of this nature are a good idea in theory but not in practice .
Our response to a humanitarian crisis cannot be based on trade , especially considering that it is now one year on from the disaster and the urgency is not as strong .
This type of support is illogical and prejudicial , as some people in Europe , in particular those working in the textiles industry in several of the southern countries , will end up paying for support for Pakistan that we should all be paying for collectively .
Furthermore , by only targeting certain industries , we are not helping all Pakistanis .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
Presented after the unprecedented floods that devastated last summer a vast portion of Pakistan 's territory , the Commission 's proposal seeks to extend autonomous trade preferences to this country concerning 75 product lines of interest to Pakistan ( mostly textile and clothing ) in the form of exemption from custom duties , with the exception of one product ( ethanol ) for which a tariff-rate quota would apply .
in writing . - ( BG ) I fully support the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council introducing emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan .
Trade preferences are hugely important to Pakistan because they will provide sustainable development to a country which has suffered several natural disasters recently .
In addition to concluding the agreement with Pakistan , the European Union will have to play a key role in convincing India to support the agreement within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
I welcome the aid given to Pakistan by the European Union , as the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid , following natural disasters that devastated the country 's economy and population .
However , the use of EU trade policy as a form of humanitarian and development aid is deeply flawed .
In my view , the Commission should never propose such measures without having first quantified the economic and social impact on the various regions of the EU .
One of the most serious results of these measures could be in Portugal , where the textile and clothing industry represents 11 % of exports and 160 000 jobs , and would be hit hard by subsidised competition from Pakistan .
In the wake of the severe floods that hit Pakistan in the summer of 2010 , the European Union wished to provide aid in the form of exceptional trade preferences .
Whilst the purpose behind this initiative is commendable , it is worth questioning how useful it will be in practice and to ask ourselves whether this economic aid will actually reach the Pakistani people , especially small-scale producers and farmers who have been particularly affected by the floods .
The Commission 's trade-based aid plan must go through a specific procedure : it must obtain Parliament 's approval but also that of the WTO , since these trade preferences deviate from basic international trade rules .
Parliament has just given the Commission the green light to continue talks with the WTO but has insisted on restricting their duration and scope .
One might question the wisdom of choosing this slow , drawn-out aid procedure instead of other faster , more effective forms of aid that would have already reached Pakistan by now .
I voted in favour of this report .
I was keen in particular that we should ensure effective monitoring of the trends of imports of products covered by this Regulation as far in advance as possible and establish customs surveillance on these imports .
I am also in favour of the idea that a quarterly report should be submitted on the application and implementation of the monitoring .
This report is on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council introducing emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan .
In terms of humanitarian aid , the European Union always leads the way .
That was the case last summer , when floods devastated a large part of Pakistan , with enormous human and material losses .
In addition to humanitarian assistance in the first hours of the disaster , the EU also has sought other ways to support the economic recovery of the country embodied in the proposed regulation .
However , we have to ensure protection against aspects that could damage some European trade sectors , namely textiles .
In addition , I belief that ' trade preferences ' are not the right way to help a country that is the victim of a disaster .
These preferences may even give rise to a dangerous precedent .
We cannot forget that the current economic and financial crisis has placed those companies most exposed to globalisation in a vulnerable situation , and it is not acceptable that ' trade preferences ' could have a detrimental effect on them .
We Swedish Social Democrats support the Commission 's proposal to suspend all duties on certain imports from Pakistan for a limited time following the floods there last year .
As the purpose of these trade preferences is to try to support Pakistan 's recovery and future development , we believe that they should be offensive and far-reaching without safeguard measures for the EU , particularly as they are to be for a limited time only .
We advocate respect for human rights , including the rights of workers , and for social and environmental standards and democratic principles and for this to always be included as conditions in a trade agreement .
We voted against the extensive human rights requirements proposed in the report , as it is completely unreasonable to expect Pakistan to be able to comply with them before the trade preferences are intended to begin .
Instead , we believe that the EU should have demanded improvements in these areas that could have been implemented quickly , particularly in view of the fact that these demands will be made if a trade agreement between the EU and Pakistan should be entered into at a later date .
As we have already said more than once , the tragedy Pakistan has suffered requires European solidarity .
However , this cannot be a pretext for putting the textile industry of several Member States , such as Portugal , at risk .
There are other ways of showing solidarity : more effective forms of aid , aimed at re-establishing the affected areas and improving the living conditions of the affected people ; based on a policy of effective and lasting development cooperation and aid , which supports the integrated and sustainable development of local communities .
There are also , however , more equitable forms of aid .
These trade concessions mainly benefit the major European importers , who thus see long-held aspirations satisfied .
On the other hand , they damage the textile industry and the countries and regions most dependent on it .
All this against a backdrop of a severe economic crisis and high unemployment .
While it is true that there is no way the measures proposed by the Commission can be a pretext for new job losses and increased exploitation in European industry , at the same time , we cannot ignore the objective difficulties that they will create .
The report acknowledges these , amongst attempts to ' sugar the pill ' with the introduction of safeguards that do not change its substance .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is just another example of defending the interests of European Union 's large companies and financial institutions , at the expense of industry in the countries with the most fragile economies .
By introducing emergency autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan , the European Commission is bringing the narrow commercial interests of a few - business , pure and simple - into the field of humanitarian aid .
It is an exercise in hypocrisy , which uses the natural disaster that has devastated Pakistan to satisfy the aspirations of a few big companies in the EU 's powers , which will damage the EU textile industry , and the countries and regions most dependent on it .
It is a serious blow for a sector that has been hit hard by the liberalisation of world trade ; that is concentrated in regions with high levels of unemployment and poverty , and little economic diversification , such as several regions in northern and central Portugal .
Therefore , we voted for the proposal to reject the agreement , and regret that it was not adopted .
However , we also voted for it to return to the Commission , in the hope that it is still possible to take into account the position of the Portuguese Parliament , which adopted a resolution against these trade concessions .
The necessary solidarity with Pakistan must be genuine aid based on development aid and cooperation policy .
Last year , there were severe floods in Pakistan .
The Commission 's idea for financing reconstruction consisted in opening up EU territory to imports of textiles and other sensitive products without imposing customs duties or , in most cases , quotas , with no consideration for the threat that European businesses would face from this new one-sided competition .
This alone would have been sufficient grounds for voting against this report .
This House refused to reject the report , even though a clause was introduced stating that this special trade agreement may be ended if Pakistan is found to be supporting terrorist organisations .
It contented itself with postponing the final vote .
It seems that we really do need to dispel the ambiguities as to where the Pakistani authorities really stand once and for all , whether it be on sheltering terrorists , helping the Taliban , especially in tribal areas , or persecution of Christians .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document .
Presented after the unprecedented floods that devastated last summer a vast portion of Pakistan 's territory , the Commission 's proposal seeks to extend autonomous trade preferences to this country concerning 75 product lines of interest to Pakistan ( mostly textile and clothing ) in the form of exemption from custom duties , with the exception of one product ( ethanol ) for which a tariff-rate quota would apply .
However , although the autonomous trade preferences would be extended to Pakistan for 3 years , a full impact assessment of the proposed measures has not been carried out by the Commission prior to the adoption of the proposal for a regulation .
In addition , it should be noted that the Commission 's proposal does not impose any burden on Pakistan in the field of human and social rights , contrary to what would have happened had GSP + status been granted to this country .
Although it might be argued that , due to the particular set of circumstances that led to the decision to grant autonomous trade preferences to Pakistan , the proposed measures will not create a binding precedent , this explanation is not entirely convincing .
Indeed , it cannot be excluded that the decision to grant autonomous trade preferences for flood-stricken Pakistan may be followed by other similar initiatives in the future .
Furthermore , there is a risk that adopting autonomous trade preferences decoupled from any kind of human rights conditionality would in fact undermine the current system of EU preferences based on the respect of a set of fundamental rights and values .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Union is known throughout the world for providing assistance where assistance is needed .
The EU proved this once again by rapidly making aid payments following the dramatic floods and their repercussions in Pakistan in 2010 .
As a next step , the Commission intended giving Pakistan a lift economically and guaranteeing that duties will be suspended on textiles and ethanol .
This approach seems to be highly controversial .
The fact is , however , that this initiative first has to be given the green light at World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) level .
Only then should Parliament become active and make a decision .
in writing . - I very much regret that , during the vote on autonomous trade preferences for Pakistan , Parliament agreed to reduce the length of the benefits to one year , thus reducing significantly any gain to Pakistan .
I voted in favour , particularly in consideration of the amendment in which we see that : ' Without prejudice to the conditions set out in paragraph 1 , entitlement to benefit from the preferential arrangements introduced by Article 1 is subject to respect for human rights , including core labour rights , and the fundamental principles of democracy by Pakistan . '
Respect for human rights must be a necessary precondition for any kind of agreement with third countries .
This report allows us to make the aid we grant an already devastated country dependent on that country 's undertaking to give up all forms of trade protectionism .
This is an inequitable proposal and I am voting against this report .
in writing . - As is known , after the unprecedented and devastating floods in Pakistan in July and August 2010 , the European Council at its meeting on 16 September mandated Ministers to agree urgently a comprehensive package of short- , medium- and longer-term measures which will help underpin Pakistan 's recovery and future development .
The draft regulation extends autonomous trade preferences to Pakistan by suspending for a limited period of time all tariffs for certain products of export interest to Pakistan .
A list of 75 dutiable product lines of importance for Pakistan 's exports has been established ( mainly textile and clothing ) .
The selected product lines amount to almost EUR 900 million in import value , accounting for about 27 % of EU imports from Pakistan ( EUR 3.3 billion ) .
I voted ' in favour ' .
in addition to promising over EUR 415 million in immediate aid , the EU is also responding to the flood disaster in Pakistan by means of exceptional trade measures to boost Pakistan 's exports .
The European Commission proposed a package of 75 tariff lines relating to Pakistan 's main export sectors in the areas worst affected by the floods .
Pakistan 's trade with the Union consists mainly of textiles and clothing products , which according to information from the Commission accounted for 73.7 % of Pakistani exports to the Union in 2009 .
In the EU 's assessment , granting these trade preferences should only cause limited adverse effects on the Internal Market and should not affect negatively the least developed members of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
Notwithstanding this , it must be expected that the unilateral suspension of duties will lead to infringement proceedings at the WTO .
If Pakistan is allowed to join the ranks of those countries that enjoy preferential tariff rates - in other words , if it is to be included in the so-called ' GSP + ' list - then the matter could be said to have resolved itself .
Uncoordinated hasty reactions are hardly helpful .
The textile and clothing industry in particular is in a time of crisis in a number of Member States as a result of transformation .
Negative effects of the trade preferences cannot therefore be ruled out , which is why I rejected the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted against granting trade preferences to Pakistan through exemption from import duties on the pretext of the floods that occurred last year .
I do not think there is any logic in using exceptional trade preferences , against the rules of international trade law , as a means of emergency aid , which has its own instruments .
The European Union has never done this before and nor have other countries .
No other developed country has followed the same path : not the US , Japan , Australia , New Zealand or Canada .
Even if the advantages given to Pakistan were a kind of ' prize ' for its role in Afghanistan , I believe using trade preferences as a political instrument establishes a dangerous precedent .
Moreover , the trade advantages given to Pakistan will be paid for by the European industries most affected , namely the textile industry of southern Europe , and also by the poor countries that export the same products to Europe , which will suffer from the diversion of European imports to Pakistan , for example Bangladesh or the countries of North Africa .
However , I voted in favour of the tabled amendments , which substantially mitigate the negative impact of the proposal : safeguard clause , limit of one year and the human rights clause .
in writing . - ( DE ) Nobody is disputing that developing countries - such as Pakistan , which has been repeatedly devastated by floods - must be supported .
Nonetheless , the EU must ensure that its partner countries in such trade agreements also meet certain requirements , particularly if duties are to be suspended .
We cannot allow such suspension of duties to damage our domestic textiles industry - with the EU having not the slightest concern over whether these products are produced using child labour or whether the funds received go directly towards supporting terrorism .
Wide-ranging duty exemptions must therefore be linked to an absolute obligation to respect human rights .
I am thinking , for example , of Christian minorities and women 's rights .
The blasphemy law in that country is particularly worrying : anyone who insults Mohammed is sentenced to death .
Fundamentalism is widespread in Pakistan across all levels of society - all the more so since the death of Osama Bin Laden - including among the students at the famous International Islamic University .
The argument that the trade preferences promote prosperity and combat radicalism therefore does not hold water .
The EU must not simply grant trade preferences where this ignores important matters of basic law .
I therefore voted against the report .
Following the floods that devastated a vast portion of Pakistan 's territory last summer , the Commission tabled a proposal to grant the country extensive autonomous trade preferences in the form of exemption from customs duties , affecting 75 product lines of interest to Pakistan : essentially textiles and clothing .
This measure , presented as temporary , but for a period of three years , would have a major impact on Portuguese textiles , so I voted against this report .
However , since the report has been adopted , I successfully advocated limiting the duration of the trade preferences to one year from the date these measures come into force , in order to minimise the repercussions on Portuguese textiles .
The period could potentially be extended following a thorough assessment of the impact on European textiles , to be presented by the Commission .
Finally , I also voted for - again thinking of Portuguese textiles - the introduction of a safeguard clause , which provides for the re-establishment of common customs tariff duties on a given product at any time if it is being imported from Pakistan under conditions that cause , or threaten to cause serious problems for an EU producer of similar or directly competing products .
in writing . - The Greens welcomed from the start the idea of supporting Pakistan 's efforts to overcome the hunger and misery following the floods .
However , our main criticism was that it was a measure focusing on a country affected by terrorism without naming this political agenda , and without embedding the measures in a set of measures concerning the political context .
Furthermore , the Greens feared that the measures might pave the way for the inclusion of Pakistan in the GSP + scheme without the country having signed and implemented the corresponding labour and environmental conventions ( let alone the Geneva Conventions ) .
Finally , the Greens wished to exclude ethanol from the list of duty-free products , as it would be made out of sugar cane , which would replace food crops , constitutes a GHG-intensive crop and does not create a significant number of jobs .
Unfortunately , none of the Green amendments was adopted in INTA .
The text has finally been referred back to the committee .
The proposal adopted today came about after the unprecedented floods that last summer devastated a vast portion of Pakistan 's territory .
The final document intends to grant autonomous trade preferences to the country in relation to 75 product lines of interest ( mainly textiles and clothing ) in the form of exemption from customs duties , with the exception of one product ( ethanol ) for which a tariff rate quota applies .
The proposed measures should be welcomed as a perfect example of the synergies that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has made possible .
The European Union and its Member States have already generously provided Pakistan with humanitarian aid , but the extension of trade preferences in this country is part of a larger package of measures that would address the medium and long-term economic consequences of the catastrophic floods .
Ensuring the recovery and future sustainable development of Pakistan is extremely important , not only for its citizens , but also for the security and stability of the region .
A stable and prosperous Pakistan that is not subject to extremist or fundamentalist tendencies is obviously in the interests of the European Union .
in writing . - When we first heard in October 2010 of the Commission 's plans to help Pakistan recover from its awful flooding by removing some customs tariffs , Greens were enthusiastic to help .
We still are , but a once-simple idea has become over-complicated and unworkable .
Originally the scheme was for 3 years , although we wanted longer to increase investor confidence .
But after various business and interest groups had got involved the proposal was reduced to 12 months only - with quarterly reviews !
Further , any deal needs a waiver from the World Trade Organisation , which they haven 't approved as some member countries ( notably India ) are worried about the effect that duty-free Pakistani textiles would have on their own markets .
There has been no progress in 5 months , and it 's unlikely we 'll see any soon , if ever .
In Plenary today I supported an amendment to send the whole report back to committee for re-working .
In doing so I wasn 't voting against helping Pakistan , but I was recognising the report before us simply wouldn 't deliver what Pakistan needs .
For me , a major stumbling block has been the WTO .
I believe this organisation needs comprehensive reorganisation into a properly democratic , accountable and transparent body .
The natural disaster suffered by the people of Pakistan last August touched all of us and deserves the solidarity of the European Union .
The European Union must show its support for Pakistan and help to minimise the devastating effects of the floods , as it has done through its policy of humanitarian aid and international cooperation when other tragic events have occurred .
However , trying to use common trade policy to express this solidarity might have undesirable repercussions for the future , both in this specific case and in others that could arise .
At Internal Market level , the effects are negative for the production of European countries like Portugal .
However , the effects at international level are also worrying , because they will create a waiver in the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , in a key sector for many developing countries .
Therefore , and also bearing in mind that an impact assessment must be encouraged to assess the repercussions of the agreement inside the EU , I voted in favour of Amendment 43 , which rejects the European Commission proposal to grant preferences to Pakistan .
in writing . - ( LT ) It is time for the EU to reconsider its long-term trade programme .
We cannot pretend that certain developing countries granted special status by the EU are the same countries they were a decade ago .
Some of these countries ( such as Brazil , Russia , Argentina , Saudi Arabia and Qatar ) are currently the strongest economically .
Meanwhile , countries like Lithuania are struggling to make ends meet .
If Pakistan is granted trade preferences for textiles , as proposed in this report , Lithuania would find itself in a vulnerable position , as textiles account for almost 6 % of all our exports .
Furthermore , the EU should pay more attention to the situation of its trade partners in the area of human rights .
Respect for human rights and democratic principles must be a fundamental element of EU trade policy .
There can be no compromise on these matters .
I am therefore concerned by the Commission 's proposal to grant Pakistan autonomous trade preferences .
Of course , the EU is keen for Pakistan to enjoy stability and prosperity , but in the face of the crisis we should get our priorities right .
As events in the last few weeks have shown , Pakistan remains a hotbed of terrorism and extremism .
The EU should be careful not to send out the wrong message .
The current system of foreign direct investment , governed by a myriad of overlapping and sometimes conflicting bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) of the Member States has to be replaced - in a reasonable time span - by a new framework of modern EU investment treaties consistent with cross-cutting EU policy goals .
I also support the rapporteur 's position , which strongly supports the coexistence approach of the Commission 's proposal for a regulation .
It is undoubtedly essential that , by way of an authorisation process , the Member States ' existing BITs remain in place and that , under clear conditions , Member States be allowed to renegotiate existing BITs , finalise pending ones , and enter into negotiations for new ones .
Legal certainty will , however , remain a relative term as long as the transition of the investment protection regime is not completed , and given validity terms of existing BITs of Member States under international public law .
I am voting for the report , with the caveat that there is a need to continue debating the matter so that it will have a better legal framework .
Since the Treaty of Lisbon , investment has been an area of exclusive EU competence .
Parliament therefore initially gave its verdict on the shape of the future European investment policy .
This is the report I myself drafted , which was voted on during the last part-session in April 2011 .
In Mr Schlyter 's report , Parliament has now examined transitional arrangements for managing investment agreements that Member States have already concluded with third countries .
As in the vote in committee , I advocated a Community vision and stated that agreements that were already standing should be closely examined by the Commission in order to check their compatibility with the Treaties and with Union law and Union policy , in particular the objectives of the Union 's external action on sustainable development .
However , the vision that has prevailed in the end is a right-wing vision in which protection of private investors is given priority over these objectives based on the general interest .
Unfortunately the negotiations that will now be entered into with the Council are not likely to correct our aim , in an EU in which the good of the Union as a whole is rarely able to withstand national egotism .
in writing . - ( LT ) Before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Member States mostly maintained bilateral agreements with third countries relating to investment .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , foreign direct investment fell within the exclusive competence of the EU and became an integral part of the EU 's common commercial policy .
I endorsed this report , which provides for a transitional period for this competence to be transferred to EU level , which in future will help ensure a high level of protection for investors against arbitrary actions by third countries .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the EU 's common commercial policy became one of the common EU policy areas where the EU is given exclusive competence .
Thus investment policy , an area which falls under the common commercial policy , must also be coordinated at EU level .
Currently Member States comply with partly overlapping but often conflicting bilateral investment agreements with third countries , and this hampers the objectives of the EU 's common commercial policy , and the formation of the image of the EU as a single trade area in transnational and global trade .
This report 's most important objective is the smooth transition from investment policies pursued by Member States individually to a common EU investment policy , ensuring legal certainty for all parties , and agreements already concluded for participants in the transitional period , when the old legal framework is being replaced by the new regulation .
Essentially this report addresses two fundamental issues - a timeline for the transition , and the cases and procedures for withholding authorisation to hold negotiations with third countries , which the Commission gives a Member State during the transitional period .
I supported this report by voting in favour because I believe that we need rules during the transitional period to ensure legal certainty and avoid conflicts and gaps in the law .
In fact , Mr Schlyter 's report arises from the proposal for a regulation of the Commission that provides for the exclusive competence of the EU on foreign direct investment , replacing the agreements put in place by the 27 Member States and also establishing a necessary transition period to be applied to existing bilateral treaties .
Finally , I agree with Mr Schlyter on the importance of a fixed date to mark the end of the transitional period so as to safeguard the European economy 's competitiveness and to provide investors with a clear picture of current and future regulatory standards .
in writing . - ( CS ) The adoption of the approved regulation is necessary , for the current system , which is created through a large number of mutually overlapping and sometimes even conflicting bilateral agreements on investments concluded by Member States , must be replaced within a reasonable period of time by a new system of modern investment agreements concluded by the EU , which will be in line with the general goals of EU policy .
The regulation is therefore the logical and only possible reaction for enshrining policy in the area of direct foreign investments as exclusive powers of the EU , which forms part of the EU 's common commercial policy .
The policy has the important role of ensuring a high level of legal certainty in a period of transition .
I therefore wholly agree with the Commission proposal , which counts on coexisting agreements .
It is essential for existing Member State agreements on investment to remain in force on the basis of the approval procedure , and for Member States to be able to negotiate changes to them under clear conditions , to complete the ongoing negotiations and to begin negotiations on new agreements .
In the interests of harmonisation of the EU 's foreign policy , I am voting to change the current system of bilateral investment treaties between the Member States and third countries .
I also share the concern expressed by the rapporteur with regard to ensuring legal certainty during the transition process , meaning there is a need to introduce a deadline for this and to clarify the conditions for withholding authorisation .
It ought to be possible to coordinate and make decisions on Member States ' individual investment policies at EU level .
The current system is marked by countless bilateral treaties that cross over or double up on each other and are often basically contradictory .
As we work on formulating a proper European investment policy therefore , I felt it would be beneficial to vote in favour of obliging Member States to make provision , when renegotiating bilateral treaties or negotiating new treaties , for a dispute settlement mechanism in which the Commission would be allowed to participate , even in a purely advisory capacity , and for confidentiality requirements to be lifted in order to allow the EU 's executive body to take part in such a capacity .
I also requested that the Commission should present a report to Parliament and the Council , no later than five years after this regulation enters into force , on the situation regarding re-examination of existing bilateral agreements , relating in particular to the number of bilateral agreements that the different Member States may have renegotiated .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , pursuant to Articles 206 and 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , foreign direct investment becomes the exclusive competence of the European Union .
At the moment , many bilateral agreements are in force and they now urgently need to be replaced by a new framework of EU investment treaties consistent with its cross-cutting political objectives .
The intention is now to find fair and effective transitional measures that will safeguard the bilateral agreements in force and not disregard the expectations of investors .
Therefore , we must avoid legal loopholes and ensure a considered transition .
As such , I call on all those involved in the trialogues to properly weigh up the need to protect legitimate expectations and the correct application of the Treaty of Lisbon , paying particular attention to the articles relating to the re-examination and withdrawal of authorisation .
I would commend the rapporteur on all the efforts made , but I call for greater consideration and compromise .
This report is on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing transitional arrangements for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries .
Pursuant to Article 207 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , this is the exclusive competence of the European Union , as it relates to matters of foreign direct investment .
Without questioning the need for the Member States ' existing bilateral treaties to remain in force , I agree with the rapporteur 's position in the sense of ensuring a high degree of legal certainty during the transition period , and also with the three reasons for withdrawing authorisation for a bilateral treaty : ' conflicts with the law of the Union ' , ' overlap , in part or in full , with an agreement in force with that third country and this specific overlap is not addressed in the latter agreement ' and treaties that might ' constitute an obstacle to the development and the implementation of the Union 's policies relating to investment ' .
Trade policy is yet another area in which competences have been withdrawn from the Member States , with the EU then having ' exclusive competence ' .
This is the foundation for this proposal for a regulation : in other words , applying Article 207 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which provides for the exclusive competence of the EU in matters of foreign direct investment as part of the common commercial policy .
The importance of trade policy and , of course , of investment policy as instruments for promoting the interests of a country and its people according to its specific characteristics and conditions are all too clear .
What is also clear - as in the case of Portugal , for example - is the damage that results from trade and investment policies that do not give due consideration to the interests , circumstances and conditions of the country , since they are essentially decided by the major powers of the EU in defence of the interests of their major companies ; the balance within the EU tipped decisively towards these powers when the Union strengthened its competences .
Among other serious aspects , this regulation intends to give the Commission the power to withdraw authorisations , to ask Member States to negotiate or reject bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) and to approve new BITs .
Those the reasons why we voted against .
It is well known that the European Union has exclusive competence in matters of external trade policy , which is the basis for this proposal for a regulation .
It is founded on Article 207 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which provides for the exclusive competence of the EU in matters of foreign direct investment as part of the common commercial policy .
However , in general , the European Commission 's positions do not respect the interests of all the Member States equally .
The importance of trade policy and , of course , of investment policy as instruments for promoting the interests of a country and its people according to its specific characteristics and conditions are all too clear .
What is also clear - as in the case of Portugal , for example - is the damage that results from trade and investment policies that do not give due consideration to the interests , circumstances and conditions of the country , since they are essentially decided by the major powers of the EU in defence of the interests of their major companies ; the balance within the EU tipped decisively towards these powers when the Union strengthened its competences .
Among other serious aspects , this regulation intends to give the Commission the power to withdraw authorisations , to ask Member States to negotiate or reject bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) and to approve new BITs .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - This report deals with international investment treaties with third countries .
The main objective of these treaties is to provide a high level of protection for investments and investors against arbitrary actions of governments of states receiving the investment .
Before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the Member States were in charge of negotiating the signing of these investment agreements .
With the Lisbon Treaty , foreign direct investment has become an exclusive competence of the EU and an integral part of the EU 's external trade policy .
Personally I think EU development policy might be superior to the trade and investment policy of the Union .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because it is proposed that the Regulation should provide the faculty for the Commission to withhold an authorisation , to request Member States to renegotiate or terminate a Bilateral Investment Treaty ( BIT ) , and to have the Commission 's approval for newly negotiated BITs .
It also lays down conditions on how , when and what it is possible to negotiate .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , foreign direct investment is included in the list of matters falling under the common commercial policy .
In accordance with Article 3 ( 1 ) ( e ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( hereinafter " the Treaty ” ) , the Union has exclusive competence with respect to the common commercial policy .
Accordingly , only the Union may legislate and adopt legally binding acts within that area .
The Member States are able to do so only if empowered by the Union , in accordance with Article 2 ( 1 ) of the Treaty .
That relationship will develop further as the Union exercises its competence in common investment policy with the main goal of creating the best possible investment protection system for all Member States ' investors equally and equal investing conditions on third country markets .
As the new investment policy will be developed in view of the transitional validity of bilateral investment agreements concluded by Member States , it should acknowledge the rights of investors whose investments fall into the scope of those agreements and should ensure their legal certainty .
The Commission should take the necessary steps towards a progressive replacement of all existing agreements on investment with new agreements that should provide for the best possible level of protection .
in writing . - ( DE ) Since the Treaty of Lisbon the Commission has had the exclusive power to negotiate and conclude bilateral investment agreements with third countries .
There are more than 1 000 agreements in existence and negotiations led by Member States are currently under way for around 200 more .
In order that this transfer of competence does not result in a hard landing for the EU , the Member States should continue to be able to guarantee legal certainty for investors during a transitional period .
Parliament sent a strong signal in the first reading and advocates a solid , secure phase for the transfer of powers .
in writing . - ( RO ) Investment agreements are still mandatory for Member States following the entry into force of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and they must be dealt with under the EU 's exclusive competence in the area of direct foreign investments .
This proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council will authorise for all the investment agreements currently in force between Member States and third countries to remain in place .
I think that this will allow us to offer an explicit guarantee of legal certainty concerning the conditions which investors are subject to .
Furthermore , the proposal also sets out the conditions under which Member States will be able to negotiate and conclude new bilateral investment agreements with third countries , regarded as an exceptional transitional measure .
in writing . - I voted for this report and welcome the fact that bilateral investment treaties are now part of the common commercial policy .
This report forbids Member States from negotiating and even maintaining bilateral investment agreements with a third country if the agreements do not comply with the European Commission 's views .
National sovereignty is therefore abolished in this field .
The Treaty of Lisbon has brought us to this point of banning any form of bilateral investment in support of another country and putting all the power in the hands of the Commission , an unelected body .
I shall vote against .
We cannot expect that what has failed at the level of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) - that is , bringing light into the jungle of bilateral investment agreements - will be successful at EU level .
An attempt has been made at a higher level to introduce comprehensive multinational regulations for Foreign Direct Investment , or FDI , that would apply to all economic sectors .
In the longer term this will probably be more likely to achieve the aim , but in reality it depends on how it is actually organised .
The problem is that binding BIT arbitration judgments based on international law could entail commitments to investors by Member States that give rise to EU Treaty infringement proceedings .
For this there is still no solution .
There is just as little consideration in the report of the potential negative aspects of the investment policy , for example the fear among the domestic population of job losses and wage cuts due to outsourcing and the relocation of production .
Direct investments are by no means the magic bullet they are made out to be .
Certain developing countries have had to learn that the hard way .
For these reasons I voted against this report .
As a result of the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , Member States have unfortunately lost their prerogatives regarding the management of foreign direct investment , which has become the exclusive competence of the Union .
Such a significant change requires transitional rules governing its implementation : the report that we voted on today seems to be an acceptable compromise , since it protects the agreements already concluded by various States on a bilateral basis and also lays the groundwork for possible new , bilateral agreements , though they must be agreed on .
The evaluation powers of the Commission are also well defined and limited , thus making it , de facto , less complicated for Member States who wish to continue their specific policy on foreign direct investment .
For these reasons I decided to vote in favour of the report .
I voted for this report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing transitional arrangements for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries .
It is a case of applying Article 207 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which provides for the exclusive competence of the EU in matters of foreign direct investment as part of the common commercial policy .
In a world of global transfers of assets and capital , and as a logical consequence of the EU 's common commercial policy , the investment policy of Member States also has to be coordinated and decided at EU level .
This means that the present system embodied by a myriad of overlapping and sometimes conflicting bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) of the Member States has to be replaced - in a reasonable time span - by a new framework of modern EU investment treaties consistent with cross-cutting EU policy goals .
The transition to an EU investment policy , bearing in mind the risky and long-term nature of foreign direct investment , is a long and complicated process .
It is extremely important to ensure a high level of legal certainty during the transition period .
Since , by virtue of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , the area of foreign direct investment is an exclusive EU competence , there is a need to provide the European Union with the necessary means to move from a disparate perspective to a harmonised approach .
As such , there is a need to find solutions enabling us to prevent legal uncertainty during the transitional period , but without risking the objectives guiding Union action .
in writing . - As we feared , the tight vote against us in the Committee on International Trade on the crucial Article 5 ( review of Member States ' existing bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) ) and Article 6 ( the possibility of withdrawing authorisation for a BIT ) of Carl Schlyter 's report on ' Transitional arrangements for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries ' has been confirmed by the vote in plenary .
We had made it easier for Members to vote with us by tabling amendments on Articles 5 and 6 , going just halfway towards what we had wanted ( and had lost at the committee stage ) .
We thus left it to the S & D Group to re-table the original texts , in order to be perceived as representing the middle ground .
Unfortunately , that strategy did not work out .
We had a roll-call vote on this and we will analyse whether we nonetheless captured some support in the ALDE Group .
We also lost our amendments concerning better transparency rules .
We won only one amendment , of minor importance , on the recitals , which was clearly ' granted ' to us by the EPP and ALDE Groups in order to appease us so that the Greens / EFA position in the final vote would be positive .
However , we chose to reject the report ( which was approved by 345 to 246 votes ) .
in writing . - Earlier this year , I made some enquiries to the European Commission in response to press reports about shipments of toxic waste from Italy to Romania .
Although no evidence was found for the shipments , what was clear from the outcome of my enquiries was that we could benefit from more regular inspections of cargo , as this would act as a deterrent to those involved in the illegal shipment of waste .
Such measures may have an additional impact in the case of developing countries because they may lack the capacity to properly monitor incoming shipments and therefore prevent the entry of toxic material into their territory .
We should give serious consideration to the benefits of thorough , regular inspections coordinated at EU level , especially in the case of shipments to developing countries .
Pursuant to Article 207 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , the EU has competences in respect of foreign direct investment ( FDI ) , as this type of investment is directly related to the new common commercial policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon came into force at a time when many bilateral investment agreements with third countries were coming to an end and no transitional arrangements had been established to ensure an integrated move towards future agreements within the exclusive competence of the European Union .
I think it is a good idea to undertake a reliable evaluation of all the bilateral agreements currently in force with third countries , and to adopt a strategy common to all Member States .
As this report says , it is crucial that the rules laid down be transparent , be known to the main political players and be assessed within a maximum of 10 years .
At a time when transactions involving assets and capital are becoming increasingly globalised , it is important that the European Union adopt a common investment policy in line with the strategy set out by all the Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am voting for this report by the Committee on International Trade .
I adopt its position at first reading , taking over the Commission proposal .
I call on the Commission to refer the matter to Parliament again if it intends to amend its proposal substantially or replace it with another text .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
The European Commission pledged up to EUR 500 million of assistance to Georgia at the October 2008 International Donors ' Conference .
The sources of the funding include both programmed funds under the envelope of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) and crisis instruments , such as the Instrument for Stability , Humanitarian Aid and Macro-Financial Assistance .
The Georgian economy is beginning to recover following the double shock caused by the military conflict with Russia of August 2008 and the global financial crisis .
However , the balance of payments and budgetary position remain weak and vulnerable due to the blockade of most direct trade with Russia and marked reduction in foreign direct investment ( FDI ) inflows .
I endorse the allocation of EUR 46 million in financial assistance to Georgia , which will help reduce the short-term financial vulnerability still faced by the economy , while supporting reform measures aimed at achieving a more sustainable balance of payments and a more stable budgetary situation .
There is a fundamental contradiction in the European Commission 's proposal to grant further financial assistance to Georgia : it was the Commission itself that pointed out that Georgia 's economy was recovering after the conflict with Russia three years ago , thereby insinuating that there was no need to ' assist ' the Georgian Government with further funds to help the national economy in addition to those already provided in recent years .
It is therefore not clear why the Georgian Government asked for more money , nor why the Commission immediately started working to mobilise nearly EUR 50 million .
Given the internal political situation in Georgia and issues of legality and transparency in that country , we have no assurances that it will be well spent .
I voted against the legislative resolution which allows Parliament to grant EUR 46 million to the Georgian Government .
There are many economic , financial and employment-related problems in Europe and there are many areas which are forced to deal with crisis situations for which the institutions could do much more .
The Commission should move first of all to focus all possible efforts on solving the problems of our citizens .
in writing . - ( LT ) The European Parliament approved the Council decision to activate the Commission pledge of EU funds to Georgia .
Prior to adopting the decision , the Commission assessed Georgia 's economic situation and the country 's financial prospects in 2010-2011 , focusing on the balance of payments and budgetary needs .
The Commission considers that the activation of the second part of the macro-financial assistance ( MFA ) pledged in 2008 is warranted .
The new MFA would help Georgia to address the economic consequences of the conflict with Russia and the global crisis .
The new MFA should support the economic reform agenda of the government and policy measures to strengthen public finance management ( building on those of the previous operation and of the EU 's sectoral budgetary support operation ) .
In addition , this assistance should help to foster economic and financial integration with the EU , in particular by exploiting the potential offered by the future Association Agreement , which aims at concluding a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement between the two parties .
in writing . - ( CS ) As a member of the European Parliament 's delegation to the EU-Armenia , EU-Azerbaijan and EU-Georgia Parliamentary Cooperation Committees , I welcome the decision to provide Georgia with macro-financial assistance of EUR 46 million , in order to help stabilise the Georgian economy and cover needs in respect of the balance of payments stipulated in the existing IMF programme .
I consider it right and proper that EUR 23 million of this sum will be provided in the form of grants , and EUR 23 million in the form of loans .
It is important that the relevant measures which Georgia should take to prevent and combat fraud , corruption and other irregularities relating to this assistance are set out in the memorandum of understanding , the loan agreement and the grant agreement , which will be agreed with the Georgian authorities .
In the interests of greater transparency in the management and disbursement of the funds , the memorandum of understanding , the loan agreement and the grant agreement should also stipulate the possibility of checks , which also means on-the-spot checks and inspections by the Commission , including the European Anti-Fraud Office .
In addition to this , we should also count on the possibility of carrying out audits , including random on-the-spot audits by the Court of Auditors .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome efforts to promote prosperity beyond the EU 's borders , because I consider our aid important in order for some third countries to be able to tackle their balance of payments crisis and restore the sustainability of foreign debt .
Therefore , and bearing in mind the economic and social problems suffered as a result of the August 2008 armed conflict and the global financial crisis , I agree with the tabled proposal of additional macro-economic financial assistance for Georgia , with a view to supporting its process of economic stabilisation and covering the needs of its balance of payments .
I also believe that this macro-economic assistance will have a positive effect on Georgia 's relations with Member States , in addition to the critical role it will play in the country 's government properly applying reforms .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report , because I believe that the mobilisation of the second part of the macro-financial assistance to Georgia is justified and relevant .
Although the Georgian economy is recovering , this additional aid will help Georgia to deal with the economic consequences of the conflict with Russia and the global crisis , and also support the government 's economic reform programme .
in writing . - ( PT ) Georgia has faced serious problems recently , particularly after the military conflict between the country and Russia due to the separatist regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
We are still a long way from being able to consider the option of the country 's accession to the European Union - repeatedly referred to by President Saakashvili - a realistic possibility , given that Georgia does not meet the objective requirements allowing it to aspire to such a desire .
That said , I believe it advantageous that Georgia express this wish and try to comply with European standards .
As such , and since it is intended to seek to help the country overcome the economic and social difficulties suffered after the military conflict , I am voting to grant Georgia additional macro-financial assistance , which I hope can be used to the real benefit of its population .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report is on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council providing further macro-financial assistance to Georgia .
This is a European Commission proposal that provides for EUR 46 million in aid to this country and is the result of the armed conflict with Russia , a situation exacerbated by the global crisis .
As this is the second part of aid guaranteed in 2008 , which is intended to enable Georgia to meet the financial agreements with global and European financial institutions , as well as to support the economic reforms in progress in this country , I agree with this aid and am voting for it .
However , I hope that Parliament and the Council will soon reach an agreement on the methodology for supervising the implementation of this aid , so that we all have greater peace of mind about the proper application of EU funds .
With regard to this proposed additional macro-financial assistance , the observations we made about the decision to grant the previous macro-financial assistance to this country remain valid and relevant .
We always advocate the EU 's need to grant assistance in solidarity with countries that need it , and for this assistance to be directed at projects that serve the interests of the people .
However , EU ' assistance ' has demonstrated that it has little to do with solidarity .
The interests of big companies and financial institutions , and of the major powers almost always overcome the genuine and real interests of solidarity .
It is no different with Georgia .
It is important to bear in mind that the proposed financial assistance is intended above all to finance the recommendations of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and its policy of structural adjustment : in other words , persisting with the same neoliberal policies that led to the economic and financial crisis that this country is facing .
We also maintain the same reservations and concerns with regard to possible progress in terms of the militarisation of the Caucasus region as a result of the tensions with Russia , bearing in mind the region 's energy wealth and geostrategic importance , which arouses the greed of the EU and its monopolies .
in writing . - Georgia has experienced a sharp economic decline since the outbreak of the military conflict with Russia in August 2008 .
This resulted in huge direct and indirect damage ; a large part of the population was displaced .
The global financial crisis which broke out in autumn 2008 made the situation in Georgia even more complicated .
The proposed assistance - part of a comprehensive EU package of up to EUR 500 million - aims to support Georgia 's recovery following the armed conflict with Russia , and also helps Georgia address the consequences of the global economic and financial crisis .
The assistance is to be allocated to the financing of the deficit of the state budget , and may help Georgia to overcome its acute financial problems .
It is the duty of the European Union to continue helping Georgia , so that that country can develop and become a modern democracy , which could serve as an example to other countries in the region .
Since the ' Rose Revolution ' , the Georgian Government has consistently implemented democratic reforms , modernising its country and carrying out difficult , unpopular economic and social reforms that are essential in the long term .
As shown by the World Bank 's ' Doing Business 2010 ' index , the business environment in Georgia is the 12th ' easiest ' in the world .
Only three European Union Member States are ranked above Georgia in this index .
This country has had notable successes in fighting corruption , which is a significant problem in all post-Soviet countries .
I am convinced that Georgia is an example to Caucasian region countries , and I have no fear in saying that this country can serve as an example to some EU Member States that currently lack the political courage to carry out reforms that would pave the way to growth and modernisation .
In solving problems associated with Georgia , we must not forget that 20 % of Georgia 's territory is still under occupation .
Russia must honour its agreement with respect to the territorial integrity of Georgia , and the European Union must consistently continue to remind Russia 's leadership of this .
in writing . - ( DE ) Supporting macro-financial assistance for Georgia , which was hit hard by the economic crisis , is something to be endorsed .
The money promised by the EU is linked to clear conditions and will reach the right areas .
This financial assistance , together with the funding from the IMF , will help stabilise the national budget and will have a positive effect on relations between the EU and Georgia .
I voted in favour of granting additional aid to Georgia .
This country stands out from the other countries involved in the Eastern Partnership on account of the reforms it has carried out in every area .
I am particularly glad to see that the simplified legislative procedure was used during work on the report on further macro-financial assistance for Georgia , since this speeded up the entire process and made it possible to vote the report through more quickly .
Georgia 's economy has recovered after Russia 's military invasion of 2008 , and has done extremely well in comparison to other countries of a similar size in the difficult times of the global financial crisis .
Since the Rose Revolution , numerous reforms have been carried out in Georgia aimed at liberalising and democratising the system in such a way as to make it more attractive to business , and to make it possible for a free-market economy and a democratic society to be established .
Since 2004 , Georgia has taken unprecedented steps in reducing the bureaucratic burden on businesses .
Restrictions have been placed on the formalities necessary to start up in business .
The tax system has been reformed , which has resulted in a five-fold increase in budgetary revenue .
To sum up , Georgia has been opened up for free and unhindered trade .
Georgia has practically eliminated the cancer of corruption in state institutions and the civil service by means of a series of public sector reforms ( concerning the public prosecutor 's office , the judiciary and the police ) and political reforms .
Today Georgia is regarded as a country with a dynamically developing economy .
In view of the above , we should continue to spur Georgia on to further development , not only by setting requirements , but also by granting aid .
in writing . - ( RO ) Georgia is one of the European Union 's partner countries as part of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) .
It is in the European Union 's vital interest to ensure stability at its eastern borders , which can be achieved through economic growth and political security .
The package of macro-financial assistance intended for Georgia is in direct response to the economic and social difficulties which this country is faced with .
Although Georgia 's economy is showing signs of recovery , it is still fragile and vulnerable , and requires financial stability .
Last but not least , the macro-financial assistance granted by the EU supplements the other financial instruments and aid granted to Georgia by the IMF , as well as by international and bilateral donors , providing Georgia with short-term macro-economic support .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council providing further macro-financial assistance to Georgia .
The European Union has found itself a new mission .
It is now applying the savage cuts in the social funds of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , via the European Financial Stability Fund applicable to the euro area and indeed the whole EU , through macro-financial assistance ( MFA ) outside the EU .
In Georgia , the IMF has announced that it will not be continuing its ' aid ' .
There is therefore no longer any need to implement the IMF austerity plan .
Through this MFA , the European Union is forcing Georgia to carry on implementing the plan regardless .
This is unacceptable : I shall vote against .
Georgia faces series financial problems following the armed conflict with Russia in 2008 and the impact of the global financial crisis .
Back in January of this year , the EU approved a EUR 46 million aid package for Georgia , of which EUR 23 million is to be paid as a loan and a further EUR 23 million in the form of a grant to the country .
The EUR 46 million forms part of an EU financial aid package worth around EUR 500 million which was approved by the EU back in October 2008 .

This second tranche of the EU 's macro-financial assistance - the first having been implemented back in 2009-2010 - is intended to help Georgia meet its external financing requirement and is subject to strict conditions .
Initial signs of its success can already be seen in the fact that real GDP grew by 6.3 % in 2010 , providing evidence of a revival of the economy .
Nonetheless , it should be stated that there are indications that the money is not being used efficiently enough .
In view of the budgetary situation of most EU Member States , this is unacceptable .
Although I am fundamentally in favour of the financial assistance , I therefore abstained from voting in the final vote .
I welcome the European Parliament 's decision to approve the Commission 's proposal to allocate a further EUR 46 million in macro-financial assistance to Georgia .
This is significant support for a country loyal to European integration which will help mitigate two negative repercussions on the Georgian economy - the military conflict with Russia and the global economic and financial crisis .
In order to increase the long-term viability of this assistance , the Commission must actively help to ensure targeted uptake , above all through measures to foster economic and financial integration with the EU , so that it would contribute to the swift conclusion of a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement between the EU and Georgia .
A dialogue on visas is another measure that would have a clear stabilising influence that would also promote reforms .
The EU-Georgia agreements on the simplification of the visa regime and readmission entered into force on 1 March 2011 and represent a welcome first step .
I trust that the Commission will soon present an evaluation of the implementation of these agreements , so that by the next meeting of the EU-Georgia Cooperation Council it is possible to begin discussions on the course of further cooperation on visa issues .
in writing . - ( PT ) This European Union macro-financial assistance is intended to help cover Georgia 's external finance needs , identified in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) in the context of the IMF stand-by arrangement for the sum of USD 1.17 billion , which has been in force since October 2008 .
Half the proposed aid will be supplied in the form of subsidies and the other half in the form of loans .
Additional macro-financial assistance should help assist Georgia to deal with the economic consequences of the conflict with Russia and the world crisis , and also support the government 's economic reform programme .
I voted for this report , because I agree with the financial assistance concerned and also with the need - in spite of financial assistance being controversial - to guarantee a model for supervising the implementation of this assistance that enables Parliament and other institutions to find out about how these funds are being spent .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted to grant Georgia an additional EUR 46 million in macro-financial assistance because I consider it necessary in order to help the country overcome the social and economic difficulties arising from the conflict with Russia .
in writing . - In line with our voting on macro-financial assistance ( MFA ) in the last parliamentary term , the suggestion was made that we abstain in this case because we do not think that MFA is very helpful so long as it is tied to whatever programme the International Monetary fund ( IMF ) is operating in the countries concerned .
Indeed , there is no EU-specific financing strategy apart from the standard IMF macro-economic reform agenda .
On the other hand , we do recognise that Georgia has financing needs and that there is an EU responsibility here .
The Greens / EFA Group has , in the end , voted in favour .
The adoption of today 's report follows the position adopted at the first reading and confirms the view expressed by the Commission .
The text we voted on asks the Commission to submit a new proposal in the event that it intends to modify it substantially or replace it with a new text .
Further macro-financial assistance will help Georgia to deal with the global crisis , by supporting the government 's reform programme .
In fact , it will reduce the short-term financing problems facing the Georgian economy .
Bearing in mind that this financial assistance is one-off assistance of limited duration , I voted in favour of the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council to grant additional macro-financial assistance to Georgia .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to comment on point 16 of the Minutes , which quite rightly reports my request for a debate to be held on the waiver of my parliamentary immunity , something which you rejected .
This therefore contradicts what the President of the sitting Mrs Angelilli said earlier , when she claimed that I had been given the floor yesterday to talk about the waiver of my parliamentary immunity , which is not true .
This Parliament has therefore deprived one of its Members of a vital right to protection , without allowing either the party himself or anyone who may have spoken in his defence to speak on the subject in plenary , either during a debate or during their explanations of vote or any other occasion .
I simply wanted this to be acknowledged , so thank you for having done that .
I understand that your comment is intended for the Minutes .
Thank you for this comment .
Migration flows and asylum and their impact on Schengen ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on migration flows and asylum and their impact on Schengen .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the developments in the Southern Neighbourhood and the ensuing migration flows are posing a serious challenge for the European Union .
They have served to underscore the importance of looking at the whole issue of how we manage migration and refugee flows .
Therefore the European Council in March called upon the Council and the Commission to submit before the June European Council a plan for the development of capacities to manage migration and refugee flows as a response .
The conclusions adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 11 and 12 April 2011 and the communication issued by the Commission last week are important steps in this direction .
The Presidency has convened an extraordinary meeting of the Council on Justice and Home Affairs for 12 May in order to discuss the issue of the management of migration and refugee flows .
These discussions will help to prepare for the meeting of the European Council on 21 June which will address the same issues .
We cannot of course stand idle in the face of events on the other side of the Mediterranean .
The EU and the Member States are ready to assist both those displaced as a result of the latest developments in North Africa and those Member States most directly concerned .
Over the past few months the EU and the Member States have made available approximately EUR 96 million of emergency humanitarian aid and we are committed to continue to provide further support as and when the situation requires .
The Council has also invited all Member States to continue their support for UNHCR , the International Organisation for Migration , the Red Cross and all relevant actors , the efforts of which are paramount in helping those displaced as a consequence of protracted violence in Libya .
Those Member States more directly affected by these developments are receiving contributions of funding , equipment and technical expertise ; for example the Commission announced earlier that approximately EUR 25 million from emergency funds could be made available for Member States such as Italy and Malta .

Furthermore , the newly-created European Asylum Support Office , although still in the process of becoming fully operational , is also available to help .
Some Member States , including Hungary , have already said that they are ready to reallocate refugees from Malta in order to alleviate pressure on the authorities there .
Apart from the specific measures intended to address this particular situation , the Council remains fully committed to the further development of the common European asylum system .
Work is under way in the Council and Parliament and some progress has been already achieved , despite the technical difficulty and the politically sensitive nature of this subject .
In general the management of migratory flows in the EU and in individual Member States requires the effective management of borders .
As far as the management of external borders is concerned , Frontex has an important role to play in a number of ways , including the monitoring of the EU 's external borders and providing operational support .
In the light of the latest developments in North Africa , joint operation Hermes was launched on 20 February 2011 following a request from the Italian Government .
This is aimed at preventing and detecting illegal border crossings to Lampedusa , Sicily , Sardinia and the Italian mainland .
Frontex is also supporting the Italian authorities in second-line border control activities by the briefing and screening of migrants .
The Council also welcomes the Commission 's decision to mobilise supplementary funds needed by Frontex to continue its planned joint operations .
We have urged Member States to provide further human and technical resources as required in support of the agency 's operations , including Hermes .
As you know , the new proposal concerning Frontex is in this House and we have been negotiating it .
I very much count on the support of Parliament in bringing this legislative proposal to a conclusion and ensuring the success of the negotiations .
Against the background of the recent migratory pressure from North Africa , the strengthening of Frontex has become a high priority for the Council .
I would like to express my thanks to Mr Busuttil and the shadow rapporteurs for their good cooperation and I very much hope , as I have just emphasised , that a first-reading agreement can be achieved by June 2011 , as was called for by the European Council in March .
Developments in the southern Mediterranean , in particular in relation to the Tunisian migrants arriving in Lampedusa , have also raised questions about controls at internal borders .
This in turn touches on the issue of freedom of movement within the European Union .
The Council fully agrees with the view held by almost everyone here that the free movement of persons within the Schengen area is a major achievement .
Those Member States that have asked for the revision of the Schengen system have also underlined that they were proposing this with the intention of preserving the free movement of our citizens , which is one of the cornerstones of the Union .
Improving the security and governance of the Schengen area in a time of increased pressure is a means to this end .
That said , in the light of the increased pressure on some external borders and the calls from Member States to strengthen the system of the Schengen rules , the Council needs to look into how we can further guarantee the principle of free movement and , at the same time , citizens ' need for maintenance of a high level of internal security .
At the Council meeting on 12 May 2011 the Presidency plans to initiate discussions on the various ideas on the Schengen acquis which have been put forward by the Commission in its communication on migration of 4 May .
The Council looks forward in particular to examining the Commission 's suggestions for a mechanism concerning the coordinated and temporary reintroduction of controls as a measure of last resort , based on objective criteria and respecting the Community method .
The Council will also have a chance to discuss how to continue work on the revision of the Schengen evaluation mechanism to ensure more efficient and uniform implementation of the aquis .
Of course our immediate priority is to deal with the effects of the dramatic events in the southern Mediterranean , but we also have to draw lessons for the future .
In short we need to put in place a strategy for the longer term .
Some of the issues which I have set out will help in creating such a strategy , but I look forward to discussions which can lead to a comprehensive approach to migration , fully in line with our global approach to migration .
Along these lines Prime Minister Orbán has recently said that we should clearly differentiate between economic migrants and political refugees .
Europe must welcome the latter if she wants to be true to herself .
Europe must help , through means similar to a Marshall Plan , the countries of North Africa so as to create liveable conditions there , thus tackling the root causes of migration .
That will require not only agreement amongst ourselves , but also consultations with our neighbours and in particular in partnership with the countries of Northern Africa , and it will need to take into account a wide range of factors such as international protection , migration , mobility and security .
To conclude , from a wider perspective , our southern neighbours will be assisted by all available means in their transition to open , democratic and prosperous societies .
This is the best possible way of addressing the push factors driving irregular immigrants towards our shores .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , today we are here to debate migration and cross-border movement of European citizens , but let me start by reminding all of us that yesterday was the 61st anniversary of the Schuman Declaration , which laid the foundations of the European Union , and from that day began a process in which European people have been willing to come together and put aside their differences , to build a European continent without borders , where our citizens can move freely between countries .
For regions like the one where we are now , here in Strasbourg and in Alsace generally , living on a frontier no longer equates with being restricted by borders , and the benefits extend far beyond these border regions .
For the vast majority of European citizens , the right to move freely is the embodiment of the European project and one of the most tangible results of the European Union , and I am pleased to say that most Europeans use their right to the full - people make around 1.25 billion journeys as tourists within the European Union countries every year .
That would be completely impossible without the European Union .
I still remember when we had to overcome many difficulties in order to travel from my country , Portugal , to Spain .
So it is indeed a great mark of the progress of civilisation that countries are able to lower barriers at their borders and let citizens move freely .
Moreover , in terms of the economy too , free movement is central to the success of the Single Market and Europe 's continued efforts to boost growth and jobs .
To put it plainly , free movement is to Europe what foundations are to buildings .
Remove it and the whole structure is undermined .
Last week , the Commission presented a communication on a more structured approach to migration , referring , inter alia , to a proposal on a reinforced Schengen governance system .
Other proposals will follow in the coming weeks , and here I want to praise the work of Commissioner Malmström who , with great intelligence and sensitivity , is doing her best to find the right approach to this complex matter .
Let me concentrate on the governance of Schengen because I understand that this is the most important concern here in Parliament .
Of course there are many other proposals , on the reinforcement of Frontex and on a common European asylum system , for example , but I hope we will have other occasions to discuss such issues in greater depth .
Last year , the Commission put forward proposals to preserve and strengthen the Schengen evaluation mechanism as a central element in the acquis of our common project , and I want to emphasise that last year - i.e. well before the recent developments - the Commission had already identified some problems in the governance of Schengen .
We will now update and complete these proposals and we will do all we can to achieve swift results .
The current migration situation in the Mediterranean and the resulting pressures have highlighted some weaknesses and uncoordinated reactions by Member States in the management of Schengen .
In the wake of these exceptional circumstances , we urgently need to reinforce the governance of Schengen and of the external borders .
We need better coordination between the Commission and Member States and , above all , between Member States themselves .
While recent events have provided a spark of urgency in bringing this matter to the table , the Commission is taking this opportunity , through the communication , to address the long-standing underlying inconsistencies and unresolved issues that have provided scope for some Member States to act unilaterally and not necessarily with a European Union perspective .
It is time to nip this tendency in the bud : to stop it ab ovo .
The Commission has already taken short-term measures to deal with the situation in the Mediterranean .
In addition , the package we put forward last week urges rational reflection , taking into account short-term needs for strengthened external borders as well as a broader approach to asylum and migration .
These issues must also be considered in the light of our neighbourhood policy , trade with North Africa and support for democratisation , as well as Europe 's own long-term labour shortages and efforts to boost European competitiveness .
This is not a knee-jerk reaction .
This is not improvisation .
This is and must be a broad range of measures built on the foundations of a strong and successful European policy , defining the best interests of the European Union and its citizens now and into the future .
At the same time , the aim is to give relief to those Member States who are trying to cope with an unfair share of the migration burden .
When thousands of people arrive on the shores of one country , it is not because they dream of living in Malta or Lampedusa ; it is because they are seeking a better life in Europe .
Countries that are more directly exposed to massive migrant inflows cannot be expected to deal with them alone .
The rules on free movement of citizens benefit all countries in the European Union .
It is the duty of all countries to support those countries that come under particular pressure at one time or another .
This means that burdens have to be shared equitably .
It also means that all Member States need to take their responsibilities seriously .
When looking at burden sharing , all the pressures and all the contributions need to be taken into account , and this is the very spirit of the European Union : the management of crisis by solidarity and responsibility .
Solidarity and responsibility are the key words in our response .
Immigration is a European challenge .
Immigration requires a European response .
That is why the Commission 's proposal aims to take Union governance of the Schengen system a step further , showing that there can be solidarity between Member States .
This is about common governance , not unilateral moves .
I emphasise once again that this is part of an overall approach .
The strengthening of Frontex and the move to a common European asylum system are also aspects of such an approach .
Allow me to make one point crystal clear : this is not about finding ways for Member States to reintroduce border controls .
I firmly believe that to do so would not only catastrophically undermine what Europe has constructed over the past 61 years , but also sabotage the viability of our efforts to build a prosperous and integrated Europe for the future .
Moreover , Member States already have the right to exercise this option unilaterally under the existing Schengen system .
That right has been exercised in the past to help Member States cope with specific short-term exceptional circumstances , for example in the wake of terrorist attacks or in relation to the movement of drugs .
These exceptions should remain exceptions , for I cannot emphasise strongly enough that reintroducing border controls is not a desirable development for Europe , neither in the current circumstances nor in relation to the future challenges that we will face sooner or later .
They should be an absolute last resort .
Moreover , we all know that internal controls can be sporadically useful but they are not part of a constructive approach to European integration , nor do they represent a cost-efficient long-term solution to monitoring movement and coping with immigration pressure .
This has always been the case .
The fact is that when faced with a massive arrival of migrants no Member State will ultimately be in a better position if it tries to deal with them alone .
Only if Member States face the situation together , can a lasting solution be found .
The proposals we put forward one year ago to strengthen Schengen , through an evaluation mechanism and intensified coordination of border surveillance , will help create a sense of Union-wide discipline and shared guidance in the system .
They will ensure that , in the future , countries will not feel pressured to take decisions alone that affect all Schengen signatories .
This is not , I emphasise , a new policy that undermines the Union .
It is a chance to strengthen it - a step forward for joint European governance , not a step back .
It is the intention to reinforce the Schengen acquis , not to depart from the Schengen acquis .
We cannot be blind to the fact that recent events have revealed a problem in Schengen governance which we have to solve .
If we do not reinforce existing mechanisms , Member States will continue to act alone .
They will , in fact , be encouraged to act alone .
We will be giving arguments to the populists , the extremists and , in some cases , the xenophobes who want to call into question the great acquis communautaire in this area .
This is why we think the best way to avoid putting Schengen at risk is precisely to reinforce the rules of governance of Schengen and clarify some of its aspects .
This is not , I insist , about caving in to pressure from any part of Europe .
By enhancing our capacity to deal with crisis situations , it will put a more robust governance system in place that will equip decision-makers with better tools to resist populist or extremist pressure in the future .
It is not a proposal intended simply to deal with short-term events , but there can only be real confidence in long-term solutions if we show that we can effectively address the short-term issues as well .
It is not about turning back time : it is about getting the governance right today for the challenges Europe will surely face tomorrow .
It is not about abandoning citizens ' rights of free movement .
It is about valuing their integrity by strengthening the rules .
I am confident that this House will support our approach and our efforts .
We are united in our determination to uphold the principles on which our Union is founded , against any populist temptation .
We know that it is now fashionable in some quarters to be extremist or populist , or indeed sometimes to wave the flags of xenophobia .
This is not what we are going to do .
We will resist all these kinds of pressure , but to succeed in this we need to give citizens the confidence that we stand firm on two things : first on correcting the shortcomings of the existing system so that effective relief can be brought to situations of pressure and crisis ; and , second , on ensuring , on this basis , full respect for human rights and the humanitarian principles on which our Union is founded .
The people are ready to exercise solidarity , internally and externally , if they are confident that their security concerns are addressed decisively and comprehensively .
I count on the support of this House in calling on the Member States to take the necessary decisions quickly .
Our proposals are on the table .
Now is not a time to wait : it is a time to act , so that an open European Union comes out of this challenge , united and stronger .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , as has already been emphasised , Schengen is one of the great achievements of our common European project .
Citizens notice it on a daily basis when travelling around Europe .
It is the realisation of the dream of Europe - a Europe without border controls .
It must therefore first be made clear in this debate - particularly in view of the debate that has taken place in recent weeks - that we in this House will jointly ensure that this principle and the idea behind it are not derailed by any initiative or any debate .
We will defend this principle in the European Parliament .
In recent weeks there have been discussions concerning more than 25 000 refugees from Tunisia who have arrived in the Italian territory of Lampedusa .
Yet a country such as Sweden has been accepting more than 25 000 people a year for years on end .
There have been states that have accommodated much greater numbers of people relative to their own population that is currently happening on the southern border of Europe , yet nobody has ever thought of questioning Schengen because of the burden .
I would therefore like to clearly stress at this stage that it is a pity that we seriously need to have a debate in Europe , of all places , on Schengen status as a result of this challenge that we must deal with together .
Secondly , I should like to make it clear that we practise solidarity .
When it comes to countries such as Malta - a small country that is massively affected and which has no hinterland - then we are currently practising solidarity .
In addition to this solidarity , however , I should like to stress that the second basic principle is the responsibility that the countries themselves have .
I must therefore also ask the Commission to look more into this .
If courts in the European Union are now ruling that Dublin II is to be ineffective - in other words , that refugees are not to be deported to their states of first arrival - then we must ask the Commission how committed it will be to taking action against those states that are obviously not currently implementing the existing law .
We are talking here about minimum standards in the European Union .
I am therefore calling on the Commission to take action here , too .
As regards the preparation for the Council , I have just three points to make .
The first is that when it comes to migration then naturally we must expect more migration in the long term as a result of demographic change , but here in the European Union we currently have 24 million people without work and in Spain the youth unemployment rate is 30 % .
We should therefore proceed cautiously - very cautiously - when it comes to the issue of migration .
My second point concerns strengthening Frontex , as has already been mentioned .
My third point is that I would ask us all to ensure that those states that were about to join Schengen , namely Bulgaria and Rumania , are not left behind because of the current debate .
They have done the work ; they have made efforts .
We are not asking for lower standards for joining , but if they meet the standards then it is only fair that Bulgaria and Rumania also have the right to become members of the Schengen area .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I do not share the opinion that the Commission 's communication is a good one .
I am very sorry , but I do not think it is .
I think it is over the top and misguided .
We are not dealing here with a crisis in the European Union .
When 400 000 people travel from Libya to Tunisia , that is a crisis for Tunisia .
When 20 000 people cross the Mediterranean to Europe , that is not a crisis for Europe .
( Applause )
If the burden were sensibly spread across Europe then there would not be a problem at all .
You gave the figures , Mr Weber .
Nobody has got worked up over figures of such magnitude .
I therefore do not believe that what you have presented is good , Mrs Malmström , because you have failed to quote Article 78 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
I do not know whether you are familiar with it .
Article 78 ( 3 ) of TFEU states that in the event of one or more Member States being confronted by a sudden inflow of nationals of third countries , the Council , on a proposal from the Commission , may adopt provisional measures for the benefit of the Member State ( s ) concerned - after consulting the European Parliament , by the way .
That is what Article 78 ( 3 ) of the current Treaty says .
By the way , temporary border controls were introduced on the basis of the Schengen regime of 2006 for the European Football Championship and for the football World Cup as a defence against hooliganism .
There is no need whatsoever to give support to a populist initiative by two heads of government - who have their backs against the wall in their countries and are looking for an escape route by populist means - by tabling such a communication .
( Applause )
Then what happened , President of the Commission ?
A Northern League interior minister in Italy says : Tunisians all speak French ; that is good - it means we can give them Schengen residence permits and they can all head off to France .
The French President then naturally asks whether they have a screw loose .
All the Tunisians coming to Italy now want to go to France ?
You want to shove them onto us ?
In that case , we will close the border .
At that , Prime Minister Berlusconi and the French President join forces to say that now we need border controls again because of the situation that we ourselves have brought about .
What does the Commission then do ?
It tables a communication , instead of saying : ' People , that is absolutely the wrong road to go down . You cannot deprive the citizens of Europe of one of their fundamental freedoms in such a way . '
That is what I would have expected of you .
( Applause )
We are losing the European spirit .
How can it in fact be the case that in this Union - in which one of our greatest achievements as regards fundamental freedoms is the freedom of movement of our citizens - suddenly two heads of government can simply arbitrarily render ineffective one of our really great achievements - that was an excellent phrase you used in your speech - because of a marginal problem that can easily be managed ?
How can that be possible ?
All that is needed for these people to win is for us not to fight sufficiently against it .
I would therefore have liked to see you fight it .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
I would just like to say one thing to you : I live on a border , in my case the German-Dutch-Belgian border between Aachen , Maastricht and Lüttich .
If you can explain to me , Mrs Malmström , how the migration problem in the Mediterranean is going to be managed by my having to show my passport the next time I travel from Aachen to Maastricht - if you can explain that to me , please - then I would be very grateful .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , let us be very open and blunt about this : what we have seen in recent weeks on this issue has been shameful - Italy issuing temporary residence permits to refugees from Tunisia , then France reacting by reintroducing internal border checks , as if the European Union had suddenly ceased to exist .
Let us be very open and call this by its name : it was a ping-pong game by two governments , and by Berlusconi and Sarkozy , on the back of refugees who are , in fact , in trouble .
That is what has been happening and , in my opinion , it has been disastrous not only for Schengen but also for the European Union and its image because the reintroduction of internal border checks contradicts the whole essence of the Union and the basic principles of the Treaty .
That point has been made several times here and Mr Barroso has also made it .
Moreover , what occurred was absolutely out of proportion .
I would not go so far as to echo Mr Schulz in calling this a marginal problem - 27 000 Tunisians do not constitute a marginal problem - but he is right to say that , by comparison with , for example , the 350 000 people who fled from Kosovo during the Kosovo war , we are clearly not talking about a migration tsunami .
And so we come to the problem : the communication from the Commission .
In my opinion , it was not very clear .
The communication states that , as a last resort in truly critical situations , a mechanism may need to be introduced - and , as I read it , that means a new mechanism - allowing for a coordinated and temporary reintroduction of controls .
That is the problem with the whole communication because , if this means that the Commission is proposing an additional possibility for the reintroduction of border controls , not provided for in the existing Schengen acquis , I can tell you that our Group will fight such a proposal with all available means , and I hope the entire Parliament will do likewise .
If , on the contrary , the sentence in question means that the Commission wants to restrict the current provision , then that has been foreseen : national security and public order are the two elements covered by the existing Schengen acquis .
If the intended meaning is that the Commission wants to restrict the current provision allowing Member States to reintroduce border controls , then , Mr Barroso , you can have 100 % support from our Group .
So , what I am asking of Ms Malmström and Mr Barroso is a rewriting of the communication and specifically of the sentence which states that a new mechanism shall be introduced for the reintroduction of border checks .
All they need to do is to state that they will strengthen the existing provision in the Schengen acquis .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , my Group and I welcome this opportunity to debate the issues and problems which Europe faces in the area of migration and the Schengen system .
The debate is long overdue .
Now is the time to focus not only on providing free movement , but also on better guarding the borders of Member States and the EU itself .
Rather than pushing for more legislation in the area of immigration and migration , we should be making the legislation that we already have work better and harder for all the citizens of the Union .
However , current concerns from Member States are not reactionary , but instead the inevitable consequence of over 20 years of ever-changing circumstances in Europe and around the world .
There is no doubt that Schengen has been a success in many ways , but Europe is facing challenges which simply did not exist to the current extent when the system was first created .
Large-scale unemployment , migration from North Africa , terrorism , organised crime and people-trafficking have provided us with problems far more complex than those envisaged in the policies for free movement of European citizens .
It is not an unfair assessment to say that the current system is now shown to be flawed and ill-equipped for the new circumstances we find ourselves in .
We need to create an effective tool representative of the modern needs of Europe 's Member States and able to improve the situation for all .
This needs to be complemented by renewed strength in making sure the other agencies of the EU , like Frontex , are there to support states in securing their own EU external borders , and that the problems are not exacerbated by further countries which may join the EU and therefore the Schengen area that are both ill-prepared to face the challenges and also to assume the burdens that accompany the obvious benefits .
This is a problem best solved through communication and cooperation , but Europe 's immigration and Schengen policies urgently require review , reflection and then sensible reform .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , there is something I do not understand .
We are told that 25 000 Tunisians are arriving in Europe and people are talking about a lack of security .
What lack of security ?
Let us not forget that extraordinary events have been taking place in Tunisia and Egypt , and that a war is going on in Libya .
May I remind you that during the war in Bosnia temporary residency permits were issued while the war lasted .
Germany took in several hundreds of thousands of people .
This happened and Germany is still standing .
It has not gone under as yet .
All this talk of a sinking ship is just propaganda .
Added to this , we are now hearing talk of criminals and mafia .
As if criminals and mafia were landing in Lampedusa !
Criminals do not need to come through Lampedusa .
They come in the usual way .
We do not see them , but they are here in our countries .
So stop making such a fuss .
The problem is quite straightforward : people are fleeing from North Africa .
So let us share out the support for them in Europe .
Surely you are not going to tell me that 25 000 people among 400 million is a big problem ?
Let me tell you something .
This is close to me , because how many Jews did we turn away ?
The English did it , the Americans did , all the countries did it when the Jews were leaving , because people said there were too many Jews .
This was in 1939-1940 .
It was Europe that was like this .
England was like this : it turned Jews away .
The United States turned them away .
The ship was called the Saint Louis .
It sickens me that every time people are in difficulty , it is seen that they are the problem .
They are not the problem : it is us and our inability to show solidarity and our inability to be open .
( Applause )
Commissioners , President-in-Office of the Council , are you aware of what happened in Paris ?
In Paris , some young Tunisians who had an Italian residency permit heard the French police say to them : ' This is what we are going to do with your permits ' , before tearing them up in front of them .
This is European law today : a national police force that tells people who have a residency permit issued by Italy : ' Mr Sarkozy has decided they do not count ' .
If this is the state of the law in Europe , I say something has gone wrong , and that is why I am asking you now to stop telling us that the problems in North Africa represent a security problem .
The problem in North Africa and the problem of the war in Libya are causing a problem of insecurity for the people living there .
So let us distribute the refugees between us .
Let us empower them by giving them temporary permits until things have calmed down , and let these permits be Europe-wide .
I think that by accepting this debate on Schengen today and by accepting populist pressure and racism , any border controls will be based on people 's faces .
Mr Schulz , did anyone stop you ?
No .
Mr Verhofstadt , did anyone stop you ?
No .
They did not stop me either .
But anyone who is brown-skinned , anyone who is different will be stopped and checked .
We will create an à la carte Europe .
Whites are allowed in , brown-skinned people are not !
That is the kind of Europe we want to fight against .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , exactly one year ago , we voted in this Parliament on our part of the codecision on resettling refugees , and in that codecision we had an emergency mechanism to be used in the case of any refugees who found themselves under armed attack or were the victims of natural disasters .
One year on , this codecision has not been concluded by the Council and my work as rapporteur on the resettlement of refugees has now become the job of finding support for this co-decision .
We had 600 votes in favour , only for it to become a task that was at first frustrating and depressing , and is now desperate .
My job as rapporteur on the resettlement of refugees cannot be to report , like last month , that have 150 people died off the coat of Lampedusa and now to learn of 600 who have disappeared and more than 60 who died in view of ships from the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) ships and European navies .
That cannot be what my job is about .
The Council has to conclude this codecision , because there is a great deal to do to resettle refugees .
Right now , we can call on Baroness Ashton to say that we need to open a humanitarian corridor to bring out 8 000 who are still in Tripoli .
There are 8 000 who have United Nations High Commission for Refugees ( UNHCR ) identity cards ; not very many .
NATO ships need to be told to apply the 1973 Resolution , which says to protect civilians .
That means the same in Benghazi , Misrata and the Mediterranean : it means saving those who are shipwrecked .
In relation to Schengen , I want to say one thing .
The response to ad hoc , unilateral suspensions of Schengen can never be a systemic suspension of Schengen by the Union .
This is not a case of completely killing off the idea .
It is a case of sticking to the idea and applying it universally .
It cannot be .
For a start , it has to be a case of applying resources to resettling refugees .
Do you know how much money the Member States of the European Union made , just from the sale of arms to Libya in 2009 ?
EUR 343 million .
Do you know how much we have in the European Refugee Fund ( ERF ) ?
EUR 100 million .
We would be delighted if the ERF contained as much as we earned in just one year from the sale of arms .
Hungary , which was the first country in the world to be the subject of a coordinated action to resettle its refugees in 1956 , has very particular responsibilities - historical responsibilities - to act on this refugee crisis as well .
We cannot complain of a lack of funds in this area .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , yesterday indeed was Europe Day and in the courtyard here we had armed soldiers , we had the Luftwaffe band and imperial eagles , we had the flag being paraded , being raised , the European anthem ; it was the display of militarism and EU nationalism .
I thought and hoped it was all just a bad dream , but today we have got you , Mr Barroso .
You begin of course by reiterating the fact that the free movement of peoples is the embodiment of the European project .
You then go on to say that it is the duty of Member States to share the burdens of migratory flows into Europe .
You advocate a common EU immigration policy , but of course you know that you are losing because the row that has blown up between Italy and France shows that when there is a crisis , between the theory of European integration and the practicality of nation state , it is the nation state that wins .
So you are worried that you are losing and , in your defence of your position , in your defence of your beloved acquis communautaire , your body of law , you resort to intolerance , you resort to nationalism , you make me realise that what I saw yesterday was actually for real .
You attack those who want to control their own border policies .
You attack them today as xenophobes .
You attack them as extremists , but worst of all , oh worst of all , you attack them three times for being populists .
Is that not a dreadful thing ?
The power of the ballot box .
When people dare to vote no in referendums , they are populists ; when they want to control their own borders , they are populists .
I put it to you that populists are actually democrats and you abuse those who want to fly the flag of populism .
Well , here it is , Mr Barroso .
Here it is .

( Mr Farage , Mr Agnew and Mr Bloom held up small Union Jacks )
That flag has represented liberal democracy far more than any other Member State of this European Union and it will go on long after your star-spangled banner has disappeared .
( NL ) Mr President , although Schengen stipulates that checks on the EU 's internal borders must be removed , it also stipulates that we have to monitor our external borders .
The problem is that this Treaty is not being complied with , because our external borders are not being effectively monitored .
Therefore , 16 years after the introduction of Schengen , we should have the courage to recognise that the Treaty has not worked .
We should also have the courage to admit that the EU has not provided a solution and that , instead , it has itself become part of the problem .
Member States must therefore once again be given the possibility of protecting their borders without EU interference .
We urgently need more measures .
Frontex , for example , should send back ships carrying bogus refugees to their countries of origin instead of playing the role of a sort of benevolent welcome committee .
We must crack down on human trafficking networks .
Member States should stop rewarding illegal foreigners with residence permits .
Active steps should be taken to repatriate illegal refugees and political refugees whose applications have been rejected .
If none of that happens , I guarantee you that that will be the end of Schengen , which would , actually , not be such a bad thing .
Mr President , I would also like to protest against the language being used here , against terms of abuse such as ' populists ' , ' extremists ' and the like , for people who simply want to protect the borders of their country .
We need to put a stop to that .
It is not right .
We must also admit that the rules need to be applied ; is it not strange that , while we are refusing to discuss the application of the rules , we are allowing some people to call others names ?
Mr President , the Schengen zone is indeed a very important and visible achievement for European citizens and the message is coming out clearly from this Chamber today that we need to fight together not just to preserve it , but to strengthen it further .
We rely on the European Commission to achieve that and the European Parliament will be behind the Commission in strengthening Schengen , but if there are two lessons that we have learnt in respect of what happened in recent weeks they are these .
First of all , the internal borders within Schengen depend on a common strategy , a common concern about our external borders .
If our external borders are weak then we will have problems on our internal borders and we need to look at that .
Italy felt under pressure with 25 000 people ; it gave them a temporary permit , they moved to France .
France felt under pressure and it re-erected national borders .
So the pressure went onto the internal borders and therefore the external borders are a common concern .
Secondly , Schengen needs solidarity and solidarity is also about sharing the responsibility - burden-sharing - and sharing responsibility is also relative to the size of the Member State .
On the current system , people who arrive in one country remain in the country where they arrive because our laws , including the Dublin Regulation , ensure that they have to remain in the first country of arrival .
This clearly needs to change because it is no longer tenable .
One thousand people arriving in the smallest Member State , my country Malta , are equivalent , population-wise , to over one million people arriving in the entire European Union .
So yes , 25 000 people are nothing , they are a drop in the ocean for the entire Union but 1000 people arriving in the southernmost Member State are a lot .
We need therefore to link Schengen with solidarity ; Schengen needs solidarity .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , the speaker talked of strengthening Schengen .
Does that include strengthening Schengen 's borders and , in particular , the borders between Greece and Turkey ?
Mr President , I thank the Member for his question .
One of the conditions for joining the Schengen zone is , indeed , strengthening external borders .
Precisely because they are a common concern , it is the responsibility of all the Member States to ensure that the external borders are strong .
Once you fulfil those conditions , then you can join Schengen .
This is precisely what countries such as Bulgaria and Romania have done , and it is precisely why we have helped Greece , by means of a Frontex mission there on the Turkish-Greek border .
So , yes , this goes to show that strengthening external borders is also a common concern .

( ES ) Mr President , it is true that yesterday , 9 May , we commemorated the moment that the European Union was founded , which showed us that Europe would be built with small steps and not once and for all , or for evermore : in other words , that Europe is not built definitively or irreversibly , and that our day-to-day work must be to preserve each of its achievements .
Schengen is an area of free movement of people , but it is also a symbol of the best that Europe has done in the last 20 years and , therefore , of the best Europe .
Presenting the 25 000 immigrants who have arrived on this side of the Mediterranean as an unbearable burden sends the wrong sort of message : Germany has demonstrated that they are not ; the Canary Islands and Spain have demonstrated that 30 000 arrivals per year from the African coasts were not an unbearable burden for the European Union .
The response cannot , therefore , be to use this migration flow to question Schengen .
Quite the contrary : instead it must be used to demonstrate that what still remains to be done is not correcting weaknesses caused by Schengen 's excesses , but rather strengthening Schengen .
Schengen can be strengthened by completing the solidarity clause provided for in the area of freedom , security and justice , pursuant to the Treaty of Lisbon ; by completing the asylum package , whose processing still remains outstanding ; and by permanently establishing the second-generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) and the verification mechanism , as stipulated in the conditions of entry to the area of free movement and as Parliament has voted in favour of Romania and Bulgaria doing .
These countries have the right to become part of the area of free movement .
However , what needs to be done above all is for the European Parliament to stake its claim to competence to decide on the issue alongside the Council .
I would therefore remind you that the proposal that the procedure invoke the legal basis of Article 70 , which excludes Parliament , is unacceptable : we demand Article 77 .

A final thought , Mr President : populism is being mentioned , because populism is not combated by imitating its half-hearted solutions but , quite the contrary , by confronting it with solutions for the future and not the past .
Mr President , Mr Verhofstadt asked the Commission to rewrite the communication but I wonder if , before it is rewritten , we could get a clear answer today as to whether or not you are aiming to improve the current existing system , to temporarily close borders , or to add something to the existing system .
That would be a good way of solving at least one of our questions .
Having said this , it is fair to say that we concur with the Commission 's aim of improving Schengen governance by reviewing the evaluation mechanism on the basis of a Community approach .
Parliament shares this view and , in this context , I have to say that we are deeply disappointed by the Council 's approach .
In fact what the Council wants to do is simply to isolate the Parliament .
I really wonder why the Council almost constantly seeks to undermine the great achievement that is the codecision role of the European Parliament .
We represent European citizens , and we should all work to serve European citizens .
Perhaps the Council should also understand its role as an EU institution rather than a mere gathering of 27 Member States .
The truth is that the answer to this migration flow , whether or not it is due to what has happened in North Africa and the Southern Mediterranean , is to come up with legislation involving a common policy on asylum and migration , which Parliament has worked on and which is being blocked in the Council .
( PL ) Mr President , in spite of the fact that I live a relatively long way away , in Poland , I feel that I understand entirely the concerns provoked by uncontrolled immigration into France or Italy .
Immigration from North Africa quite naturally exacerbates cultural and social tensions , and intensifies pressure on the social budgets of the Member States .
We therefore have a lot to discuss , and we should not try to ignore the matter .
French , Italian and Maltese citizens are today faced with the highest bills on account of the fact that controls along the European Union 's external borders are simply not working .
The European nations are also footing the bill for our failed efforts to halt immigration into Europe .
I have only one request .
I would like the changes to the Schengen Code not to be used as a pretext for limiting the freedom of movement of citizens of the European Union 's Member States .
Such proposals have been made for many years in respect of the Polish-German border , to the disadvantage of Polish citizens .
It will be easier to reach an agreement if we have a full guarantee that changes to the Schengen Code will not affect the citizens of the Member States .
( FR ) Mr President , this debate beggars belief .
We are being asked to review the freedom of movement of people in Europe and to reinstate national borders in order to cope with the influx of migrants that has supposedly been overwhelming Europe since the revolution in Tunisia .
If the consequences of this posturing were not so drastic and far-removed from reality , they would be laughable .
Since the beginning of 2011 , over 1 150 people have died in the Mediterranean and 23 000 people have arrived in Italy .
Meanwhile , more than 700 000 people have fled Libya and sought refuge in neighbouring countries and have found a different kind of welcome there than the kind they would have received in Europe .
Mr Sarkozy and Mr Berlusconi are putting short-term electoral interests first , by fearmongering and making people believe there is an invasion going on .
What nonsense !
When will Europe stop saying one thing and doing another ?
What suggestions are people putting forward today , apart from just words , giving in to populist pressure , reinforcing Frontex yet again and turning Europe into a fortress ?
Borders have never stopped anyone , either during the darker days of our history or today .
Do we not have any other message to pass on to the emerging democracies on the other side of the Mediterranean ?
The Union reached out to the dictators for years , in contempt of its own values .
Is it not time that it opened its eyes ?
I for one think it is .
( Applause )

( NL ) Mr President , I believe that Mr Borghezio , of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group , is next in line to speak .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this issue has the merit of having brought great hypocrisy to light .
The only government within the European Union that has an interior minister from a party which you define as populist is the one that has had the courage to implement the most humanitarian measure : giving 25 000 Tunisian people permission to move freely .
This is because we saw in the flesh that they were not 25 000 criminals , but people who had fled Tunisia .
It was an emergency , we had to face it with common sense and we have tried to help .
This shows a truth , namely that in many situations the real ' goodies ' are us , the ' baddies ' .
We who affirm the need to control immigration and external borders , continue to beg Europe - as Mr Cohn-Bendit has rightly done - to spread what might become 50 000 or 100 000 refugees across its territory , because the people who flee Libya are not criminals .
These are the clear words of a movement which defends territory and identity , which is against immigration because it does not want people to be uprooted , and which condemns racism and xenophobia but also hypocrisy .
( NL ) Mr President , we have a single European asylum and migration policy , one and the same awful policy for the whole of the EU .
The recent disastrous stream of migrants from North Africa and the trouble we have been having with the failing Schengen Treaty indicate that asylum and migration policy should be handed back to Member States .
One Member State is not the same as another , it is as simple as that .
That is why a single , common European policy will not work .
Mr President , Commissioner Malmström 's proposal concerning Schengen is a downright pathetic move .
It is bonkers of her to decide that Member States should not be allowed to make up their own minds on whether or not to introduce border checks and , if necessary , close their borders .
Member States are having trouble with tens of thousands of underprivileged migrants from North Africa , but Commissioner Malmström is preventing them from doing anything about it .
We still have boatloads of fortune-seeking migrants reaching Lampedusa .
The evil of migration continues its insidious spread .
But no , if you ask Commissioner Malmström , she will tell you that Member States are not allowed to fight back .
Instead , she gives us some claptrap about solidarity .
Mr President , Member States are unfortunately no longer the masters in their own homes .
Europe is the master .
Member States want those powers back .
Member States must , once again , be able to set their own asylum and immigration policies .
What is the Commission going to do about this ?

( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by telling Commissioner Malmström that I agree with the deserved praise given to her by President Barroso for the work that she is doing in this area .
The fact that we are experiencing a difficult period with regard to migration pressures cannot be an excuse for weakening one of the major achievements of European integration : namely , the Schengen area .
Schengen is synonymous with freedom of movement , and this reality cannot and must not be reversed , but must be protected , strengthened and developed .
I also agree that proper control of external borders is essential .
If this does not happen , the security of the Schengen area is weakened , the credibility of the European Union is undermined and mutual trust is destroyed .
Therefore , I welcome the recognition made by the European Commission , in its communication of last week , of the importance of the Schengen area , and of the challenge of strengthening and developing it .
I also agree with President Barroso that there is a need for greater solidarity and sharing of responsibilities between the Member States .
The problem does not lie in the Schengen rules , but in the way in which the Member States apply the rules without responsibility or solidarity .
Therefore , we require a real mechanism for evaluating Schengen .
This Parliament is prepared to work in good faith to create this mechanism : a mechanism that does not apply double standards ; in other words , that is not more demanding of candidate countries than of those that are already members of the club .
However , I am concerned , Commissioner .
I am concerned about the silence of the Presidency of the Council at the start of this debate concerning this mechanism , and I am also concerned about the Council 's year-long silence concerning the mechanism for resettling refugees , as already mentioned by Mr Tavares .
Of the three institutions , the one that is not making good progress in this area is the Council , and it should get back on track as quickly as possible .
a blue-card question for Mr van der Stoep . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to ask Mr van der Stoep the following question : if border checks were to be reintroduced , what would Mr van der Stoep say to the Dutch holidaymakers returning from a fortnight 's holiday in France who want to cross the border between Antwerp and Hazeldonk and who , on their way home , end up in a mile-long tailback , the same tailback as the lorry drivers on their way to the Port of Rotterdam to unload their cargo ?

( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Sargentini knows very well that we are absolutely against new customs gates being set up ; from 1992 , when our borders were opened , to last year 's common asylum and migration policy , everything worked absolutely fine .
However , at a certain moment , we crossed a line ourselves and what you seem to have overlooked is the fact that there are now 25,000 economic refugees in Italy who are going to be given visas .
These are economic refugees and they should be sent back to their countries as soon as possible .
They should not even have been permitted to apply for a visa .
The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) has always been clear on this : we do not want those gates back , but what we do want is merely the possibility of determining our own asylum and migration policy ourselves , and you are well aware of that .
Madam President , the position of the S & D Group is very clear .
We have heard all the background as to why Schengen is being breached and we have waited since 1999 for any kind of common migration or asylum policy .
So we are very clear in our messages .
First to the Commission : on Schengen , you want a Community mechanism for collective decision-making , you want to move away from intergovernmentalism , you want a lock on the political opportunism that we have seen from Italy and from France .
So please do not make the message ambiguous in the statement .
Make it clear that you will have a lock and you will prevent that type of opportunism which will in the end break Schengen .
To the Council : you have waited since 1999 for a common European asylum system , you have created a situation where solidarity and burden-sharing are often spoken of in this place , but we are nowhere near the formal mechanism for burden-sharing in the European Community .
You are blocking much of the work we are doing here in Parliament .
Unblock it .
Work with us and the Commission to ensure that solidarity means solidarity , burden-sharing means burden-sharing .
And finally , the Commission is looking ahead to a migration policy .
Work with us .
Do not be timid , be courageous and ensure that when we fix Schengen , we also fix our common migration policy and we have something to be proud of .

Madam President , like others I think that Commissioner Malmström is doing a very good job , but I also feel , in view of President Barroso 's robust defence of Schengen free movement today , that I do not really understand how the notion could possibly have taken hold that the Commission 's proposed EU-level mechanism is going to make it easier to reintroduce internal border controls .
Yet that notion has taken hold .
It could not possibly be , could it , that different messages are being sent to different audiences , one to MEPs , maybe one to Paris and Rome ?
The EU 's migration and asylum pressures ought to be capable of effective management by competent governments .
Unfortunately we have too many governments now which are playing to the extremist right-wing gallery .
The European Commission must indeed defend EU internal free movement and not throw gestures to the likes of President Sarkozy and Prime Minister Berlusconi for electioneering purposes .
It should highlight the failure of Member States to implement EU migration rules .
Lastly , the Commission must investigate allegations about 61 migrants being left to die , despite their making contact with Italian coastguards , a NATO warship and a military helicopter .
Any authorities that breached international maritime and humanitarian law must be brought to book .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we need to get to the point here .
We do not need a new rule on the temporary or any other reintroduction of border controls , either now or in the future .
We need to grasp that freedom of movement - and that is , after all , the message of the European Union - is something that you cannot simply displace or circumvent at will .
It is a citizens ' right that you cannot simply relativise .
Do you want to know what honestly annoys me ?
We hear a lot said about solidarity .
Who is talking about solidarity with the countries of Africa who are currently having to accommodate hundreds of thousands of refugees and will continue to do so - without great debate ?
Is anyone talking about solidarity with the people who are fleeing war and coming here to Europe ?
We need to show these people a bit of respect .
To be frank , I do not want to discuss any changes to Schengen or any rules whatsoever ; I simply want us to deal sensibly with migration once and for all .
We will not achieve this by using Frontex as a means of deporting people ; we will achieve it by having a democratic and humanitarian asylum law .
That is what we should be talking about in Europe and it must apply throughout Europe .
That is what we should fight for .
That is our real task .
( FR ) Madam President , my speech is addressed to the Commission and to my fellow Members , and I would also like to welcome the Council .
The issue we are facing today stems from the management of the Schengen area in 2011 .
That area is no longer restricted to five Member States , as it was in the 1980s .
Rather , it is an area which has continually expanded over the last few years and which today comprises 25 countries , three of which are not members of the European Union .
Therefore , like all European policies , cooperation in the Schengen area should reflect the real situation to which it applies today , which is different from that of 10 years ago .
This is the context in which the Italian and French Governments ' proposals , and the pragmatic and necessary steps outlined by the Commission today in its communication on immigration , should be understood .
Mutual trust between the Member States party to the Schengen area is indeed the cornerstone of Schengen cooperation .
However , this trust is based on reciprocal obligations .
If one of the parties fails to respect its obligations and generates an influx , the whole system breaks down .
The other Member States must therefore be allowed to respond to this breakdown by restoring temporary and strictly regulated border controls .
Such action would be a clear request to the Member States that are responsible for the breakdown to control their external borders better .
Furthermore , the Commission 's proposed measures would be very much in the spirit of Schengen , since controls would be reinstated as a last resort and the decision would be taken at European level rather than at intergovernmental level .
These measures will be intrinsically linked to all of the other proposed long-term measures , in preparation for a common migration policy .
Strengthening Frontex and showing greater solidarity are particularly crucial - and I will conclude on this point - in order to support the Member States situated at our external borders .
The situation in the Mediterranean in recent years only serves to highlight shortcomings in the Schengen acquis .
In the space of a few weeks , migrants from neighbouring Mediterranean countries have come to account for a significant percentage of France 's annual immigration .
This acquis is not static , but must instead be developed .
I hope that this proposal will be adopted quickly in order to guarantee better management of our Schengen area as soon as possible , and thus to ensure the security of our common external borders .
( RO ) Madam President , the exceptional migration flows , such as those from the southern Mediterranean , must not pose a threat to the Schengen area .
The European Commission must not promote the ideas of certain Member States which cast doubt over it .
The role of the Commission is to protect the Schengen area by promoting European solutions mentioned in the Schengen acquis .
Member States must demonstrate solidarity in managing the Schengen area .
The Council must also help strengthen the Schengen area by giving its immediate approval allowing Romania and Bulgaria to access this area .
The so-called problems with the Schengen area are bogus and have nothing to do with the freedom of movement inside the Union , but with the inability or bad faith on the part of some states to face up to immigration-related problems outside the European Union .
The solution for the future lies in improving Europe 's migration management system , completing the process of setting up the European Common Asylum System , the legal framework for illegal and legal migration , and enhancing the role of Frontex .
( IT ) Madam President , in recent weeks massive migration flows have provoked anxiety and reactions among European citizens .
Some Member States have set out positions that mean that the question of migration flows should be held in high estimation .
Schengen is now an established asset of European civilization and as such should be protected and preserved .
This does not mean that the temporary reintroduction of border controls , under certain conditions , is not an option .
We therefore welcome compensation mechanisms based on an EU approach , to ensure , in each case , the application of the Schengen area in compliance with the expectations of the people concerned .
The Commission 's valuable proposal of 4 May 2011 , by which the Schengen area is made more flexible and concerted in order to allow a more regular management of internal migration flows , heads in this direction .
The proposal aims at stronger governance , which must certainly be held in due consideration during moments of particular crisis .
I listened with particular interest to Mr Barroso both here in Brussels and in Palermo on the regional policies for the protection of Sicily and Lampedusa , which continues to see the arrival of boats which would otherwise be at the mercy of raging seas where more lives would be lost .
Madam President , we must continue to take this into account .
( FR ) Madam President , in these important debates on migration issues , we must avoid at all costs falling into the trap of Mr Sarkozy 's and Mr Berlusconi 's opportunistic statements on the Schengen Agreements .

Using Europe and migration flows as punchbags while citing the populist arguments of the extreme right is a very convenient way for some European governments to conceal their national economic and social failings .
To challenge free movement , a tangible achievement of European integration , today , is manipulative and dangerous .
On the one hand commentators are saying that the Commission has sided with France and Italy , while on the other President Barroso is today telling us that he does not intend to side with populist Member States .
Which of these is it ?
The Communication of 4 May not only mentions the reinstatement of internal border controls , it also addresses many other topics , such as the fight against human trafficking , legal immigration , resettlement of refugees , asylum and so on .
Those are the real issues !
The problem is that this communication only goes halfway .
Commissioner Malmström , it seems that you want to reintroduce a Community approach , which is vital .
Go on then , I dare you !
We need more Europe and more integration where Member States are tempted to protect only their individual interests .
( Applause )
( EL ) Madam President , on 2 July 1990 , just a few days after the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement was signed , Time Magazine published an article which started as follows : ' The dream of a border-free Europe took a step toward reality ' and ended as follows : ' to combat a possible increase in illicit drug trafficking , terrorist activities and illegal immigration , controls on the external borders of Schengenland will be tightened ' .
That was written 21 years ago and , as the President of the Commission said , that is precisely what we are being called on to do today : to keep the dream alive and to tighten controls on the Italian , Greek and southern European borders as a whole , because the southern borders of united Europe are the borders of the other states - of Germany , France and Belgium , for example .
In keeping with the principles of solidarity and reciprocity that keep this Europe alive , we need to review everything which does not appear to be paying off , to review the Dublin II agreement , as already debated in Parliament , and to share the burdens which each Member State must bear fairly , so that we can all help to keep the dream alive .
( IT ) Madam President , to question Schengen is , in our view , to question Europe .
If Europe is going to be even weaker , as right-wing governments desire , it will be increasingly tempting to ask ourselves whether remaining in Europe still makes sense , as the Italian Interior Minister , Mr Maroni , has done .
The answer , however , is greater involvement of EU mechanisms .
In essence , we need more Europe , not less Europe , and the Commission needs to say so more forcefully .
The best of Europe was shown on Sunday night when , in an extraordinary chain of human solidarity , the people of Lampedusa saved 500 shipwrecked people who were heading towards certain death .
The worst of Europe , if the news carried by The Guardian is confirmed , would be NATO military forces who do not intervene to save men , women and children adrift .
If we are sure about which of these we prefer , Mrs Malmström , then during the European Council in June the Commission will have to convince Member States to formulate a European policy on immigration , because Europe à la carte would be tantamount to the collapse of the European dream .
( NL ) Madam President , in June 2009 I was elected to the European Parliament by European citizens .
I was not elected to a parliament of institutions , nor was I elected to a parliament of individual Member States .
I am pointing that out because European citizens have many questions about Schengen .
This is nothing to do with populism , nor is it to do with fear .
This is to do with the questions which are worrying European citizens : how are we dealing with Schengen ?
Many questions are being asked about this at the moment , and I therefore call your attention to this .
Obviously , if the President of the Commission says that we have to uphold the principle of free movement of persons , then I will support that .
25,000 Tunisians cannot be allowed to take 502 million Europeans hostage , but these questions will not go away and public support for Schengen in Europe will be jeopardised .
That is why I can also agree to temporary border check arrangements , as my fellow member Mr Iacolino suggested .
I am very well aware that we cannot get burden-sharing up and running at the first attempt .
Finally , Madam President , one more question : what is the state of play when it comes to the launch of the European Asylum Support Office in Malta ?
I have heard that there is still a possibility of it getting off the ground .
Perhaps , the Commissioner could explain once again when the Office will actually be up and running .
( ES ) Madam President , Mrs Malmström , the problem with the communication tabled by the Commission is that it is a communication that is not credible at the present time , in relation to the long-term problems that the issue raised here involves , or even to the emergency solutions that the European Union should have implemented at this time .
Unfortunately , what the Commission has shown is that it is very weak , because you cannot keep everyone happy .
It is not possible to keep Mr Sarkozy and Mr Berlusconi happy , on the one hand , and have a common asylum and immigration policy for the long term , on the other .
It is impossible to introduce ambiguities that go nowhere into a communication like this , and what they demonstrate is that this is a policy that does not resolutely face up to the situation we are experiencing .
Mr Barroso is not doing you much of a favour when he says that you have done the best you could to find a balance , because this is not about finding a balance .
This is about dealing with an emergency situation like the one before us .
It is about having financing and reaching a proper agreement between the Member States on a common asylum policy , on the European Asylum Office and on all the challenges we are facing .
There is none of that here .
How can you talk about regional cooperation programmes with third countries when the democrats of Tunisia and Libya are seeing us closing our countries ' borders ?
Is it possible to talk about that ?
We cannot say ambiguous things .
We are dealing with issues serious enough that you should take this seriously too , Mrs Malmström .

( DE ) Madam President , I consider the debate on the reintroduction of border controls and the modification of the Schengen mechanism to be absolutely excessive and superfluous .
Moreover , we are only having this debate because Mr Berlusconi and Mr Sarkozy were thinking only of their national interests and acting in a populist way when they threatened to reintroduce controls at the borders between individual Member States on account of the migrants from North Africa .
I was also astounded - I must make that clear - at how quickly Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission , took up the debate rather than taking a corrective European approach .
Schengen is a huge achievement .
Schengen is a European symbol and is the perfect combination of freedom to travel , open borders and security .
Schengen must never be brought into question .
In special cases we already have the possibility of reintroducing controls for a limited period and in a limited region where there is a serious threat to internal security .
What we do not need , then , is a debate on Schengen .
What we instead need is a debate on measures to enhance Frontex so as to provide maximum security at the external borders of the European Union - thereby ensuring freedom of movement - and a debate on speedy asylum proceedings and managed migration , on cooperation to deal with the causes of migration and on readmission agreements .
I am happy to go along with Commissioner Malmström 's proposals on this - her proposals are very broad - and I invite the Commission to follow Parliament 's lead , rather than the lead set by certain representatives of the Council .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , at a time when , politically , the fundamental principles of cohesion and solidarity in the EU are under attack on all sides , especially from neo-nationalist movements , and we all know who they are , the Commission should , in my opinion , make it its daily task to crush anyone who attacks the symbols of European political unification .
Yet , we are here today , precisely because it has not done so .
It has allowed a debate to be instigated under pressure from certain Member States on the cornerstone of the European identity : Schengen .
However , legally also , the Commission 's proposal conflicts with Articles 78 and 80 of the Convention .
Where a Member State is under severe pressure from immigration , the Convention expressly states that Europe must provide support and solidarity .
Restoring internal border controls is not solidarity , it is punishment .
It does not fairly distribute the burden of the pressure on the external borders , for example , by strengthening Frontex ; it puts an even greater burden on the Member State .
In other words , Commission , this is not ' burden sharing ' ; it is a blatant form of ' burden dumping ' .
You , the Commission , have allowed this debate to happen and you must stop it , right here , right now .
( HU ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Commissioner , Minister of State Győri , the Schengen system is one of the most tangible acquis of the European Union .
If European citizens were asked , they would mention free movement without border controls as something important for them in the European Union .
That is why it is important to preserve this system and to do everything to preserve the free movement of our citizens and a Europe without borders .
This must remain our primary goal .
The values , our acquis have to be protected especially when they are challenged .
This challenge today is the surge of migration and refugees .
However , in order to address these challenges we need concrete proposals and solutions .
This begins with separation and clarification of the issue , which means that we separate the refugee issue from illegal immigration , we use our existing principles that we can build on , such as solidarity and cooperation , and we use our existing institutions such as FRONTEX , or our existing rules .
I welcome the Hungarian position and the position of Minister of State Győri , and also the words of Mr Barroso , who said that the aim is to reinforce the Schengen acquis and operate it well , not to depart from it .
( LT ) Madam President , first of all I would like to stress that the solution to the migration problems that have come about should remain within the scope of the Schengen Agreement .
The Schengen acquis currently provides for possibilities to temporarily restore the protection of internal borders when there is a threat to public order and security and these provisions really are wholly sufficient .
Therefore , perhaps the Commission might elaborate on the additional cases provided for in its Communication on migration , enabling border protection to be extended temporarily , which the Communication describes in very abstract terms , and whose subject area is too poorly defined ?
Does this mean that the European Commission is pandering to the leaders of the two largest European Union Member States and aims to destroy one of the greatest EU values - the area of freedom and free movement ?
I would also like to comment on the Communication 's content , because it seems as if the Communication was written purely with this case in mind , where there are increased migration flows from the countries of North Africa .
Doesn 't the Commission feel that a document called a Communication on migration should be much broader in terms of its content and substance ?
( DE ) Madam President , the borders have been removed for the first time in Germany and Austria and we finally have free movement for workers from the countries of Eastern Europe .
On the one hand , borders are being torn down , while on the other you are trying to build barriers yet again .
I find it impossible to accept that two Member States and two gentlemen looking to make a name for themselves have managed to bring the issue of the reintroduction of border controls back to the debating chamber .
There is no going back on this matter and we cannot allow ourselves to be put under pressure by this single-issue discussion .
The refugee problem cannot be automatically resolved by returning to a regime of border controls .
Pardon me .
These people have risked their lives in making their way to Europe and they will also succeed in bypassing border crossings .
The only ones who stand to gain from the reintroduction of border controls would be the human traffickers because the refugees would have to find new ways to cross the borders , providing the human traffickers with a new source of income .
I cannot accept the fact that we are seriously contemplating this matter and I would call on the Commission not to compromise here .
( DE ) Madam President , I am pleased that all sides of the House , including the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which includes Mr Sarkozy and Mr Berlusconi , have made it clear that new rules are not required and that it is not necessary to alter the Schengen Agreement , but that something else is needed , namely a common asylum and migration policy that is worthy of the name .

Furthermore , Mrs Malmström , I am calling on you to take action and to make it clear that the Dublin II Agreement must be changed in order to facilitate genuine European solidarity in relation to asylum issues and to show that this continent is a cohesive entity and that countries with external borders cannot be left to fend for themselves .
However , caution is advised .
Italy itself can certainly assume responsibility for this and must do so .
An interior minister like Mr Maroni , who himself belongs to Lega Nord party , must make it clear that these people are refugees whose rights must be respected and that the correct course of action must be taken here .
We in Europe need to protect not just money and banks , but also refugees , which is why we do not need a new Schengen regulation , but rather a policy on asylum and migration that truly respects human dignity .
Madam President , in the past couple of months , the Commission has moved rather fast in publishing two important communications aimed at addressing the challenges at hand since the outbreak of the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia .
A number of policy options have been put forward and Parliament has already expressed itself on them in order to guide the Commission in drafting concrete legislative proposals .
In the communication on migration , the Commission addresses the issues of external border controls , Schengen governance and organised mobility .
Why is there nothing more explicit here on burden-sharing ?
The communication mentions the pilot project for the resettlement of refugees in Malta , but it does not introduce the notion of a pilot project concerning relocation of unauthorised migrants or asylum seekers - and this despite the repeated calls for such a burden-sharing system from various Member States and Members of Parliament .
Why is the Commission not coming up with a concrete proposal on this ?
We are talking about a European area of freedom of movement ; we are talking about a common European asylum system .
When are you going to back up the notion of European solidarity with deeds ?
( DA ) Madam President , I would like to address the proposal that the Commission has tabled concerning the strengthening of external border control .
Unfortunately , it is not very satisfactory because , at a time when we are witnessing several Member States pursuing a rash immigration policy that grants large numbers of foreigners lawful residence in the EU , and when the lack of border control allows people to move freely across borders , there is a need for stronger border control between the EU 's Member States on a permanent basis .
With regard to the constant talk of solidarity , I would also like to express my surprise at the fact that Member States like Denmark , for example , that have been good at tightening up their immigration policy , are supposed to show a large degree of solidarity with countries that have not managed to do the same .
It would make sense to allow countries expressing their national sovereignty by determining their own immigration policy to also reap the fruits of their labours .

( DE ) Madam President , apparently only about 3 000 of the Tunisian refugees apprehended in Lampedusa are genuine asylum-seekers , while 20 000 or more are economic migrants .
As long as the European Union refuses to admit that it cannot accommodate all economic migrants from every conceivable quarter , hundreds of thousands more will make their way here .
If steps are taken such as mass amnesties for illegal immigrants or if the Schengen Agreement is violated through the use of tourist visas , as was recently the case , then this will inevitably result in many thousands more refugees .
This puts the entire Schengen system at risk .
Greece , Italy and Malta are obviously not in a position to secure their external borders and newcomers to the Schengen Group often relax their efforts after accession .
The EU 's external borders are riddled with more holes than a Swiss cheese and are also being undermined internally .
Temporary controls are not enough .
The EU must develop Frontex into a genuine border protection agency .
If none of these measures produce results , then inevitably one or other country will come up with the idea of withdrawing from the Schengen Agreement .
( BG ) Madam President , today we need to answer the question about how to preserve and strike a balance between our basic values : freedom , solidarity , justice and , on the other hand , security .
The point was mentioned on numerous occasions that external borders are a joint responsibility for all Member States .
Let us refrain from creating unnecessary obstacles between us .
Let us also prevent the current situation from going down in the history books as a bad example of European integration .
I naturally welcome the greater role given to Frontex and the additional human and material resources for the agency , along with the reinforcement of the Schengen evaluation mechanism , but not the new requirements imposed on Bulgaria and Romania and the obstruction of their membership .
Mrs Győri , after Bulgaria and Romania met all the technical criteria for membership , which was assessed by the Council 's experts , please tell us what the Council 's position is on the timeframe for admitting Bulgaria and Romania , and whether such a discussion is going on in the Council .
If new rules apply , they must be valid for everyone and not be used to achieve political objectives , but to build on the current system for protecting our borders .
From a foreign policy perspective , I think that our good neighbourhood policy must be linked to the relevant governments fulfilling readmission commitments to their citizens .
( DE ) Madam President , open borders are an important symbol for Europe .
I would like to draw your attention to another problem .
I come from Northern Germany , which is why the German-Danish border is of particular importance for me .
The right-wing populist Danish People 's Party is trying to force the Danish Government to reintroduce border controls .
What is the reason for this ?
It is a fear of people from Romania and Bulgaria .
This is scandalous .
The right-wing populists are rapidly growing in numbers and represent a real danger for Europe .
Of course we must have protections against untrammelled criminality and our security authorities have already found effective alternatives to passport controls .
It makes me very sad that one of our major European achievements is to be put at risk .
The EU success in promoting peace and freedom is without historical parallel but is now under high-level attack .
I would call on the Danish Government not to allow itself to be dictated to by the right-wing populists .
Madam President , freedom of movement is a cornerstone of European integration .
Let us not open a Pandora 's Box by revising Schengen .
Let us not go back on our principles .
The possibility of introducing border controls already exists .
It should be temporary , exceptional and a last resort .
What is needed is a common approach , a long-term vision as called for by the Commission , to respond to citizens ' concerns on security .
We need to move forward to a common asylum policy by 2012 , to have a common migration policy and to facilitate legal immigration for work while combating irregular immigration .
Short-term procedures that hinder resettlement have to be removed .
Yes , we have to express solidarity with the Member States that are most exposed to an influx of people , but first of all our solidarity should be with the people who are fleeing tragedy .
The dignity of immigrants , of people fleeing the country , has to be put back at the centre of the European debate .
( FR ) Madam President , I wonder if the demagogues of Rome and Paris and their cohorts here in the European Parliament realise what their request to reinstate internal border controls actually implies .
More than one million European citizens work in countries other than their own .
One hundred and fifty thousand people cross the border every day into Luxembourg .
Do you want to subject them to border checks ?
Tens of millions of Europeans will travel this summer .
Do Mr Berlusconi and Mr Sarkozy want to subject them to border checks ?
President Barroso said it himself : every year there are over 1.25 billion movements of persons within the Schengen area .
Do you want to subject them to border checks ?
Commissioner Malmström , leave Schengen as it is .
Re-read the Treaties , re-read Articles 67 and 78 .
Everything is there .
There is no need to devise something new ; let us stick with Schengen and the free movement of citizens , otherwise we will have a citizens ' revolt on our hands .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Schulz has left us , but I am pleased that he and Mrs Rodust have made it clear that it was not Social Democrat policy that border controls should be reintroduced .
However , two years ago , during the election campaign for the European Parliament , the key demand of the Danish Social Democrats was that the borders should be closed again .
I am not talking about the right-wing populists .
Mr Jørgensen and party leader Mrs Thorning-Schmidt both argued for this .
You are absolutely right , this is populism .
An important question for the Commission is therefore as follows : Can a country reintroduce border controls and still remain in the Schengen Union with access to the information system , etc . , or is this an either-or situation ?
The question is important for the Danish debate , which is why I ask that a clear answer be given .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I note that , in order to save Schengen , many would like to offer as a solution the expulsion from Europe of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Sarkozy .


More simply , I think it would be enough to strengthen Frontex , which means tightening security along the EU external borders .
I would like to remind everyone that right now many governments shun their duty of solidarity by not taking part in Frontex .
Besides that , I feel compelled to make another crucial point : behind the humanitarian emergency and the immigration problem lurks a political problem .
Indeed , while Europe has a strong humanitarian presence on immigration , I agree with Mrs Malmström that it is absent , at a political level , with regard to the tragedy behind it .
More Mrs Malmström and less Baroness Ashton is what we need , and we will see that somehow we can improve the difficult conditions in which we find ourselves and will be able to ensure that the future is given a chance .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this has been a very interesting and good debate on a very important subject .
There was talk earlier about a ping-pong game going on .
That ping-pong game is probably between the European Parliament and two Member States , so please do not use the Commission as a ball .
We are trying to have a coordinated , responsible and coherent response to everything relating to migration and borders because it all goes together .
We cannot have a visa policy if we do not have border control .
We cannot have credible protection of people who ask for asylum if we do not have a common asylum policy in the European Union .
We cannot have legal migration that works if we do not also work with integration and we cannot fight irregular migration if we do not have a proper and decent return and readmission policy .
So , in order to have all this together , we need a clear framework and we need a European framework .
The Commission has therefore presented this communication .
With all respect to the hard-working people in the Commission , I will reveal a secret to you .
We cannot produce a communication like this in two days .
It is not possible .
It has been planned for a long time .
This is not a response to one or two Presidents or Prime Ministers - this is something that we have been planning for a long time , and it is all there .
Those with whom we have been working together on a daily basis will know that since day one I have been working with them and the Council to achieve a joint common European asylum system .
It is hard work , it is difficult and we are working very slowly , but we are making some progress .
We are working together on legal migration , we are trying to reinforce Frontex , and I have been promising you a paper on integration since my hearing last February and , already last year , we proposed better governance of Schengen .
This is not a response to one or two Prime Ministers calling for something .
It is something well thought out and it is something that will lead to further legislation and proposals in the light of the European Council meeting in June , which will have as a theme - also planned for a long time - migration issues .
Of course , the situation in Northern Africa and in the Mediterranean accelerates the need for us in Europe to have our house in order .
Is that a reason to reinstall internal border control ?
No , of course not .
Is there a reason for European action ?
Yes , there is .
We have about 25 000 Tunisians coming to Europe .
We have discussed this on many occasions here in the plenary .
Of course , every individual comes for a reason , namely that he - because it is very often a he - has no work in Tunisia .
I feel very strongly about every individual 's fate here , but not all of them can come to Europe .
It is much better - and that is why we are working with the Tunisian authorities and Italy in order to see how we can support Italy to create jobs and growth - for these people to find a future in Tunisia , because they are not refugees .
However , there are refugees coming , and increasingly more so now .
This week a lot of people have come from Libya - third country nationals , even Libyans - and that might increase .
These people are clearly a reason for European action and solidarity .
The Commission has invited all Member States to a conference on 12 May in order to discuss relocation and a prolongation of the Malta project in order to assist Malta with the thousands of people who have been going there .
But we will also have the UNHCR there , so we will try to ask Member States to take increased responsibility for the refugees running away from the increasing violence in Libya who are stranded in Tunisia and at the border .
Turning to Schengen , I agree with you - or most of you - who have said that Schengen is a fantastic achievement .
The fact that we can travel from Finland to Malta , from Portugal to Estonia , without ever showing a passport is a wonderful symbol of European integration .
I want to protect this and further promote it .
I am happy that I can count on your support in this .
However , the system is not perfect .
We knew long before all this started that there were some weaknesses in the systems .
Evaluation has not worked , because Member States are evaluating each other and that is not a good thing .
We need a European mechanism with the involvement of the European Parliament .
I presented this in November last year and I remember that I got quite a lot of support from this plenary to do this .
We need to have tools to help the Member States perform better in protecting EU external borders .
We need to strengthen monitoring and we need more - not less - Europe .
So , in order to assess this situation and to decide on the necessary means , we really need a European approach .
The events of last week have confirmed this .
The shortcomings should never automatically lead to the reintroduction of border control .
There has to be an assessment of the shortcomings in all other ways possible , such as providing financial and operational support .
Member States can also help each other .
We are also working together with you on strengthening Frontex .
The point of departure is strengthening current legislation .
I am convinced that the current rules can cater for most situations .
Where there are differences in interpretation , the Commission should consult with Member States in order to clarify the rules .
This can be done by issuing guidelines or recommendations .
There are particular circumstances where there might be a need to reintroduce border controls .
That is already provided for today and it has been the case in a few situations - for example a major event such as a terrorist threat .
There could be a major event where Member States , under very clear circumstances , need to do this .
But we need to strengthen the European dimension of this and to prevent Member States from unilaterally taking action .
That is what we are talking about .
We live in turbulent times .
Many of the things that are happening are a reason for joy - in Egypt and Tunisia - but there are also a lot of concerns .
We need to be calm in this situation .
We need to try to handle it in the short term , but also in the long term .
We need to strengthen our rules , not to undermine them .
We need to strengthen the rules based on European law , on our values and on international commitments .
We need a European leadership to stand up against simplistic solutions - and I have heard some of them here today - and populism .
We need more Europe , not less .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I would also like to thank you very much for this debate and the contributions I had from the honourable Members of this House .
First let me start with our clarification concerning the asylum package , as I received very concrete questions on that .
As to the specific proposals on the table , the Council welcomes the start of the trilogues between the Parliament and the Council concerning the Qualification Directive .
As to the Dublin Regulation and the Eurodac Regulation , important progress has been made at technical level .
Two main issues , however , remain outstanding which are inextricably linked to the political discussions .
The first is the suspension of transfers under the Dublin Regulation and the second is access for law enforcement under the Eurodac Regulation .
Many delegations in Council are of the opinion that suspending Dublin transfers to Member States that are subject to practical pressures would create a poor precedent and would undermine the Dublin Regulation .
A large number of delegations have also expressed a strong wish to give law enforcement agencies access to the Eurodac database .
Given these views in Council and considering our shared commitment to establishing a common European asylum system , a constructive debate is needed between all the institutions involved : the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
Finally , the Council awaits with interest the revised proposals of the Commission concerning the procedural directives and the Reception Conditions Directive , which are expected , if I am not mistaken , in early June .
So , Ms Weber , since you suggested , with reference to the work of the Council , that we are questioning and undermining codecision and are trying to isolate Parliament , I hope that my clarification was enough for you .
Of course we are very pleased to share all the information with you and we are very committed to making progress on these dossiers , which are , I think , of vital importance for all of us .
Let me continue in my mother tongue for some horizontal general concluding remarks .
( HU ) As emphasised in my introduction , the great debate in the Council is yet to come .
The proposal of the Commission was published six days ago .
We convened a special meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council for 12 May , where we will be able to have an orientation debate .
We hope that this work and the working group debate can make the situation easier for the heads of states and heads of governments , and they will be able to take the most important political decisions in the European Council in June .
So at this moment I can share with you the opinion of the Hungarian Presidency .
And let me reiterate , not for the first time in this House , that our basic philosophy is a strong Europe ; a strong Europe that places people at the centre of its thinking .
This is our basic principle ; it determines every policy we make and each step we take .
It is on this basis that I can tell you what our starting point will be in this politically highly sensitive issue .
We will not be partners with anyone attempting to dismantle the Schengen system and free movement .
The overwhelming majority of the comments made in this House have argued for the preservation of this common acquis .
Let me quote the honourable Italian Member Mr Iacolino , who called it ' patrimonia della civilta europea , ' ' our common European heritage ' , or Mrs Kinga Gál , who said that free movement is the most tangible result of the unity of the EU .
The Hungarian Presidency will withstand every effort to the contrary .
But this does not mean , and here I agree with Commissioner Malmström , that the system should not be perfected .
For months , for years we have been aware that the system should be adjusted to the challenges of 2011 , and this can indeed be done .
Nobody wants the system that we have established together , with many years of work , to fall into pieces .
So , as regards restoring internal borders , we think that it can be done only in an exceptional situation , in case of an extraordinary challenge , for a defined period and by the decision of the Community .
I have said this in my introduction , Mrs Malmström and Mr Barroso have said this as well .
I repeat once again that this is our starting point .
What are the issues in which we can still be partners , and which are the ones in which we cannot be partners ?
We would like to distinguish refugees who are genuine asylum seekers under international law .
We must help them so that we can be loyal to ourselves and to our common values .
At the same time we also have to combat illegal migration .
I do not need to mention that the protection of the common borders , our external borders , is a common issue .
FRONTEX has to be strengthened , and the means necessary for this must be provided .
This is what we are working on with your cooperation , hoping that we can make a decision as soon as possible .
The issue of Schengen does not only mean what the Commission communication now contains ; the expansion of the Schengen zone is on the agenda .
The Hungarian Presidency clearly separates these two issues .
Nobody should want to ignore the two countries which have put enormous work , energy and money into preparing properly and meeting the rigorous requirements that accession to the Schengen zone involves , and destroy it by saying that the atmosphere is not right at the moment .
We already acknowledged in February during the Hungarian Presidency that as far as the technical standards were concerned , Romania was ready , while Bulgaria still had some homework to do .
I am happy to announce that Sch-eval , the Schengen Evaluation Group has now found that Bulgaria has done that work .
I hope that we can state in the Council before the Hungarian Presidency comes to an end that technical preparation has been completed .
The two countries fulfil the technical criteria of Schengen .
The political decision will have to be made when the Member States are ready for it .
We have had ongoing consultations with all parties concerned , and are trying to find a solution that is acceptable for all stakeholders , Romania , Bulgaria , and the Member States concerned about the Schengen mechanism .

And finally , a comment : I think it was Mr Weber of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) who said that we had to be very careful about the policy we implement concerning migrants , European problems and labour supply .
I deeply agree with that .
We should not forget that we have our own unemployed , but we should equally remember that we are an aging society in Europe and we will have labour supply problems as well .
That is why the Hungarian Presidency has been committed to put demographic issues on the agenda , to help each other see which Member States have been very successful in the field of demographic policy , in the field of family policy .
We would like to improve the situation of families in the European Union .
We would like more children to be born in Europe , because every Member State promotes this with their own means , and this is the solution for the problem of an aging society , and it would be good if we did not have to solve it through migration .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Together with the euro , free movement of persons in the EU is one of the fundamental pillars of the European project .
There is no reason whatsoever why we should now question this .
The reaction to the thousands of refugees who are literally being washed ashore in the south of Europe cannot possibly be considered a valid reason for us to start closing our internal borders , even temporarily .
The only sensible way to react to this is to do something , in the short term , about a common European asylum and migration policy .
We cannot and should not sit back and allow the arrival of 30 000 refugees on the shores of Italy or Greece to undermine the pillars of the EU .
Obviously , Italy is right to have requested European solidarity in tackling this problem .
Solidarity is the solution .
Shutting our borders , even temporarily , is a panic reaction , unbefitting of EU leaders .
, in writing . - The Commission 's response to any perceived challenge to the EU is to reach for more centralised powers .
In the same way the financial crisis played perfectly into their hands and they leapt at the chance to justify economic governance rather than admit the euro 's failure , concerns about the sudden influx of migrants and the stresses it puts on countries is being used to call for the reinforcement of Schengen with increased centralised governance .
MEPs are elected by the people , as the voice of the people .
They represent the countries they are from .
Yet when they reflect national interests here , it 's labelled ' Populist ' .
Mr Barroso said it 's becoming fashionable to be Populist and wave the flag of xenophobia .
Does he believe the very essence of being a country - having a domestic government , an independent economy and national borders - is inherently wrong ?
Why not have the guts to just scrap Parliament and take over Europe by force ?
Name calling , scaremongering and creeping bureaucracy is calculated and megalomaniac .
But don 't think we are unaware .
If we were , the so called ' fashion ' for populism would not be developing .
People are waking up to your intentions and the time will come that you are exposed .
The migration problem that we are facing in Italy and throughout Europe absolutely cannot be reduced to just the humanitarian emergency , even though that is the most urgent situation to deal with .
We MEPs - who are known to be responsible for expressing the political will of our citizens , and for implementing and assessing the long-term sustainability of their requests - must have an overall vision , and we must know how to defend it against the other institutions .
In the case of immigration policy , the overall vision starts with the analysis of a European population which is aging , although this is happening rather unevenly among the States of the Union .
A serious imbalance is being created between birth rates and death rates and our growth is also linked to the distribution of the workforce to ensure that the market has the necessary resources to continuously produce everything that is needed .
This is why Parliament should advocate a holistic management of the immigration problem to the other institutions , including the governments of Member States , with people at the centre of a recovery strategy - by which I do not mean solely an economic recovery - which needs plumbers , engineers and builders , as well as banking .
Italy 's decision to issue temporary residence permits to thousands of Tunisian immigrants arriving on its soil , followed by France 's request to temporarily restore border controls , has brought the Schengen area , one of the most tangible aspects of European integration , into question .
The proposals outlined in the Commission Communication of 4 May , including , in particular , a planned extension of the ' exceptional circumstances ' under which internal border controls may be restored , leave me somewhat perplexed .
Surely we are not going to allow the will of two Heads of State to jeopardise one of Europe 's greatest achievements .
Immigration is a challenge requiring a Europe-wide response , and therefore I call for a common migration policy .
It is time to tackle this issue head-on .
I hope that the atmosphere of the European Summit in June , at which this topic will be addressed , will not be contaminated by populist sentiments .
I would like to voice my disappointment over the fact that the Commission is narrowing down the entire issue of migration to the problems in the Mediterranean and the Schengen area .
The situation is critical .
An ambitious strategy has long been expected from the Commission .
Not an anti-European plan for restoring national boundaries .
Commissioner Malmström correctly emphasises the fact that the free movement of people across European borders is an enormous success and we must not lose it .
From this perspective , the Commission proposal for managed immigration flows seems incomprehensible .
Particularly the part allowing the introduction of border controls in the EU , even if they are only emergency ones and on a temporary basis .
The fact that a state cannot decide on such a measure , but only the Union , is a plus .
Despite this , I consider the clause to be backward and needlessly submissive to the populist pressure of the French and Italian premiers .
We are not talking about something insignificant , but about one of the fundamental principles of the EU ; freedom of movement .
I am not convinced that we should sacrifice this to the current problems with controlling migration pressures from Africa .
In my opinion , the role of the Union should be to plan the sharing out of migration pressures from the Mediterranean between the Member States , and to manage the integration of immigrants effectively .
The Commission is recommending the adoption of many documents relating to migration in May and June .
I would like to express the hope that , in formulating these documents , the Commission will maintain a measure of detachment and a cool head .
The current political crisis in North Africa and the resulting migration confirm the need for a strong European approach to immigration and asylum .
Immigration is a European challenge that requires not only a rapid and effective solution but also a shared long-term strategy .
Perhaps we are forgetting that according to the latest United Nations estimates , 12 360 migrants have left Libya and arrived in Italy and Malta since last March , but already 700 000 people have fled Libya and Tunisia with the aim of crossing the Mediterranean .
Without a joint plan for immigrant reception and border control we risk uncontrollable , chaotic immigration with serious consequences for the whole of Europe .
In this regard , it is important to strengthen Frontex , establish greater solidarity among the Member States , set up agreements for increased border control and also to repatriate illegal immigrants .
Finally , as regards any changes in the Schengen system , such a decision should be taken at a European level and not left in the hands of any single country .
We should not allow the states most exposed to migratory pressure to run the risk of finding themselves even more isolated .
, in writing . - ( HU ) One of the most important challenges for Europe today is how to react to the revolutions developed on its southern borders .
The democratisation of this region is an essential interest for the EU ; the EU must find a solution for the flow of refugees coming from this region which complies with humanitarian principles and human rights .
Solidarity is necessary between Member States , but especially with the refugees coming to Europe .
We Hungarians can really understand the importance of this , since hundreds of thousands of our compatriots were taken in by many countries of the world after the 1956 uprising .
The answer to the pressure of migration is not the reintroduction of internal border control , but the acceleration of the ongoing negotiations for the purpose of adopting the refugee package , the common European migration policy and the Schengen evaluation system as soon as possible .
Reintroduction of border controls , albeit temporarily , would undermine one of the symbolic acquis of the EU , hindering the free movement of citizens .
This is an acquis which European citizens much appreciate , and which is also a guarantee for the implementation and success of the common economic area .
We must find solutions to the emerging problems together , we should not give grounds to populist and individual voices merely offering pseudo-solutions .
During our debates on strengthening and improving management of the Schengen area , we must at the same time consider the European Union 's new migration policy , not only in the context of the situation in North Africa , but also with regard to possible events in the countries neighbouring us to the east .
It is hard to predict what might happen in the post-Soviet states in future .
We must also bear in mind the challenges facing Europe .
The EU is an ageing society , and therefore the influx of migrants should not be regarded only as a threat to European labour markets .
Migrants often contribute to the economic growth of their country of destination .
This was the case after the new Member States were accepted into the EU .
Germany , which feared an influx of migrants , applied transitional periods and is only now opening up its borders to workers from Poland .
The UK decided to open up its labour market straight away , and is now enjoying the benefits of having employed around two million young , efficient and energetic Poles .
It is also frequently said that we should accept political migrants , but close Europe 's doors to economic migrants .
In my opinion , this division does not make much sense , since it is often difficult to distinguish between these two types of migration .
How should we classify the middle-class protests in the Arab countries ?
The underlying causes are both political and economic .
Let us not therefore fall prey to imagined fears , but let us think about the opportunities for our development .
, in writing . - The aggressive positions taken by the French and Italian political leaders with regard to the Ventimiglia incident have nothing to do with the Schengen agreement , but are rather an exercise to impress their own citizens .
The 20 000 or so migrants were , in the main , economic migrants seeking jobs and better economic opportunities .
Rather than suffer a brain-drain as its best and brightest people seek economic migration , what Tunisia requires is EU financial assistance for economic development programmes promoting work for the young and the unemployed .
However , this should not distract us from dealing with the real problem of how best to cope with the migration of genuine asylum seekers from North Africa , who are or will be fleeing from war-torn countries .
For this we do not need the return of national border controls .
The principles of the EU include freedom of movement and solidarity between Member States , and we should not take retrograde steps in that regard .
We have provision in the treaties for establishing a single EU asylum system and proper burden-sharing between Member States .
Instead of stoking up right-wing populism , we should be working as Europeans to put the necessary legislation in place .
The arrival of streams of immigrants to Lampedusa in recent days shows that the immigration crisis is an ongoing issue that requires immediate action .
We clearly need improved governance within the Schengen area , as established by the Commission Communication of 4 May .
To this end , the solidarity mechanims must be strengthened in terms of redistribution of asylum seekers , organised mobility and new partnerships with third countries .
Revising the mechanisms for applying the Schengen acquis must not be seen as an excuse to limit at will the right to free movement , but rather as a stimulus for new opportunities .
I hope that concrete proposals will be made very soon to combat prejudice and discrimination , to combat lawlessness and to promote human rights , human dignity and peace .
Governing immigration effectively and encouraging peaceful coexistence must be the daily commitment of a good policy that aims to promote development and security .
Returning the massive flows of people to their countries of origin does not help maintain the distance between Europeans and immigrants .
If anything , it risks increasing illegality , insecurity and economic costs .
The mass migration of people from North Africa was foreseeable some months ago , and France and Italy should have reacted immediately , together with the Commission .
Their statements and actions today , with the police of one state refusing to accept the documents of another state , are provoking more than just astonishment .
The demands for the protection of interests on internal borders on account of 25 000 refugees are unprecedented and populistic , and are against everything Schengen stands for .
On 22 December 2007 , I helped to chop down the border gate on the Slovak-Hungarian border .
Compared to people 's enthusiasm at that time , today 's strengthening of internal borders looks like a complete negation of the Schengen ideal .
Freedom , the free movement of people and goods , and solidarity with everyone who is in need of solidarity , must remain priorities of the EU .
I am opposed to internal borders , and I therefore expect a strengthening of the Schengen control mechanisms , so as to prevent the populist tendencies of some states , to prevent radicalisation and intolerance , and to consolidate the Schengen system , which is one of the greatest achievements of today 's Europe .
The events that are devastating the island of Lampedusa , as the result of the popular revolutions in North Africa , have created a humanitarian crisis , with more than 20 000 Tunisian immigrants arriving between January and April .
The Italian Government has not been successfully responding to the innumerable requests for asylum and the sudden arrival of thousands of illegal immigrants .
The Schengen Agreement , concluded in 1985 , and incorporated in the Treaty on European Union , is regarded as one of the greatest expressions of European integration .
Therefore , it is important not to forget its basic principles , which , if corrupted , will compromise the effectiveness of the Schengen area .
It is becoming imperative to properly apply the Schengen agreements through the spirit of solidarity , reciprocal information and coordination .
The humanitarian crisis we are experiencing today must be resolved , but through the legal means established by the Schengen rules .
The differentiation between people who are entitled to international protection , such as refugees , and economic migrants is extremely important , in order to protect those who really need to be protected .
On the other hand , unilateral violation of the agreement must be prevented at all costs , since this threatens the construction of a European area without borders , which started in 1985 .
The proposals which the Commission announced on Wednesday to tighten the asylum and migration policy contain one piece of poppycock and some good initiatives .
The reference to border checks on our internal borders is evidence more of political expediency than of leadership and insight .
But , all right , this concession to France and Italy is fortunately merely symbolic .
I am also pleased that , in its proposals , the Commission has shown that it , too , is aware that it does not have to look for solid solutions to a more efficient asylum and migration policy under church towers , and that this requires another , more European , form of cooperation .
There are enormous differences between Member States in terms of how they deal with asylum applications and the outcome of these procedures .
A single European asylum system is therefore necessary , so that asylum seekers can see that Europe can provide help where it is necessary , but that it does not give free tickets to adventurers .
We need to link this to the development of meaningful partnerships between Europe and its neighbouring countries , so that we can support growth and development .
I hope that the Commission will no longer allow itself to be used as a plaything by some politicians who want to score points at home .
What we need are solid European solutions to a European problem .
These proposals are a good starting point , but I need a few more things on top of that .
With the severe impact from the economic and financial crisis and from the repercussions of the Arab Spring with its far-reaching implications in terms of the requirements for controlling the flows of emigrants and access to oil resources , the EU is looking increasingly divided and likely to abandon one of its most valuable achievements - free movement in the Schengen area .
Limiting European citizens ' freedom of movement by introducing some new restrictions , albeit temporary , and imposing on Romania and Bulgaria additional criteria to those in the Schengen Agreement will result in undermining European unity .
I believe in a powerful Europe that shows solidarity and I am one of the supporters of the vision promoted by the EU Hungarian Presidency , expressed by the slogan ' Strong Europe ' .
However , looking at the recent developments concerning the future of the Schengen area , I must say that we are on the wrong track .
During critical moments , like those we are going through , the EU leadership should demonstrate greater vision and solidarity and be concerned about blocking the resurgence of crass populism and internal protectionism in Europe .
These problems will have dramatic consequences , which are easy to predict .
It is certainly not restrictions and bans that will help strengthen the Schengen area and establish stability in it .
in writing . - ( SK ) It also emerged from the debate in the plenary of the European Parliament that the freedom of movement made possible by the Schengen Agreement is one of the key pillars of European cooperation , and we must do everything to preserve it .
At the same time , however , we see that Europe was not ready for the growing number of immigrants from Tunisia and Libya .
The fact that Italy has given these immigrants travel documents allows them free movement within the Schengen area .
It has thus also forced other states , particularly France and Germany , to begin searching intensively for a solution .
Schengen allows states to introduce random border controls over travellers in exceptional circumstances , and Denmark , for example , has already made use of this option .
In my opinion , a single European migration and asylum policy is not the solution , as this matter is within the competence of Member States .
At this moment , the boundary states of the Schengen area should accept their responsibility for protecting the common boundary , and take measures for the rapid return of economic migrants to their country of origin .
Interinstitutional agreement on a common Transparency Register - Amendment of the Rules following the establishment of a common Transparency Register
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Carlo Casini , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on conclusion of an interinstitutional agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on a common Transparency Register , and
the report by Carlo Casini , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the amendment of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure following the establishment by the European Parliament and the Commission of a joint transparency register .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will make a single statement covering both matters , which are on the same subject .
With this debate and the vote which will follow , we will conclude a task and a period of negotiations in the working group chaired by Mrs Wallis and composed of fellow Members from all political groups , as well as a Commission delegation led by Mr Šefčovič , which has resulted in the drafting of an agreement for the establishment of a common Transparency Register .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs ( AFCO ) has prepared this report in a few months and has also finalised a report on the amendment of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
Personally , I was very surprised at the amount of public attention that this transparency agreement has garnered .
I fear that people think the results will have a greater effect than was actually pursued .
Transparency is the defence of right political action , but it is not the right instrument for getting to the heart of corruption .
The recent cases of journalists trying to corrupt a few MEPs could also happen outside parliamentary premises .
Furthermore , would-be corruptors know how to avoid being identified and the registers are not , therefore , a silver bullet .
The right tool for the job is criminal law .
Yet if the criminal law of the Member States is not sufficient , we will need to reread Articles 82 to 86 of the Treaty of Lisbon , reflect on whether we can consider the corruption of MEPs to be cross-border crime or an act otherwise detrimental to the Union 's financial interests and determine whether or not to create a European Public Prosecutor , which would , moreover , be a significant step along the path to unity .
The Transparency Register has a more modest task .
In some countries the term lobbyist has a negative meaning , while in others lobbying is seen as an almost an act of public service because it informs decision-makers on issues they might not otherwise know about .
This is especially important for the European Parliament , because often the issues faced by MEPs are very complex and technical and we almost always need to find a balance between businesses and countries with divergent interests .
This is where lobbyists become very useful .
So we shall no longer call them lobbyists but stakeholders .
Of course , interests can be conflicting , and rightly so .
I used to be a judge and I can say that cross-examination of opposing sides is considered a condition for uncovering the truth and obtaining justice .
So , having lobbyists or stakeholders with conflicting interests is a good thing : what is important is that the judge - and therefore also the MEP - maintains his freedom of thought , independence , and his honest search for the common good .
Hence , we have established the Transparency Register , in mutual agreement between Parliament and the Commission with the hope that the Council will soon join the agreement .
Those who wish to represent their interests are free to have access to our premises but they must be listed in the Register , where all information needed to identify their legal and financial status will be recorded .
The Register is public .
There are also organisations that do not pursue selfish interests but try to collaborate in European policies in the name of general values , such as churches , political parties and regions .
They do not need to be added to this Register : but , if they have separate offices exclusively tasked with maintaining contact with European institutions , they must be included in their Register , though subject to a different legal regime to stakeholders .
As already stated , the new Register also contains an amendment to the Rules of Procedure .
There are therefore two reports , but in any case this is just a first step towards more complete transparency .
Some hypotheses are already being researched and could be turned into rules after further reflection hence point 9 of the document adopting the agreement indicates the possibility for the reports to carry the details of the stakeholders who met with MEPs during the preparation of the report in question .
This broad provision for possible amendments leads me to express a negative opinion on amendments which would put limits on such future deliberations .
I hope , however , that Council will join this agreement in short order and that there is also immediate and broad consensus in this House , a strong signal of the duty of transparency and also a call to action .
I hope that the vote is nearly unanimous .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , transparency is a particularly important principle of democratic institutions .
This is especially true for the European institutions , because - as it is commonly known - they are often accused of exclusion and of non-transparent operation .
The Council is committed to making efforts to ensure the highest level of transparency between the institutions and bodies of the European Union .
The Council is also aware that citizens expect those who they have put in charge of the management of their affairs to observe the highest possible standards ; therefore the Council welcomes the initiative of the European Parliament and Council to establish a transparency register .
I especially welcome the reports by Mr Carlo Casini .
If the House accepts them , it will be possible to create the transparency register in the coming months , based on the reports .
By this we can show once again that the EU is committed to transparency not only in words , but also in deeds .
I take this opportunity to emphasise that I am aware that the Council has been invited to participate in the transparency register .
The Council has so far had no intention to fully participate in the process because unlike Parliament and the Commission , the Council by its nature is not affected by the activity of interest representatives .
Generally they do not contact the Council as an institution , but target their activity at the Member States .
Nevertheless , I have already explained that the Council is prepared to participate in the register and to follow its activity .
We are also ready to discuss aspects of the possible role of the Council with Parliament and the Commission , of course without delaying the entry into force of the agreement between these two institutions .
Ladies and gentlemen , based on the Council 's recent decision , we are now considering the possibility of making a political declaration for launching the register in June .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , transparency is an issue of interest and concern for citizens and is essential to increase the democratic legitimacy of the European Union .
I am very happy to inform you that already today we have more than 3800 registrants in the Commission register .
Therefore , I am absolutely convinced that the adoption of a common transparency register will represent a major further step forward in enhancing transparency in the EU decision-making process and providing a direct response to citizens ' concerns .
I would like to praise the very constructive work which we have developed in our joint working group .
Here , I would like to pay tribute to Ms Wallis , our President for today , Mr Casini , our rapporteur , and also to Mr Leinen and Ms Durant .
It was an excellent group and it was a real pleasure to work with together .
The result of our work is a very balanced and pragmatic draft of an interinstitutional agreement , which we are presenting to the House for consideration and debate today .
A positive vote tomorrow will allow the joint launching of the register by our two institutions to take place in June .
This will undoubtedly send a strong political signal confirming our determination to enforce transparent and ethical practices on the European stage .
The register aims to give citizens more transparency as regards organisations and self-employed individuals engaged in EU policy-making or trying to influence the EU decision-making process .
I understand that there have been some concerns about regional public bodies , so I had better clarify .
The question was whether they should register .
I think that if we read the text carefully it is quite true that it would not reflect their true identity and not reflect the fact that they ensure direct representation of their citizens as established by their own constitutional systems .
A careful reading of the content of the agreement should give full reassurances in this regard .
Indeed , the text explicitly mentions that local , regional and municipal authorities are not expected to register .
This approach is even reinforced by Annex I , which indicates that public authorities themselves are not expected to register .
Services forming an integral part of the administration staffed by local , regional and municipal officials and engaged in activities corresponding to institutional or constitutional attributions will also not be expected to register .
I hope this will help to clarify the concerns which I have registered over the last days .
A final word on the interinstitutional dimension .
I think we all share the view that the achievement of common cooperation with the Commission and Parliament would be further consolidated with the involvement of the Council .
Therefore , I am very obliged to , and wholeheartedly thank , the Hungarian Presidency for changing the attitude in the Council and for getting the Council into a positive mood and positive mindset in looking for ways in which we can best arrange the relationship between the Council , Commission and Parliament in managing the register , because the political signal that three institutions are taking this issue so seriously , and that three institutions are going to tackle the issue of transparency together , will be a powerful one .
I am sure that , with such political support from all three institutions , the threshold of 4000 registrants will very soon be reached .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , transparency is a cornerstone of democracy , ensuring that people know who exerts influence and how decisions are made .
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament has significantly more power .
That is why it is right that our modus operandi should always be open to debate and that we should question ourselves .
The negotiations between the European Parliament and the Commission in relation to the transparency register are a success and we have now produced an excellent result .
I would like to underline once again that it is good that we have found clear regulations for the local and regional authorities , and even for churches , that reflect their interests .
I would also like to say that we do not regard lobbyism as something bad per se .
We need expert opinions and we need to be able to call on experts for our work .
In the end it is important that we , as parliamentarians , should be able to consider issues freely and make decisions independently .
I would now like to state that we parliamentarians have a lot to be proud of .
If we conduct a national comparison , we will see that there are only a few Member States of the European Union who have already established a transparency register at this level .
In my country 's capital , Berlin , where I also happen to live , there is no such transparency register , which is why we should all be aware that this is a truly significant step forward .
To the Council I would say : if this issue is not a problem for the Council because lobbyists have very little influence there , then it should be easier for it to sign up to the transparency register .
Accordingly , the Council may be able to conquer its internal resistance .
Finally , Madam President , I would point out that if we in Parliament want to escape the influence of lobbyists to a greater extent in future , then we will need greater supports and more staff , enabling us to achieve more for the citizens of the European Union .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur and all those involved in this process because tomorrow , after the vote , a long period of hard work will finally come to a conclusion .
This is a good day for Europe , for the European Parliament as an institution , and for the Commission because we have succeeded in getting a common transparency register off the ground .
This an important step along the way , but more work needs to be done .
I would like to address two points .
The first is that the register is not really mandatory .
This needs to be stated openly at this point .
I have a question for the Commissioner in this regard : the Commission has always claimed that the appropriate legal framework for this does not exist .
Is the Commission ready to establish such a legal framework , so that we will have a mandatory register after the revision ?
I was very pleased by the statement from the Council indicating that it does not foresee any difficulty in joining our register , as Mr Weber has just pointed out .
I am hopeful that the Council will follow through on this , because the register will really only be complete if all three institutions of the European Union have a common register and if this register is also mandatory .
As a group , we favour the amendment brought forward by another group requiring that the money spent on lobbying should also be listed in the transparency register ; we intend supporting this amendment .
As far as the various national lobby groups are concerned , it has been clearly stated that these will not be included in the register .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members for their willingness to compromise on this matter .
It really would have been a black mark for such an agreement if national lobby groups were treated in the same way as industry lobbyists or other professional associations .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , recent scandals have certainly exposed the power that lobbyists can have upon Parliament , so the Liberal Group strongly welcomes the streamlining of the lobbyists ' register , which creates effectively a straightforward mandatory system which ought to bring greater transparency and improved consultative processes .
I commend especially paragraph 9 of the report , which invites the Bureau to set up a system of legislative footprints whereby rapporteurs can record those that have lobbied in the course of progressing a draft law .
This is a sensitive question , but I think that it would be a further step forward in improving the popular legitimacy of Parliament and the quality of our law-making .
The system can only be complete once the Council - which is the second chamber of our legislature - joins in , but I welcome the tentative steps forward which are being made and I thank the Presidency for its statement this afternoon .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Duff for bringing up the issue of the legislative footprint .
Do you believe that a legislative footprint , the extent of which still has to be defined , might also restrict the work of the European Parliament ?
Also : how far-reaching do you expect the impact of the legislative footprint to be ?
Madam President , I think this would be an experiment .
Like all experiments , if it were to be successful , the practice would spread .
However , I think that it ought to be limited to rapporteurs who are responsible for drafting a law on behalf of Parliament .
They should publish the names of people with whom they have had official meetings in the course of their work .
I think it would encourage intelligent and informed lobbying in Parliament .
We all know that we rely on the specialism and expertise of professionals outside this House to produce top class drafting .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , may I start by thanking Mr Casini for his work in delivering this interinstitutional agreement .
Members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Commission have worked well to develop a meaningful and practical report which will deliver more transparency in the legislative process .
Madam President , it is good that you are in the chair today ; I thank you for your work in the negotiations between Parliament and the Commission .
This report is proportional in its approach ; it is useful and I believe it will do good .
It recognises the important role that regional and local governments play in shaping European legislation , and therefore clearly differentiates between lobbyists and local and regional government officials .
Although the report is a step in the right direction , there is still more that needs to be done .
I hope that this register - if it proves to be a success - will develop into a mandatory register of lobbyists .
I agree with Mr Duff 's proposal that rapporteurs should name the lobbyists that they have had contact with when drafting a law .
There is no doubt that we in this Chamber are regarded with a fair amount of suspicion by our constituents .
The more transparency and the more openness there is the better .
With that in mind , could I just say that the one problem with this agreement is that it is one institution short .
It is disappointing that the Council has not signed up .
As co-legislator , the Member States should come together and sign up to the register so that we can deliver a truly transparent legislative process .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , politics is built on trust .
The Members of this House have been elected in a free and secret ballot by the citizens of our Member States , who rightly expect us to respect their interests , in other words the common good , in all of our speeches and decisions , rather than pursuing our own interests or the interests of third parties , whether businesses or other interest groups .
However , we are also aware that in Brussels , for example , we are surrounded by more than 10 000 professional lobbyists , who do exactly what their job description suggests , namely attempting to exert influence on Members of Parliament and the Commission .
You cannot stop this because it is perfectly normal - we live in a free and open society - however we need to make our voice heard within this structure and maintain our independence .
We have not always succeeded in this and there have been Members who have broken these rules , which is one of the main reasons why we want to improve our rules .
Transparency is one of the most important preconditions for trust and this is precisely what we are working on at present .
After extremely protracted negotiations , we have succeeded in agreeing on this transparency register with the Commission .
Admittedly , I would have preferred it if the Council had also been on board .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have long campaigned for this .
We are pleased that this has been achieved and also quite proud of the result , however I must say that we are not happy with all aspects .
We would have preferred the register to be mandatory , not just for those who work within the Commission and Parliament buildings , but also for those who ply their trade elsewhere , for example over a glass of wine in one of Brussels ' many bars .
We want the register not just to apply to Parliament and the Commission , but also to the Council .
We want the financial details made available to be more precise and meaningful .
We believe that the sums of money involved should be measured in the same way , rather than the situation proposed now in which smaller operations are measured in increments of EUR 50 000 , while larger ones are measured in larger increments , making it difficult to know exactly how much money is involved .
We also favour regular checks by a common secretariat .
Nonetheless , this is a good day for Europe because it brings us more transparency .
I would like to thank all those involved for what has been achieved .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , this report is a step in the direction of greater openness and a mandatory lobbyist register for anyone who attempts to influence the EU .
However , there is still a long way to go before we achieve our objective .
Moreover , as corrupt MEPs have revealed , we also need to put our own house in order .
We must make it clear that it is not acceptable for MEPs to have any form of paid job on the side that might put a question mark against our integrity .
Furthermore , we must have effective means of control and rules to determine the consequences of breaking the rules .
We must also establish clear rules for the protection of whistle-blowers , so as to prevent the messenger from being shot .
We look forward to the report from the special committee and , in this regard , we anticipate a speedy revision of the agreement that we are debating here today and of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Søndergaard , I wanted to ask what you think of the approach of the legislative footprint and what it means from your point of view that the transparency register will continue to be non-compulsory , in other words that enormous loopholes will continue to exist .
( DA ) Thank you for your question .
It gives me the opportunity to emphasise the point that I have already made , namely that there is still a long way to go before we achieve our objective .
We do not believe that we have already achieved it .
We believe that there is still something lacking .
It is clear that the question of the mandatory nature of the register is absolutely crucial .
We believe that the idea of a digital footprint in legislative texts is a good one and that this is something that we should apply , but of course we also believe that it has to be mandatory in order for it to work .
However , as I said , this is a step in the right direction , and we hope that , when we receive the report from the special committee and this text is to be revised - because it has to be revised within two years - we will have the opportunity to fully achieve our objective , as we must fully achieve our objective in this area .
Madam President , so we are to have a transparency register !
Unsurprisingly , this has only come about because enterprising British journalists were able to demonstrate the ease with which some MEPs succumbed to the lure of money .
At that point , the European Parliament , not unlike the police chief in the film Casablanca , professed itself to be shocked - shocked ! - to discover that corrupt lobbying had been taking place under its very nose .
This register bears all the hallmarks of the stable door being shut long after the horse has gone .
The register will change little ; the lobbyists will always get through .
A voluntary system of registration was introduced ; it was quite ineffectual .
Now some light will shine on what is going on , but most of this will be thrust back into the murky depths of the stagnant pond ; it will be business as usual .
As usual , the law-abiding will bear the brunt of the red tape , and wrongdoers will just find a way of carrying on .
While taxpayers ' money sloshes around Brussels in the quantities that it does , there will always be unscrupulous lobbyists , just as where there is carrion , there are always vultures .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Agnew , while I am all in favour of a well-managed exchange during debates , I am less pleased when matters are presented in a false way .
For that reason , I would ask you to please correct your last statement .
You have just claimed that Parliament is simply debating the question of a transparency register because a number of British newspapers recently brought a particular story to public attention .
I would therefore ask you to explain to Parliament and to the public at large that we began discussing this issue some time ago and that this transparency register had already been agreed upon before the story you are referring to even happened .
Mr President , this appears to be the catalyst which started the whole thing off .
I do not want any British MEPs to be here anyway .
I do not see why we should have to put up with foreign institutions like this running our affairs .
The further we go to the south and east , the worse the culture of corruption becomes .
I do not like it , and I do not want my country to have any part in it .
( DE ) Mr President , we are all aware that not just the European Parliament , but also the European Union as a whole is suffering from a huge credibility problem .
I am sure this is something Mr Häfner will not want to hear , however , although Parliament has finally reached agreement on this transparency register , no doubt bowing to pressure because of the recent lobbying scandal , in my opinion , this register will lack teeth .
I believe that a voluntary register is simply a sham and will not offer greater transparency or bring us to a point where the Council of Ministers will be prepared to get involved , so we do not even have all the key legislative bodies on board .
Even if the Council were to come on board , a whole host of loopholes would still exist .
Apparently there are hundreds of expert groups who work on the official papers published by the Commission , however the identity of the members of these advisory bodies that meet behind closed doors remains a closely-guarded secret .
In my opinion , we need a record not only of all work undertaken for business or for international concerns , but also all paid lobbying for interest groups such as professional organisations and trade unions .
Our citizens have a right to expect genuine transparency here , too .
( EL ) Mr President , congratulations to Mr Casini on his report , which is absolutely right .
Of course , the question of transparency touches on the dignity of parliamentarians , of that there can be no doubt .
However , the more such measures we take , the better we promote transparency and functional relations between the institutions of the Union and our social partners and interest groups .
The new register , as proposed , safeguards transparency across the broad spectrum of institutional contacts and concentrates representatives of special interests , representatives of civil society and representatives of the public authorities in separate chapters , thereby distinguishing between the different roles of interest groups and official institutional spokesmen .
The invitation to register safeguards the very identity of interest groups and lobbyists , by recognising them independently and positioning them so that they can speak directly and immediately with the EU institutions .
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , the powers of the European Parliament have been enhanced and this is attracting increasing numbers of representatives asking for intervention .
To close , the Transparency Register mainly serves transparency and democratic , pluralistic interaction between the social partners , the citizens who gave parliamentarians a mandate and the EU institutions .
It goes without saying that all EU institutions and senior officers must have a place in any such Transparency Register .

( ES ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Casini for the reports on this transparency register .
We are living through a crisis on an extraordinary scale , which has been with us for a long time and threatens to stay even longer .
A crisis like this worsens the public 's living conditions and lowers their expectations for the future .
When economic crises prevent us from legitimising politics with the positive results we offer the public , we must contribute to this legitimisation with our scrupulous respect for the political values that we advocate : austerity , honesty , closeness to the public , and transparency .
This register is a step toward transparency , but just a step .
I am with my fellow Members who have stressed the need for this register to be obligatory , for it to incorporate the Council , and for it to include harsher penalties when irregular behaviour is detected .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it will be an important step in the right direction when we vote on the transparency register tomorrow , but no doubt this will not be the last word on the matter .
Firstly , I am pleased that we have chosen a new name for the lobby register of the European Parliament , which dates back to 1996 and which is now to be known as the transparency register .
I find it regrettable to see who will be required to register in order to obtain a one-year building pass - the list includes public institutions and bodies .
As I have stated before , I can understand why it is necessary for a law society to register , but I find it harder to understand why public bodies which have never been active on a party-political level , and never will be , are also required to register .
In the final analysis , irrespective of all the transparency achieved , it all comes down to the moral compass of each Member of this House , as this dictates what he thinks is right , whom he meets and whom he decides not to meet , whom he listens to and whom he decides not to listen to .
After all , people also contact us using many other different communication channels .
( DE ) Mr President , obeying your moral compass can be a tricky business .
I think it is all a matter of the independence of the Members of this House .
Of course lobbying becomes a problem if someone tries to change your convictions , using whatever arguments they can , particularly if these arguments are dishonest .
The fact is that even now the lobby register only covers 2 800 of the 20 000 lobbyists in Brussels .
The fact is also that here in this House we have far too few opportunities to develop sufficiently qualified expertise ; this could be changed quickly by redirecting funding and this is something I would very much support .
This transparency register may be just a small victory , however it can be seen as a move in the same direction as Washington D.C. , where the Lobbying Act on Disclosure has existed for some time .
This works better than anything we have here .
For my part , I believe that we should not only introduce the concept of a legislative footprint as soon as possible , but also a legislative fingerprint , in other words we should go public on all lobbyists with whom we come in contact and what our business is with them .
I would invite you to take a look at my website , where I have set up a lobby ticker that registers every lobbyist contact , irrespective of whether or not I am currently working on a legislative initiative .
( GA ) Mr President , this report is important as it goes to the heart of the work we are doing in Parliament : preparing and implementing rules and laws .
As Mr Cassini said , the term ' lobbyist ' is somewhat unfortunate because it creates the impression of privilege or corruption or both , whereas in reality these are experts in their field who help to inform us of the intricacies and the nuances of the various pieces of legislation that we are proposing .
I myself am at this point involved in an opinion on data protection and the number of groups that have come to me with their views amazes me .
I would like , if I were compelled to have a register , to record those who came to me as well , because in that way , we could have true transparency .
A register of lobbyists officially , but also a record of those who lobbied us .
That would create true transparency , greater credibility and ultimately greater trust .
Mr President , it has often been said that our citizens are unaware of the greater powers that this Parliament has had since Lisbon .
This may be true , and it is very unfortunate , because , rest assured , lobbyists - or those pretending to be lobbyists , as proven recently - are very much aware of the powers of this Parliament .
We co-decide on almost all major legislation in the EU , and that is a good thing , because we represent the people of the EU .
We are the only body directly elected by them .
Now , although this is , and will remain , one of the most transparent institutions in the Union , I still believe that with greater power comes greater responsibility , and this is precisely what we must strive to achieve in the months to come .
The agreement today with the Commission is not bad , but lobbyists must be obliged to put their names and their real interests in a register .
And this is what this Parliament is already demanding of lobbyists coming here to us .
I hope that the other institutions will follow suit .
I close by saying the following .
As you mentioned , I am a co-chair of this working group that we have in place .
I cannot say much about what we are discussing in detail .
I can assure you , however , that we will ensure that the rules of conduct for this Parliament will be some of the most transparent and will be rules which can make our citizens and ourselves proud of being members of this extraordinary institution .
- ( SK ) Mr President , I would like to start by applauding the fact that the submitted agreement will improve the situation in the area of EU transparency , but to be honest , it is still far from ideal .
However , it is good that lobbyists now have a greater incentive to join the register , as otherwise they will not get into the European Parliament .
There is also improved access to information concerning lobbyists , including their names , and we should also applaud the fact that lobbyists who fail to comply with the rules will face various penalties , for example they may be excluded from the register , which will mean they are blacklisted .
The question is whether these measures are enough .
For example , I cannot agree that registration is de facto mandatory when only registered lobbyists have access to Parliament .
In the interests of greater transparency it is essential for registration in fact to be de jure mandatory , and I hope we will achieve this in the current parliamentary term .
We also need to improve the rules on the submission of reports by firms of lobbyists regarding their outlays on lobbying activities .
The current setup allows lobbyists to report far less than they have really spent .
It is equally important to have transparency over the financial sources from which lobbyists and consultancy firms draw their revenue .
I would like to end by adding that I would very much appreciate it if Members would not confuse the topic of the ' transparency register ' with that of the ' code of conduct ' , as it is a completely different issue .
Members who have fallen victim in some way - even if through their own fault - to fictional lobbying agencies , should not be motivated in such a way when establishing the rules of the ' transparency register ' .
( SV ) Mr President , a great deal has already been said , but it is worth repeating .
It is good that we have now finally agreed on a lobbyists register .
Many of us have been fighting for this for a long time .
However , it is still a very cautious proposal .
I nevertheless choose to see it as a first step that can be developed into a broad principle of public access in all of the EU 's institutions .
The comments from the Council and from Commissioner Šefčovič today are very positive .
The principle of disclosure and transparency is one of the few truly effective instruments for minimising the risks of infringements and fraud .
It is also an important way of increasing confidence in those of us operating in this political system and in politics in general .
The next steps should be for all institutions to be included , for the register to be made mandatory and , like the approach taken in some Scandinavian countries , for this to be supplemented by a form of informant protection for whistleblowers , who are also extremely important for openness and transparency . Thank you .
- ( SK ) Mr President , I welcome and fully support the establishment of a transparency register and a list of lobbyists intended both for organisations and for the independent lobbyists who participate in the creation and implementation of EU policy , because a tightening up of standards aimed at securing the stability and integrity of EU public administration and strengthening institutional regulations is a guarantee of the democratic functioning of the EU .
On the other hand , the register must not , of course , prevent Members from fulfilling their duties arising from their mandate and meeting their constituents or representatives of public bodies on behalf of Member States at the European Parliament .
There must , however , be clear rules applying to representatives of special interest groups , in order to ensure open , transparent and proper dialogue with those who seek to participate in some way in the creation of EU law and to influence that process .

Mr President , I speak as the rapporteur on the public Access to Documents Regulation No 1049 / 2001 and , in the spirit of the openness and transparency enshrined within that regulation , I welcome this agreement .
It is another step in the right direction because openness and transparency are at the heart of the democratic decision-making process and we should be made aware of all of those who influence and sometimes have an undue influence on policy , procedures and outcomes .
However , we need to do more work , we need to ensure that the transparency and integrity of the work of lobbyists at the EU level is of the highest .
Furthermore , we need to make the new register operational as quickly as possible and , as soon as the register is operational , all persons and organisations falling into its scope should provide correct , up-to-date information so we can see who is influencing what .
Finally , let me quote Jana Mittermaier of Transparency International : ' The new register will be a test of the commitment of all parties involved in lobbying to greater openness . '
You could not say it more succinctly .
( ES ) Mr President , I should like to say that the 21st century is the century of the Web , the century of WikiLeaks and the century of institutional openness .
That means transparency and public participation , and we must be partly responsible for constructing our decisions .
We must decide together .
Our work must therefore be proactive in nature .
We cannot simply wait for lobbies and interest groups to pressure us : we must make the effort to get close to the public ; to listen to them .
I therefore believe that the transparency register and fingerprinting algorithms will be effective , and , far from limiting and causing fear , they are an opportunity to improve our reports and gauge our results .
I believe that this is the only way we can move toward becoming a modern parliament .
I have been in charge of one report and in the explanatory statement I listed all the agents with whom I worked , because it is a way of working and an attitude that we should clearly separate from all the irresponsible acts we have seen in the past .
( FR ) Mr President , I too would like to express my satisfaction at this text , which I will be pleased to vote for tomorrow .
I would simply like to point out that the recent scandals we have witnessed are attempts at bribery , and nothing else .
While this is a serious matter , these are recent developments .
We began our work long before these recent , serious developments , which are covered in another piece of work .
They are isolated cases , and a good job too .
Nevertheless , we can see that a number of groups are employing considerable resources and are doing all they can to influence decision making as much as possible .
This register is therefore a step in the right direction .
I contributed to its development and I am also extremely satisfied with the work that has been done .
However , further steps must be taken .
This register must become a dynamic instrument and one which is assessed on an annual basis .
It should be anything but rigid .
In fact , I think that developments in technology and in the means employed by lobbyists will force us to continually review the instrument in order to ensure its effectiveness and to identify , through a directive , who is performing lobbying activities , for how much money and in what way .
I am also entirely in favour of ecological footprints - I mean legislative footprints - which publishing the number of lobbyists and the names of the people they met in the reports could provide , and I am in favour of being able to find out exactly who said what and who influenced whom .
Finally , publishing the register is one thing , explaining how it works is quite another .
Citizens also need to be given the means to consult these registers so that they can make meaningful use of the information when trying to understand how we make decisions .
That is why our group will vote unreservedly in favour of this text .
( DE ) Mr President , lobbying is a central instrument for the involvement of citizens in political life , which is why it is important to prevent its misuse .
That is why there is an urgent need for a transparency register for all institutions , not just Parliament and the Commission , but also for the Council , after all that is where the real decisions are made .
To restate the point , registration must be mandatory , not just for access to Parliament , after all lobbyists certainly do not just seek out their contacts in the Parliament building itself , but also , more often than not in restaurants , at cocktail receptions or in the gym .
I would also like to say a word about transparency in relation to the political parties .
Even if these are one-man parties and act as a one-man operation , seeking to portray themselves as whiter than white , these parties and persons must demonstrate the requisite level of transparency .
They must ensure transparency in relation to their assets , their claims on the public purse and the reimbursement of campaign costs , in other words in relation to the actual moneys they have received from public bodies in their own countries during their election campaigns .
These costs should be documented in a transparent manner .
( PL ) Mr President , thank you very much for the opportunity to take the floor .
In common with the majority of those in this Chamber , I agree that a register will represent progress in terms of the transparency of the legislative procedure , but in my opinion this is only a first step .
We should give serious consideration to other steps and solutions .
As I see it , what is most important is the question of what MEPs are allowed to do .
Are MEPs only allowed to work in a professional capacity here in Parliament , or are they also allowed to undertake other activities in addition to their work in Parliament ?
I personally believe that these other activities should be very narrowly defined , and should be limited to scientific work and publications .
Any other activities on various boards will always provoke questions and doubts .
( SV ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon has granted increased powers to the European Parliament and with this also comes an increase in responsibility .
Transparency in our work is therefore extremely important in view of the fact that our work involves legislation for 500 million people and often very large sums of money .
The register for lobbyists that has now been decided on in the compromise is , of course , very worthwhile , and I hope that we can go further by providing informant protection for whistleblowers .
I also hope that we can go further and ensure that the information in the register for financial contingent liabilities or ownership becomes mandatory rather than voluntary , as it is at the moment .
I hope , too , that we will have a debate on what subsidiary activities are appropriate from an ethical point of view when we have a job to do as Members of the European Parliament .
I welcome the compromise and see it as a way forward , but there are many more steps to take on this road to transparency , openness and greater democratic trust . Thank you .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I think Mr Weber rightly said that the transparency register being jointly managed is something to be proud of because , with the exception of the United States or Canada , I do not know of any other place outside the European Union where such a lobbies ' register with such parameters as we are going to establish is functioning .
Here I am also referring to Member State capitals .
The question that was raised by several speakers , the first being Mr Groote and then Mr Häfner , concerned the mandatory register .
We , in the working group , are discussing this issue at great length .
The problem is that currently we do not see the legal basis that allows us to oblige companies , citizens or interest representatives to register in order to exercise their profession .
We , as an EU administration , cannot refuse to deal with such an entity or entities on this basis .
Therefore we have been looking for ways in which we can turn to the positive motivation of companies , organisations and lobbies to register .
I think we achieved a lot because , with the agreement of Parliament , we are actually turning this system into a mandatory one .
With our joint actions , together with the Council , we will increase the reputation and pressure so much that we will see in the next two years how this is to work and it will give us additional experience to have a high-quality review and we will see how we can improve the working of the system further .
The calls for appropriate verification as regards financing the activities of those who register : here I can assure you that the Commission is already performing random checks on all the registrants that are already in the register and I am sure that these activities will even increase once we manage the register jointly .
All those who are in the register should be sure that if there is something inappropriate we will find it , we will criticise it , try to correct it and we will not be afraid to shame those responsible .
I was very glad - I am coming back to this because several speakers referred to the importance it - that all three institutions are progressing in this work .
I am sure that after this very important opening by the Hungarian Presidency , we will not waste a minute and we will try to start the interinstitutional talks with the Council as soon as possible so we can find , I am sure , a very accommodating manner in which to manage the register together , the three institutions working on this issue with the same goal of increased transparency of European Union legislation .
The last point that was raised by several speakers and described by Mr Casini : the transparency register is definitely not a silver bullet or a magical solution to fight corruption .
We know very well that high moral standards , ethics , dignity and clear rules are key .
But it would certainly serve as a very good instrument and good indicator that those who register are prepared to respect the rules and be transparent , that they have nothing to hide and - this should be the key indicator for all of us - that they should be real partners to work with us and exchange information with us and that they have trust in our future communication .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to welcome , as a representative of a Member State which has had an act providing for lobbying since 2006 , today 's debate and the fact that Parliament and the Commission are able to agree in the issue of the transparency register .
Transparency has always been a very important issue for the Council .
I am very happy to see that while we did not manage to achieve progress in 2008 and 2009 , we now made a breakthrough during the Hungarian Presidency in that the Council is prepared to monitor processes , and inasmuch as it is able , will participate in this activity - we will see to what extent , negotiations are still to follow .
So we are ready for negotiations concerning our contribution and , as I indicated in my introductory speech , we think that we would affirm this intention in a political declaration to be issued in June .
So this does not mean that we would accede to the interinstitutional agreement .
The reason why Member States can accept this formula at the moment - which , I must emphasise once again , is a significant progress compared to the previous years - is that lobby organisations do not approach the Council as a European institution , there have been very sporadic examples for that .
The targets of lobbying activities are rather the Member States , the governments of Member States , and governmental agencies .
So the Council is not exposed to lobbying to the extent the Commission or the European Parliament is .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I hope cooperation will be efficient , and we will be able to make this political declaration after these negotiations .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to clarify a few things .
I too would like to strongly emphasise that this agreement was concluded long before the outbreak of the episode with the British journalists .
Unfortunately , this is one way in which false information is spread through the media .
For example , a major Italian newspaper , the Corriere della Sera , has today poked fun at Europe by saying that we acted too late and only after these events with journalists .
This is not true .
It unjustly encourages distrust of Europe .
The agreement had been reached long beforehand .
If anything , this discussion has arisen with some delay because , once the scandal had exploded , we wondered if we could attempt to further strenthen the agreement .
The text has , however , remained the unchanged .
That is the first clarification .
The second concerns the question of obligation .
The register is already mandatory .
Those who want to lobby must enrol themselves in the register .
I cannot understand what ' obligatory ' means : it cannot mean that all companies , all enterprises or all citizens must be entered in this register .
That is not possible .
If anything , it is up to individual MEPs , who , when approached by someone who wants to exert pressure on them , must invite them to register before making contact .
The third point refers to possible future amendments .
There is a working group for this purpose , which I think needs to have as much room for manoeuvre as possible .
I agree that we should identify the lobbyists encountered during the course of the negotiations but I do not know if this task belongs only to the rapporteur or whether it should be extended to the President .
We grant the working group the freedom to submit any necessary recommendations .
Finally , I too wish to thank both Mr Šefčovič , who has made a huge contribution to the implementation of this agreement , and the representative of the Hungarian Government , for , among other things , the assurance given about the Council joining the agreement in short order , which without doubt has its own uncertainties seeing as the Council certainly represents the second chamber in this case .
If the Council is also equipped with the register , this would therefore underline more effectively that the structure of Europe is made up of a government - the Commission - and a legislative body , consisting both of representatives of citizens and of states .
Howver , I realise that there are still questions to be answered , since the Council of Ministers represents the states .
I am , however , confident that we will come to a positive conclusion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 11 May 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
, in writing . - We always pride ourselves on being the most open among the European institutions .
However , the recent past has demonstrated that , no matter the advantages this provides , the system has its drawbacks , too .
We all know how European citizens have lost and keep losing their confidence in Europe and , let us be honest , in us MEPs .
An important way of regaining this trust is being open about what we do and what influences shape our work .
The joint transparency register that we are to adopt today by voting yes to the two reports on the table is a great first step in this direction .
It is a ' first step ' as this will not solve all our problems .
Even if it would be difficult to do it now , in the future we shall move towards mandatory registration for lobbyists .
I would also like to underline that such a register does not replace our individual efforts for transparency and the need for rethinking our work in this regard .
I welcome the common transparency register of the Commission and the European Parliament , at least in this form .
However , it should be just one of a series of essential steps towards greater transparency in the legislative process , which should apply to all three European institutions .
The European Parliament is clearly willing to hold a serious debate on lobbying and the rules for lobbying .
This will also set an example to those Member States that have yet to take such a step .
I believe that the transparency register will also contribute towards the greater credibility of the political environment .
Its actual impact , however , will depend mainly on the willingness of everyone involved to respect the more stringent rules .
, in writing . - ( NL ) I can only applaud the fact that the Commission and Parliament are pulling together to create a common ' transparency register ' for lobbyists , think tanks and other interest organisations .
After all , for every dossier on our agenda , we need to be able to make enquiries of various interest groups and to do so completely openly .
There is nothing wrong , by the way , with organisations defending their own interests , as long as this takes place in an open and balanced fashion .
The principle of ' legislative footprint ' , whereby rapporteurs have to state with whom they have been in contact in the process of drafting their proposals , is a good policy .
I have actually already addressed this in my report on toy safety .
Clear arrangements to make this principle generally applicable will enhance transparency .
This is also a suitable instrument to bust the myths about lobbying which are circulating amongst the general public , whose common interest we , as members of the European Parliament , are promoting .
The fact that the Council , also , eventually expressed its willingness to join this register means that we are going to have a unique register for all EU lobbyists , which is something that we , together with the European Parliament , have been working towards for years .
I therefore support this approach .
Nuclear safety 25 years after the Chernobyl disaster ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on nuclear safety 25 years after the Chernobyl disaster by Bogusław Sonik , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B7-0312 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , I would like to say how happy I am that this sitting of the European Parliament is commemorating the victims and all those injured by the Chernobyl disaster , which was the greatest nuclear disaster in history .
Particularly in the light of recent events in Japan , this anniversary has become a tragic reason for assessments and considerations regarding nuclear safety .
The Chernobyl tragedy also revealed the powerlessness and thoughtlessness of the then Communist authorities in Ukraine , which tried to conceal from the world the disaster and its scale .
Let us remind ourselves of just a few facts , which give some indication of the scale , extent and dimensions of the tragedy .
The explosion of the reactor at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant resulted in the contamination of around 100 000 km2 of land , of which 70 % was in Belarus .
Radioactive substances also reached Scandinavia and Central Europe , including Poland , as well as Greece and Italy in Southern Europe .

Around 115 000 people were evacuated from the areas in the vicinity of the reactor , and around 220 000 people were relocated from Belarus , the Russian Federation and Ukraine after 1986 .
It is very hard to assess the ravages wreaked by the disaster , both in terms of health and the environment .
Specialists are still unable to determine the number of deaths caused by the disaster .
According to the World Health Organisation , the number of those killed by cancers caused by contamination following the explosion in the nuclear power plant may be as many as 9000 .
Other sources estimate that around 200 000 people have already died from radiation-related diseases , and that a further 100 000 people may die from cancers caused by the Chernobyl disaster in future .
According to the latest research , the residents of at least two Ukrainian districts are still eating contaminated food .
Let us not forget that the European Union , which set up the Chernobyl Shelter Fund , has contributed most in financial terms in the fight to mitigate the effects of the Chernobyl disaster .
On the 25th anniversary of the disaster , the European Commission announced that EUR 110 million would be allocated to stabilising the situation and protecting the environment around the Chernobyl nuclear power plant .
In this context , we cannot forget that the question of how to approach nuclear safety is relevant across all borders around the world , and should therefore be considered in a spirit of solidarity and cross-border responsibility .
Therefore I would both ask and call upon the European Commission to conduct long-term and comprehensive research into the health-related consequences of the Chernobyl disaster .
Is the Commission prepared to undertake and support long-term research , over a human lifespan , into the effects of the Chernobyl disaster for the health of Europeans in all areas which suffered from nuclear fallout ?
Does the European Commission have any data regarding environmental contamination in the areas most affected by the explosion ?
On the anniversary of the disaster , is the Commission going to encourage governments to commit publicly to providing new funding for the fight to mitigate the effects of this nuclear disaster ?
In view of the number of nuclear power stations on the territory of the European Union and the current level of coordination within the European Union , what possible scenarios is the Commission aware of regarding the effects of a serious nuclear accident in a power station for the populations resident in the individual Member States ?
Does the European Commission have any plans to coordinate the national positions in the event of a nuclear disaster ?
Nuclear disasters always come as a surprise , and always have international and global consequences .
It is therefore better to have prepared a set of necessary responses in advance , which will make it possible to minimise the risk and avoid further disasters .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , in the 25 years since the nuclear accident in Chernobyl , the Commission has played a significant role in worldwide efforts to alleviate the consequences of the tragedy .
The size of the task meant that a united effort was required .
That is why the Commission cooperated with partners in the Member States , the G7 and Ukraine itself to ensure that the area can be stabilised in an orderly manner and secured in an environmentally appropriate way .
The EU took an active approach in mobilising more resources from the international community to enable outstanding work at the Chernobyl site to be completed and we are continuing our efforts in this direction with our own contribution .
The Commission is the biggest contributor to the Chernobyl Shelter Fund and we promised a further EUR 110 million from our budget at the donor conference held in Kiev last April , which brought together pledges of a further EUR 550 million .

We have been busy on the diplomatic front and have also persuaded 32 countries , including 13 new donors , to commit to the fund .
We intend continuing our activities among other donors , including the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , so as to secure the financial resources still required to complete all projects by 2015 .
We are also working with the government in Ukraine to ensure that the plan to shelter the Chernobyl reactor core can be completed .
This involves encasing the damaged reactor block IV with new protective cladding and the necessary steps to close down the other reactor blocks .
All work should be completed by 2015 .
Next we turn to the research projects under the aegis of the Euratom framework programme relating to the consequences of the accident and how these are to be overcome .
At present , research into low doses of radiation is the subject of a large-scale initiative as part of a joint programme planned by the European MELODI platform .
As part of the mechanism for cooperation in the area of nuclear safety , we are considering a project aimed at helping the most significantly affected population groups around the Chernobyl exclusion zone .
It is our intention to deal with the links between health and nutrition in greater depth .
If it proves useful to carry out targeted activities in evaluating the consequences for human health in all areas affected by the fallout from Chernobyl , the Commission is ready to take action and to transfer responsibility for the coordination of the appropriate measures to the EU 's Health Security Committee .
Another of the Commission 's responsibilities is the combating of environmental contamination .
After the accident , we contributed to joint research projects with the Commonwealth of Independent States in supporting the gathering of extensive data and the designing of strategies for disaster management in the nuclear sector and in the relevant areas in Belarus , Russia and Ukraine .
We gathered data on the release of radioactive caesium throughout the EU following the accident .
This was published in the form of an atlas in 1998 , produced in cooperation with Ukraine , Russia and Belarus .
At present , under the aegis of the 7th Euratom framework programme , we are supporting a network of excellence in radio ecology in order to finance integration , networking and scientific excellence in the interests of radiation protection for human beings and the environment .
When it comes to civil protection , for the last nine years we have been fostering cooperation between the Member States in the area of civil protection exercises .
These exercises also involve participants from third countries .
Three exercises co-financed with funds from our financial instrument for civil protection had a radiological component , namely TORCH , which dealt with an accident resulting in mass fatalities and its simulation , CREMEX , which involved a mass contamination in the form of a dirty bomb , and SISMICAEX , implemented one year ago , which dealt with a nuclear accident caused by an earthquake .
In the coming years we shall continue to provide aid in a spirit of European solidarity , doing all we can to reduce the damage and to avoid further damage from Chernobyl .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that it is always good to take stock of activities , which is why I am grateful to the Commission for having explained so clearly everything that Europe has done since the disaster , both immediately , in the medium to long term , and right up to the present .
Irrespective of how we view the problem , it is worthwhile pointing out that these damage limitation measures could never have taken place on this scale without the involvement of the European Union .
I also find it very helpful to know that the Commission did not just provide immediate direct aid , but on behalf of Europe as a whole has also dealt intensively with the question of what conclusions are to be drawn from the disaster in terms of civil protection measures , information exchange systems , as well as research and related studies .
I am not entirely convinced that it is absolutely necessary to come up with new studies .
It may be that we need to evaluate the material already available to us to see whether it is sufficient for our needs .
I believe that this will become clear during the course of a differentiated debate .
Sometimes having access to a huge amount of information is no guarantee that meaningful progress will be made .
I would like to express my thanks and to say that the Commission and Europe as a whole can be pleased with what they have achieved in this case .
They have demonstrated that these institutions are not just a talking shop , but also a source of practical aid .


on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Sonik for triggering this debate and for preparing the oral question .
I agree that we should never forget the Chernobyl disaster .
We are well aware that the long-term consequences of the catastrophe are still being experienced a full quarter century later .
There is still a large uninhabitable area , so that people can no longer return to their homes .
Then there is the long-term impact on health .
Television has shown us that women still suffer miscarriages 25 years after the disaster .
Europe shares some of the responsibility because the issue of nuclear safety is not a matter of national sovereignty , but rather one of European responsibility .
On this densely populated continent , every nuclear power plant has consequences for neighbouring countries .
It is for this reason , Mr Oettinger , that you have particular responsibility for ensuring that we get to grips with this topic , especially in the light of what has happened in Fukushima .
Later on we are going to talk with you about the stress tests , in other words the safety analyses for the 143 nuclear power plants .
I would encourage you to stick to your principles .
We want the highest possible safety standard in Europe , not just investigations into natural disasters .
Accordingly we must also investigate other risks , such as plane crashes , terrorist attacks , computer attacks , in other words this combination of attacks on nuclear power plants ; what is more , you must guarantee that this does not become simply a token gesture .
There is still a great deal to be done in Chernobyl .
The sarcophagus is not yet safe , which is why new financial resources are required to put this in order .
I have not yet heard any plans for what to do with the nuclear waste lying about the site ; the disposal of this material is not yet assured .
Accordingly I believe , Mr Reul , that research studies are necessary because we do not have enough experience with the long-term effects of radiation .
I would encourage the Commission to put such studies in motion .
In the final analysis , the safest option is the nuclear exit strategy .
As we continue to cooperate with the affected countries , my greatest wish is that we should establish workshops for future technology there , and provide advice on how to save energy and develop alternative energy sources .
This is precisely what is needed 25 years after Chernobyl .
( The speaker agrees to take a question in accordance with Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure . )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Leinen .
He referred to stress tests .
What I would like to know is : the stress tests must have a consequence .
Do you think it would be possible to establish a permanent European regulator for this area who would be responsible for dealing with these issues and who would have the power to remove dangerous nuclear power stations from the grid ?
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Rübig for his question .
The aim must be to establish a European competence for monitoring nuclear power stations .
If an issue has an impact that goes beyond national borders , then this involves a European dimension , which also requires a European competence .
Mr Oettinger , we do not yet have this competence , however you must do all you can to ensure that we are given the basis to monitor nuclear plants independently and objectively from a European perspective , enabling us to draw our own conclusions when weaknesses are pinpointed .
If the stress test shows that a power plant is unsafe , then it must be shut down or , if possible , upgraded .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , while the question of pursuing our energy strategy , with or without nuclear power , is now being debated in the Member States concerned , we should keep in mind that , whichever decision is taken , nuclear safety will remain a long-standing issue for several generations .
We should obviously develop and enforce common standards on nuclear safety at international level since radioactive contamination knows no borders , as the Chernobyl disaster revealed and as is confirmed by what is still happening in Fukushima .
Twenty-five years after events in Chernobyl , we still need further assessment and research on past and current impacts of contamination of human health and the environment .
We have to think about nuclear safety , not as a protection measure but as a long-term and encompassing strategy .
We should also address the issue of nuclear waste .
What has remained from Chernobyl is waste and this is a serious and threatening issue in the region .
It is also becoming a European challenge for the future of nuclear energy .
We need more research in this field and we need to guarantee the long-term safety of storage or disposal of these materials .
Whatever decision we take now , reversibility and retrievability are therefore required .
I would welcome a clear position from the Commission on this matter .
Mr President , Chernobyl has been a point of reference for European policy for the 25 years since the tragic disaster .
Sometimes this is entirely apposite , but sometimes it is devoid of any sense .
Unlike the Soviet Union of 30 years ago , in the European Union we have very good legal instruments to enforce our safety standards .
They are among the highest standards in the world , and so it is an abuse of history to exploit Chernobyl today for the purposes of anti-nuclear propaganda based on sheer prejudice .
There is another aspect to the reining in of the European nuclear sector , namely that it helps maintains our dependency on imports of fossil fuels from third countries .
There are also useful conclusions that can be drawn from Chernobyl .
A whole series of Russian nuclear power stations , which are intended to export electricity to European Union Member States , are being planned along our eastern border .
They are being constructed without any regard for EU safety standards .
It would be worth the Commission taking steps to ensure that its standards are enforced not only in the EU itself , but also outside its borders , since the plants in the Kaliningrad Oblast and in Belarus are aimed at the European market .
The only question is whether the Commission will have the power and the imagination to succeed in taking action in this field .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , it is true that the European Union has already done a lot in relation to Chernobyl and its aftermath .
Nonetheless , the question remains whether we have done enough , whether we can ever do enough and whether we always do the right thing .
In my opinion , there are still some major gaps that need to be filled in the area of the health issues arising from the fallout .
The dispute relating to the continuously falsified figures from the International Atomic Energy Agency needs to be teased out .
I believe that the European Union , whose territory is affected by roughly half of the fallout from the disaster - I use the present tense ' is ' advisedly - must look to its own interests here .
This is very important .
The international consequences that we , as an international community , must suffer are by no means limited to the territory of the former Soviet Union , Belarus , Ukraine and Russia , because more than half of the fallout following the fire and explosion fell on the territory of the European continent .
So , I would encourage you to examine the need for a new evaluation of the incident 's impact on health .
Many former employees of the World Health Organisation would be pleased to find their work assessed in a different light .
My next concern is the local clear-up operation .
The large new shelter is currently the subject of much debate .
Why is it that we still do not have a risk analysis for Sarcophagus I ?
Why is it that we are unable to understand the problem that exists there ?
How can it be that a project of this magnitude is being managed without a transparent risk analysis ?
I also wonder how it is that we still have no explanation for why it has not been possible to remove and store the spent fuel rods from Chernobyl Reactors II and III , which were shut down correctly ?
I regard that as a huge problem .
My third point is that we in the European Union have been on the threshold of nuclear meltdown several times since Chernobyl and long before Fukushima .
Forsmark is a good example of this , Paks is another , as is the Brunsbüttel nuclear power plant in Germany .
The stress tests now proposed are incapable of describing the risk that faces us in the existing European nuclear power plants .
For this reason I would ask you , Mr Oettinger , not to try to pull the wool over our eyes .
You promised tough safety tests .
What has been placed on the table so far cannot be taken seriously .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , following the disaster of Chernobyl 25 years ago , new investigations by the Society for Radiation Protection show that to date 1.4 million people have died from the long-term consequences of the nuclear meltdown .
Even in Germany we feared for the safety of our children , as they were exposed to radioactive rain clouds and contaminated foodstuffs .
The EU must now take the right steps in responding to the Chernobyl and Fukushima disasters .
The fears that the promised stress tests for all nuclear power plants would simply provide an excuse for the continued operation of reactors have unfortunately proven to be well-founded in the light of the stress criteria announced .
Other nuclear facilities will not be examined .
Any threats that could cost the nuclear industry too dearly , such as human error or plane crashes , are simply ignored , despite the fact that these are key when assessing the safety of the population .
We are calling for extensive , binding stress tests carried out by independent experts .
However this can only be the first step on the way to a Europe-wide nuclear exit scenario .

Mr President , the explosion at Chernobyl was a disaster , but let us keep it in perspective : 64 people were killed by Chernobyl radiation over 23 years , and it caused an unknown proportion of 6000 cases of thyroid cancer .
These are tragic figures but they pale into insignificance compared to the death toll on our roads .
Yet , while no one is using road traffic accidents to campaign to ban the motor car , a small army of leftists is using Chernobyl to push for an end to nuclear power .
I do not doubt that they mean well but the road to hell is paved with good intentions .
The same people meant well when they helped to create the biofuels rush , pushing the price of food beyond the reach of the world 's poor .
Tonight millions of children will go to bed slowly dying of hunger because people on that side of the House meant well : that is what the fuzzy ideals of the Utopian left do in the real world .
The impact of a nuclear ban would be even worse because the alternative to nuclear power is not wind farms and solar panels .
In our energy-scarce , post-peak oil world , the alternative to reactors is mass starvation .
( LT ) Mr President , the causes of the Chernobyl disaster include mistakes in project design and the failure to test the reactor in extreme conditions .
The tragedy that took place in Japan a quarter of a century later has forced us to check the safety of existing nuclear facilities through stress tests .
I have no doubt that nuclear power plants within the European Union will pass these tests or will at least carry them out .
However , when there are accidents in such facilities , damage to the environment and human health does not stop at the border .
The whole of Europe learnt that lesson well 25 years ago .
Therefore stress tests must be carried out , and not only at nuclear power plants within the European Union .
Currently two power plants are planned close to the European Union 's borders - in Belarus and the Kaliningrad region .
Unfortunately , in these cases it seems too early to talk about any stress tests .
There has not been a proper environmental impact assessment of these cases , not all questions have been answered and a system for rectifying environmental damage has yet to be established .
Moreover , the Belarusian power plant is to be built on a site that experienced a seven-point earthquake , the biggest in Belarusian history .
Therefore the entire European Union , both the Commission and the Member States should act in solidarity to ensure that nuclear power plants planned in the European Union 's neighbourhood are subject to the same stress tests as European Union power plants .
They must also ensure that the project developers provide the international mediating organisations , the IAEA and the Espoo Convention secretariat , with clear and substantiated responses as regards the choice of construction sites , environmental impact , reparations and evacuation plans .
Only then can we be sure that we will not have to evacuate 100 000 people , this time within the territory of the European Union .
( LT ) Mr President , this discussion is very important , but long overdue , in my opinion .
The nuclear accident in Chernobyl is still having disastrous effects on the populations of both Ukraine and neighbouring countries .
The people of Lithuania are to this day paying for this accident with their health ; its consequences will also be felt by future generations .
Unfortunately , the accident in Fukushima has shown that , because of the material benefits , in 25 years the world has made absolutely no attempt to evaluate the nuclear threat objectively .
For many years we were told that nuclear is the cleanest and safest form of energy , but as we can see , when there is an accident its consequences are disastrous , they will echo through the generations and the cost of these consequences is immeasurable .
The issue of nuclear safety must be fundamentally reviewed .
I welcome the fact that the Commission has initiated the implementation of stress tests at European Union nuclear power plants , but such checks must become systematic and continuous , not random , in order to reduce the chance of accidents as much as possible .
From our experience of the banking crisis we have learnt that not one institution or sector can guarantee effective self-regulation or self-control .
Commissioner , I therefore feel you will agree that it is necessary to set up a nuclear safety policy as a matter of urgency and to supervise its implementation .
We must have a European Union position as regards third countries which intend to build nuclear power plants right next to the European Union 's external borders .
We must know what actions will be taken if the nuclear power plants fail to comply with stress test requirements and many other issues .
( SV ) Mr President , people and rescue workers in and around Chernobyl suffered very badly as a result of the disaster , but the effects also reached areas much further away .
Today , 25 years after the Chernobyl disaster , animals kept in open pasture in certain areas of Sweden still have to be tested and given alternative feed before they are slaughtered .
This has affected the Sami people in particular .
After the disaster in Fukushima , many people in Europe are now concerned about nuclear power once again .
It is therefore extremely important that the checking and assessment of the European reactors does not become a paper tiger , but that it really is a proper assessment .
Transparency is of the utmost importance , and I am therefore very concerned to hear that the United Kingdom does not want to report the results of stress tests and that France is not interested in ambitious stress tests .
Commissioner , as well as technology and geography , you must also ensure that the safety culture and the structure of safety policies are included in the stress test when the proposal is put forward . Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , twenty-five years after the nuclear accident in Chernobyl , we are becoming ever more aware of the tragic consequences of disasters in nuclear power stations , for human health and even life and for the environment as a whole .
We have also become more aware of this following recent events in Fukushima .
We know for certain that one of the main causes of the Chernobyl accident was the flawed design of the reactor .
This begs the question of whether the European Union is monitoring what is happening with the other reactors from the Soviet era ; what steps is it taking to ensure that they are safe ?
At present over 140 nuclear power stations are operating on the territory of the European Union , with over 190 on the European continent .
I therefore support the decision to conduct stress tests of nuclear power stations on EU territory .
These tests will not be mandatory , however , and there will be no consequences for those who fail to participate in them .
What will be the outcome of these tests for nuclear power stations which do not pass them or which do not participate in them ?
There can be no doubt that we need to set high standards for nuclear power stations in order to ensure that they can gain greater public acceptance than to date , since they are unquestionably an important source of energy for Europe .
We should also develop other possible sources of energy , such as shale gas for example , which provides many opportunities to obtain energy without expanding the nuclear energy sector unnecessarily .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall begin by commending the initiative taken by my colleague and friend , Bogusław Sonik , in tabling this oral question on nuclear safety 25 years after the Chernobyl disaster .
Chernobyl remains the worst civil nuclear disaster in history .
It is crucial that we learn lessons from the successive disasters involving nuclear power .
Allow me to present four to you .
Firstly , we must guarantee maximum levels of safety and security to citizens .
The European Union must have the highest standards in the world and must exert an influence on international authorities so that , within the framework of global governance which has begun to emerge , people throughout the planet can be certain that the strictest possible safety criteria are being applied as scientific knowledge develops .
All commercialisation of low-cost nuclear power plants must also be stopped .
Secondly , the public domain , and more specifically the European Union and its Member States , as well as nuclear industry operators , must adopt a behavioural ethic of total transparency in relation to nuclear activities .
Citizens accept scientific risk to some extent , but only if it can be measured .
Only a transparency ethic , attracting heavy penalties if breached , can dispel this concern .
Thirdly , all safety-related costs should be included in the energy production cost , and if we have to set money aside to cover all the costs , that is , if we have to make it compulsory to set this money aside , then we must introduce legislation establishing mandatory levels of capital .
Fourthly , we must monitor the training of nuclear engineers and speed up scientific research programmes , and on that note I would like to express my satisfaction that the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community ( Euratom ) has been extended into 2012 and 2013 .
( RO ) Mr President , I am from Romania , a country which produces nuclear energy , whose population even now has fears and questions that remain unanswered about the long-term impact of the Chernobyl accident .
I welcome this important discussion with the European Commission .
I think that it is our duty to show our concern , particularly about the issue of measuring the impact of nuclear accidents on human health .
A group of experts funded by the European Commission recommended an international study should be conducted , which would investigate all the effects that the Chernobyl disaster has had on human health .
The World Health Organisation would usually be the most suitable candidate to carry out this study .
However , there is , in actual fact , a conflict between the World Health Organisation and the International Atomic Energy Agency , with the interests of the nuclear industry seeming to take priority over human health .
An agreement signed between these organisations well over 50 years ago implies that the Agency can prevent the WHO from having access to information regarded as confidential , even if this information may be crucially important for monitoring and understanding the effects of nuclear accidents on human health .
In other words , an organisation concerned with promoting nuclear technology bans the WHO from accessing information about the impact of this technology on human health .
( PL ) Mr President , two weeks ago , we marked the passing of a quarter of a century since the explosion in Chernobyl , the effects of which were tragic .
I remember very clearly the days immediately following the tragedy , when the Communist regime in my country , Poland , concealed the truth about the disaster itself , and then about its scale , and thousands of people were forced to participate in the May Day marches with no regard for their health , only five days after the explosion , when a radioactive cloud covered a large part of Europe , including the north-east region of Poland , which is the electoral district I have the honour of representing in the European Parliament .
Appropriate safeguarding of the explosion site is still an unresolved issue .
Work on a new shell was halted due to lack of funds , and EU aid is therefore essential in order to make it possible for the work to be completed .
Yet let us not run away from atomic energy , which is an ideal tool for establishing energy independence in Europe .
Further expansion in this respect is therefore unavoidable , as proven by the plans to construct further plants in Poland , Lithuania and Slovakia , and I therefore support the introduction of stress tests and safety assessments for nuclear power stations .
The tests should be mandatory and carried out periodically .
We should also actively support international cooperation on improving nuclear safety , and therefore similar stress tests should be carried out in nuclear power stations in Ukraine , on Russian territory and in the former Soviet states .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , like Fukushima , Chernobyl showed that , despite all the rules we may set down , the residual risk from human error needs to be measured and that , in this context , we must identify more clearly where the limits of nuclear energy lie , because obviously even the strictest regulations cannot eliminate this residual risk as a result of human error .
My second point relates to the lack of available information because of the Soviet system that existed at the time .
This socialist system lies behind the misinformation and lack of information at the time , as well as the paucity of data available to us today .
The Soviet centralist model is largely responsible for this misinformation .
This energy source and the associated residual risk are only acceptable - even on a temporary basis - if they are associated with the necessary degree of openness .
Thirdly , we must recognise that many people - including some from my own constituency - are still helping to alleviate the consequences of the disaster by inviting children into their homes , as well as many other initiatives .
The consequences of this catastrophe can still be seen in a generation that had not even been conceived at the time .
Accordingly , we can only take this residual risk into account to a limited extent and should understand that nuclear energy can only be a stop-gap technology .
Finally , Commissioner , I wish to encourage you in relation to the stress tests .
We need European criteria and inspection standards that are not solely open to the arbitrary will of individual states .
These stress tests must establish a situation whereby no data can be provided that cannot be verified subsequently .
That is why I would urge you not to allow yourself to be manipulated by members of the Council of Ministers , but rather to set down clear , common , verifiable standards , so that these stress tests fulfil their purpose .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , if someone lives on a road that is too loud , there is always the possibility of moving somewhere further away , perhaps just a couple of blocks distant .
Unfortunately , as the Chernobyl incident 25 years ago and the Fukushima incident a few weeks ago remind us , when it comes to nuclear power plant accidents , this possibility of simply moving a few blocks further away does not exist .
Nuclear safety is not a local issue .
It is , in fact , a global issue .
Next door to Europe lie Russia and Belarus , which do not currently have the same high safety standards that we have in the European Union .
However , we in Europe have nowhere where we can move to away from our neighbours .
We have to ensure that our safety standards apply not only to Europe but also to Europe 's neighbours , and , in fact , to the whole world .
I therefore call upon you , Commissioner , not only to carry out these stress tests in Europe ( and they must be carried out , and carried out strictly ) , but also to work to ensure that European standards and European stress tests apply also to our neighbours and to the whole world .
In this connection , Europe has the chance to exercise influence on our direct neighbours and link energy purchases with the nuclear safety issue . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President ,
( Mr Mann begins to speak without a microphone . )
....
1986 and the nuclear meltdown of an outdated nuclear power plant .
Fearing the danger from radiation , we stayed at home as much as possible for weeks on end , only venturing outside when absolutely necessary .
A nuclear emergency was declared on 11 March of this year in the Fukushima nuclear power plant .
Even in a high-tech country like Japan , the promised safety levels could not be even remotely achieved .
The responsible politicians need to distance themselves from over-hasty solutions .
Sustainability involves compulsory stringent stress tests that examine the impact on nuclear power plants of natural disasters , as well as accidents , terrorist attacks and human error .
My country stands accused of ' typical German angst ' - quite unfairly in this case .
We need to take the fears of our citizens seriously .
Everything needs to be on the table , from different timetables and decommissioning scenarios to qualified moratoriums - without false time pressures , polemics or ideologies .
The work of the German Ethics Commission should be a shining model for Europe .
Workers in nuclear power plants need special protection .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs wants to expand the legal basis for the directive on disposal to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This would also include those workers who deal with radioactive waste and spent fuel rods .
Stringent criteria must apply in the areas of training and occupational safety and thorough investigations are required .
On a final note , Mr President : we must never compromise on safety issues .
This is true for the EU and for our neighbours , who must be persuaded of the importance of joint decision-making .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , while we commemorate the victims of the Chernobyl disaster today , our thoughts are also with the victims of Fukushima , and we are also considering the safety of our citizens in Europe .
This is the subject of our debate .
Public fears regarding nuclear energy have recently intensified greatly in Europe , something which emerges from all the opinion polls carried out in all the EU Member States , including my own country , Poland , where support for the construction of nuclear power stations has fallen by 10-15 % .
It is therefore extremely important that the criteria of the six-point tests announced in Budapest should be met , since this will ensure that people feel safer .
Commissioner , you must not yield to the will of the Member States which are calling for the criteria to be relaxed .
This is currently a subject of disagreement , and we would insist most emphatically that half-measures and relaxed criteria should not be agreed to , in view of either crises or normal human error .
This is all the more true since the results of the tests should form a basis for the drafting of guidelines for the Member States which are only just starting to develop their nuclear programme .
We have discussed countries neighbouring Europe which have nuclear programmes .
I think that these issues should be included in the Commission communication on the external dimension of the EU energy policy .
We are talking about energy which is supplied to Europe , and which should be covered by EU policy , in the same way as gas or other sources of energy .
At the same time , we must also work on the Europeanisation of energy policy .
- ( SK ) Mr President , we all still remember clearly the terrible disaster at the Chernobyl nuclear plant 25 years ago .
Hundreds of thousands of people lost their lives , and many bear the consequences of the radiation to this day in the form of disease and death through cancer .
I am delighted that the European Parliament is addressing the question of nuclear safety today and that this is a key point , but another key point is that without nuclear energy we cannot , unfortunately , get by at all .
This applies in Europe , in the United States and in China , but in China , the United States and India there are projects for new nuclear plants , as you will surely be aware , and I think it is an over-reaction to exclude nuclear power in Europe in the future .
Another key point , of course , is public health and safety , and I am pleased that the planned stress tests , both in the EU and , as has been said here , also in Belarus , and in the future Ukraine and Russia , should be such as to make people in the EU safe .
Mr President , I would like to speak about one issue only .
Twenty-five years after Chernobyl , there is a need to rebuild the sarcophagus , but we see how difficult it is to gather the financial resources : how difficult it is to get the financial resources from those European Member States that are , at the same time , worrying very much about nuclear safety .
We have to make sure that the long-term commitment is there for as long as the long-term risk of the nuclear facility in Chernobyl remains .
The public commitment needs to be not merely verbal , but also financial ; and human resources are necessary too , to provide the skills required for the long term - for as long as Chernobyl remains unresolved .
We may not realise at this stage what is required in terms of Member States ' financial resources , but until we understand the problem we will continue , for the most part , to pay mere lip service to tackling it .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , even 25 years down the road , Chernobyl continues to be a cause for concern .
Fukushima will also be a source of anxiety for years to come .
The debate surrounding these major accidents is a sign that nuclear technology has inherent risks that it may not be possible to control .
This is leading to a rethink in energy policy .
However , it is also evident that unilateral action by individual countries is a mistake .
We need international strategies , or at least EU-wide strategies when it comes to safety .
That is why I fully support the Commissioner for Energy , who has made a number of important proposals in this direction .
I would call on everyone here to work together to produce common principles so that the existing nuclear reactors really are safe , so that power failures are not allowed to happen and so that earthquake safety and other risks can be better estimated .
We should then take a pro-active approach in bringing these principles to the attention of the international bodies .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has been 25 years since the Chernobyl disaster , but we do not have any comprehensive , systematic research into the catastrophe 's effect on health .
There are just separate , uncoordinated studies : for example , regarding the increased incidence of thyroid cancer in Ukraine and Belarus .
This absence of comprehensive , followup studies is a disgrace , and I would ask the Commission to commit clearly to measures to carry out a comprehensive , international study of this kind .
The claim has been made in this debate that Chernobyl might only have led to the deaths of a few dozen people .
The estimates for deaths at the other end of the scale are in the millions .
This sort of confusion is possible precisely because there is no comprehensive research .
Research of this kind would also improve the knowledge that mankind has about the effects of radiation on health .
- ( CS ) Mr President , in connection with the 25th anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster , I believe that gratitude should be expressed to two countries which the European Parliament is none too fond of .
First Belarus , which suffered the same consequences of this disaster as did Ukraine , and which has been funding recovery from the aftermath of the disaster patiently and without any posturing .
Much has been done , without the EU authorities paying much attention .
Secondly , thanks are due to the government and people of the Republic of Cuba , which has taken many children whose parents died in the Chernobyl disaster for treatment in Cuba .
They were given the best possible treatment and the best possible care at a time when the Republic of Cuba was in a very difficult economic situation .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all well aware of the direct impact of Chernobyl .
I have a question because , after all , our citizens expect us to learn lessons from such events .
There is little doubt that the Commission is aware of the consequences of Chernobyl and now Fukushima for the population of Europe , whether in terms of health risks or the financial consequences .
What steps are being taken to protect the people of Europe in the event of a new accident ?
After all , undeniable risks exist here in Europe too - for example in connection with the Isar I power plant , which is the same type as Fukushima and which is in the flight path of Munich airport , or Krško , which is located in an area prone to earthquakes .

Mr President , in my half-minute I would say two or three things : firstly , the victims of Chernobyl are thankfully not forgotten .
In my own country , a great lady by the name of Adi Roche and her organisation have given tremendous support and will do so long into the future , because the effects of Chernobyl will still be felt .
Secondly , the role of the Commission , as highlighted by the Commissioner , is praiseworthy ; and , thirdly , the point made by Paul Rübig that a new regulator should oversee the stress tests and any future power plants that are built would be very sensible .
- ( SK ) Mr President , the Chernobyl disaster showed us the importance of having a highly-developed information system .
We know that the Soviet leadership concealed the effects of the damage to the nuclear reactor for a very long time , and this had grave consequences for the inhabitants of nearby countries .
We should also be prepared for the eventuality that , just as in Chernobyl , the operator of the plant in Fukushima has made an attempt to conceal the damage and has tried to water down the information relating to these issues .
From the perspective of providing protection in the event of a nuclear disaster , it is therefore very important to ensure that information is provided very quickly and efficiently , both to the public and to the experts , and that it is accurate .
In Chernobyl the cause was human error , while in Fukushima it was the natural elements .
We know how to prevent human error , we know how to train workers and we know how to provide good automatic protection , and we must strive to ensure that we provide such mechanisms in the future .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , with regard to Chernobyl , I am happy to promise that your proposals and demands in relation to the issue of research , as well as other areas , will be examined by us and incorporated in the next steps .
Likewise , we shall do all we can to finance the necessary technical measures in full within the international community with the involvement of the European Union .
I would like to express my general thanks for a very constructive discussion , including the question of what is to follow in the wake of Fukushima .
Following this sitting we are scheduled to meet with the coordinators of the responsible parliamentary committees , where I will explain how things now stand .
Firstly let me point out that the stress test is uncharted territory for us .
You are well aware of this .
There has never been an inspection process for nuclear power plants at European level .
I believe that this is already a significant fact that points to the way ahead .
My second point is that if one reads the Treaty of Lisbon , a document on which you all worked , then it is evident that the decision on the energy mix was and remains a matter for the Member States , in other words the countries where you live .
For this reason , the decision in favour of coal , nuclear energy , gas or renewable energies is largely a matter for the Member States themselves .
The 20 % renewable energy requirement is the first time that we have had a European process that impacts on the decision in relation to the energy mix otherwise decided solely by the Member States themselves .
We have 14 Member States that operate nuclear power plants and 13 Member States that do not .
Poland , a very European country , is on the point of deciding on two nuclear power plants .
In Italy , the search for suitable sites has been suspended .
You have suggested that I should put a European regulator in place .
If that is what you want , then give me the legal competence to do so and approve the relevant jobs .
I will accept everything you have to offer .
However , I am bound by law and legislation .
As yet we do not have a European nuclear watchdog .
There is no provision for such a body either in the Treaty of Lisbon , the Euratom Treaty or in the establishment plan for the Commission .
You know this as well as I do .
I think that the stress test is important .
It has been commissioned by the European Council and is intended to set the highest standards for safety as its benchmark .
The key meeting between the European regulators , ENSREG and the Commission is to take place on Thursday .
As yet there are no test criteria , even though judgments have already been made - judgments that the stress tests are too soft , disappointing or inadequate .
There have not been any stress tests yet .
The test criteria will be drawn up on Thursday .
What we do have is a proposal from a body of which the Commission is not a member .
In April , the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association published its preparatory work , which it was fully entitled to do .
It is up to us to decide what to do with this .
Without any involvement on the part of the Commission , WENRA applied its expertise and , following a circulation procedure , came up with a resolution that human error and human causes should not be included .
I do not think this is adequate .
That is why I will present my position on behalf of the Commission tomorrow evening to all 27 nuclear watchdog bodies , based on thorough groundwork , telling them that we need to take all risks into consideration , regardless of their origin .
This applies equally to natural causes , such as earthquakes , flooding or extreme temperatures , and human causes , such as error , accident , intent or criminality .
As far as I am concerned this also includes terrorist threats , cyber attacks and plane crashes .
I believe that this is in the interests of the people of Europe .
Today 's debate showed me that there is a broad interest among all parties in the European Parliament in this test and in the test criteria , which must include the human factor .
I am grateful for this tailwind .
By the way , it is not always easy to make a clear distinction : was Fukushima caused by nature or by human beings ?
I would claim it was originally a natural disaster - earthquake and flooding - however , human strengths and weaknesses came into play when it came to taking control of the risk and in reducing and avoiding damage .
Human weaknesses have continued to play a role in Japan right up to the present .
After Thursday I will be more than happy to report back to you on what is to happen next .
However , you must know that I need the approval of the European Commission - which I already have - and the national regulators - which I intend to obtain .
I need to get approval for the test criteria of the stress tests from each national regulator , including our very competent and esteemed colleagues in Paris , London , Madrid and Brussels , where opinion is still inconclusive , although there is a feeling that there is little to be gained by taking matters to a European level .
I promise you transparency in this matter .
We must learn the lesson of complete transparency from Chernobyl .
I promise you transparency in relation to how negotiations proceed in Brussels on Wednesday evening and Thursday and what the result is .
I will also tell you if we fail to reach an agreement between the Commission and ENSREG , at which point we may return the mandate to the European Council .
You will not find my signature on an abbreviated version of the stress test .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
( GA ) The effect of Chernobyl on the world and the current events in Fukushima are clear evidence of the devastation which nuclear mishaps inflict on local communities .
Since there is a significant number of nuclear stations in Europe , and since these stations are often close to borders , a cross-border approach must be adopted to nuclear safety , coordinated at the EU level .
Member States must share information on safety issues , potential threats and civil protection coordination with their neighbours and with nuclear facilities on a prompt and ongoing basis .
There is a significant nuclear risk to Ireland because of the nuclear plants on the west coast of Britain ; Sellafield is the most famous .
Five men were arrested under the Terrorism Act outside the Sellafield nuclear plant on 2 May , and the Irish Government has not yet stated whether the British Government shared all the security information about the incident with it .
The Irish people must be convinced that their government is fully informed of any neighbouring threat and of what is being done to combat those security threats .
The situation in Japan and at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant after the earthquake and tsunami of 11 March 2011 remains a cause for concern .
This , coupled with the 25th anniversary of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster , which struck Ukraine on 26 April 1986 , is a reminder to European leaders of their responsibility regarding nuclear safety in Europe .
That is why Member States must take all the measures necessary to ensure and maintain a maximum level of security in European power plants and a maximum level of protection for citizens .
Nevertheless , it is important to keep a cool head when addressing present and future energy challenges .
Therefore , nuclear energy , as a low CO2 emission technology , cannot be overlooked .
The challenge lies in achieving a balance between the development of nuclear energy and the development of tools for preventing the risks associated with its production and for combating the effects of nuclear accidents .
This year is the 25th anniversary of the nuclear disaster in the Ukrainian town of Chernobyl .
On 26 April 1986 , a sudden power surge in the reactor during a system test damaged the reactor vessel , which gave rise to a series of explosions .
According to UN data , areas within a radius of 500 km from the power plant were contaminated .
Around 115 000 people were evacuated from the areas in the vicinity of the reactor , and since 1986 around 220 000 people have been relocated from Belarus , the Russian Federation and Ukraine .
Nuclear accidents occur without warning and unexpectedly .
The accident in Chernobyl occurred 25 years ago , but as recently as March of this year there was an accident in Fukushima .
It should be noted that the cause of the disaster was the breakdown of the cooling system due to a power outage , and interruptions to power supply are a frequent phenomenon in the Member States .
There can be no doubt that we should draw conclusions from history , but we should not become hysterical in response to the disaster in Japan .
This accident has given rise to serious doubts regarding the safety of nuclear energy around the world .
Everything points to the fact that nuclear energy will become a significant source of energy in the near future , and therefore it is absolutely crucial to ensure that the highest feasible level of safety is achieved in the energy sector .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0303 / 2011 ) .
Colleagues , please note that we are starting 40 minutes late .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Mr President , I know I am pushing an open door with you in raising this , but would say again that it really is not acceptable that Question Time be conducted in this way .
There is no Parliament in the world in which Question Time is not sacrosanct .
I would ask you again to raise this matter with the Bureau .

Mr Mitchell , it is not the Bureau , it is a matter for the Conference of Presidents , but no doubt the Swoboda reforms will make proposals on how to deal with this .
I agree with you .
It is totally unsatisfactory , but I took the chair at just 19.40 so I am not really responsible for the delay .
Subject : Provision in the new draft budget for combating youth unemployment
The flagship initiative ' An agenda for new skills and jobs ' underlines the fact that because of the crisis employment has fallen below 69 % , while the figure for unemployment has risen to 10 % ; assuming that the job market will stabilise in 2010-2011 , attainment of an employment rate of 75 % by 2020 will require an average increase in employment of slightly more than 1 % per year .
At the same time , unemployment of young people under 25 is approaching 20 % , while the persisting financial crisis is leading to a reduction in the employment rate , rather than the target of an annual 1 % rise .
How , and with what provision in the draft budget will the Commission attempt to achieve by next year the objective of an average 1 % increase in employment in the EU ?
Does the Commission think that the proposed cuts in next year 's budget will have a negative impact on the amounts allocated to education , training and boosting employment in the EU in general ?
Member of the Commission . - As you all know , the EU headline targets under Europe 2020 include increasing the employment rate to 75 % , lifting at least 20 million people out of poverty and social exclusion , reducing the proportion of early school-leavers to under 10 % , and ensuring that at least 40 % of the younger generation will have completed a tertiary degree by 2020 .
The Commission helps Member States to achieve these targets through financial support , in particular the European Social Fund , policy coordination and policy guidance at EU level under the European semester .
The 2011 Joint Employment Report , which is based on the Commission 's assessment of the Member States ' draft national reform programmes , calls on them to improve the functioning of the labour market by introducing more employment-friendly tax systems and by making work pay , ensuring that wages reflect developments in productivity , introducing flexible working arrangements to facilitate the further integration of women into the labour market , ensuring that pension reforms include a more direct link between later retirement and increased pension entitlements , removing incentives for people to retire early and linking unemployment benefits with the business cycle .
This means that safety nets should be reinforced at times when most needed as we have seen in the past couple of years , while money would be saved in good times .
When exactly we enter good times is a country-by-country assessment .
Hopefully , in a couple of years ' time we will all get there .
But under the current very difficult circumstances , it is also important that public employment services provide better job search assistance .
We also need to reduce labour market segmentation .
Indeed , evidence shows that particular groups , and notably those under temporary or precarious contracts , have taken a much bigger hit as a result of the crisis .
This is the reason why the Commission has invited Member States to introduce open-ended contracts with a gradual increase of protection rights .
Although small in comparison with national public budgets , the European Social Fund has been helping the Member States weather the recent economic crisis .
In line with the Commission communication on the budget review and the conclusions of the fifth report on social cohesion , the Europe 2020 Strategy provides both a clear set of common priorities and the framework for identification of funding priorities post-2013 in line with the objectives of smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , including human capital development .
The Commission will present its proposals for the next multiannual financial framework at the end of June .
As regards the 2012 budget , I would like to point out that the draft budget that was adopted by the Commission on 20 April is in line with the European Council conclusions of 24 and 25 March , which state that fiscal consolidation efforts must be complemented by growth-enhancing structural reforms .
To that end , Member States will implement measures in order to invest in education and training .
The Commission has applied a restrictive policy as regards administrative expenditure , with a nominal freeze for Commission administrative expenditure .
However , the Commission has proposed to increase its commitment and payment appropriations , by 3.7 % and 4.9 % respectively , with a focus on expenditure related to the Europe 2020 strategy including the ESF , the lifelong learning programme , the Youth in Action programme , the seventh framework research programme and the competitiveness and innovation programmes .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I would , of course , remind you that unemployment , especially among young people in Europe , is currently close to 20.5 % and , in some instances , is now out of control .
According to the data available to me , it is 43.5 % in Spain and in Greece it is close - I repeat among young people - to 36 % .
Bearing in mind that this critical state of affairs is a one-off occurrence which we could not have forecast 2 or 3 years ago , may we expect a new intervention by the Commission in this particular situation , in addition to what you have told us ?
Commissioner , would you consider an area-based response to youth employment problems ?
You will find that it is people with the lowest level of education , perhaps living in local authority complexes , lacking access to education and on social welfare who have the highest levels of unemployment .
There are models of local development which have started to address this issue on an area-specific basis .
Would the Commission consider doing anything in partnership with Member States to try and tackle the areas with highest unemployment ?
( EL ) Mr President , as we have already heard , there is massive unemployment among young people in both Greece and Europe .
At the same time , young people , women and immigrants are the most vulnerable groups of society when it comes to the arbitrary action being taken by employers , by which I mean action against labour rights and disregard for collective bargaining .
I should therefore like to ask you , Commissioner , what measures you intend to take to protect young workers from precarious jobs and arbitrary action by employers .
Mr President , honourable Members , the future common agricultural policy must rise to the challenges facing agriculture , and here I am referring to food security , the stabilisation of agricultural incomes and the production of high quality and extremely safe food products .
At the same time , however , the common agricultural policy must meet the environmental and territorial challenges and objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy while also supporting the competitiveness and sustainability of agricultural industries and rural areas .
The Commission intends to propose an ambitious and comprehensive reform of the common agricultural policy which will require farmers to make a significant contribution towards achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The cumulative impact of a ' greening ' of direct payments and better targeted rural development measures will mean that the CAP offers a more robust and comprehensive response to the provision of environmental public goods .
A strong and ambitious common agricultural policy also requires an appropriate European Union budget .
To that end , the Commission is due to present its legislative proposals for the next multiannual financial framework at the end of June 2011 .
Following this , the Commission will present its proposals on the reform of the common agricultural policy in the second half of 2011 , in order to ensure that we can coordinate the submission of legislative proposals at budget level while taking into account our ambitions for the future common agricultural policy .
Just a brief follow-up .
In the communication on the CAP towards 2020 it says that achieving all the objectives in the future CAP ' will require that public support to the agricultural sector and rural areas be maintained ' .
You mentioned this yourself , Commissioner .
How do you propose to ensure that this support for the CAP is maintained in the new EU multiannual financial framework ?
Commissioner , as you know , the delivery of public goods and security of food supply comes at a very significant cost .
Farmers need to know that they will get a fair return for their efforts .
They also need to be in a position to plan ahead .
In this regard , and in terms of moving the negotiations on the CAP forward , when does the Commission expect to be in a position to reveal the detailed proposals of the next multi-financial framework and the allocation of the CAP budget ?
I think it is imperative that we know that as quickly as possible because , as Members , we are working somewhat in the dark , not knowing what finances are going to be available to us .
( PL ) Commissioner , from what you have said it appears that very far-reaching changes will be made to the common agricultural policy .
My question in connection with this is as follows : will these merely be qualitative changes , or are there plans for them also to include changes to the way funding is allocated to individual countries , for example ?
Today the funds earmarked for agriculture are divided up very differently between the individual countries .
( RO ) I sincerely thank the Commissioner for the answer he gave .
In a global index indicating vulnerability to food price rises , out of the 40 countries occupying the top places in the index four are Member States of the European Union .
I do not doubt the Commissioner 's best intentions regarding the budget , but to what extent will the future budget be able to meet both the food demands and the new environmental ambitions ?
Mr President , the fight against climate change is a major challenge for Europe , and more efforts in research and innovation will be needed in order to develop a society whose carbon emissions are low and which is resilient to climate change .
At the moment , there is no single specialist body operating in these areas , nor is there a specific incentive such as the annual climate innovation award that has been mentioned .
Nevertheless , many efforts have been made to achieve a coordinated approach among the Union 's various policies and programmes .
The Europe 2020 Strategy and its flagship initiative , the ' Innovation Union ' , have been adopted in order to bring the European economy out of the crisis and to confront the social challenges that exist .
Investment in research and innovation - including new technologies such as eco-innovation , for example - is at the heart of this strategy , and new financial instruments are being planned with the aim of obtaining a substantial increase in private investment and establishing sustainable and long-term growth .
As part of the Innovation Union , a pilot European Innovation Partnership has been proposed with the aim of covering the whole of the innovation chain , from research and development onwards , in order to guarantee that adequate conditions are in place to bring the results of research and development successfully to the market .
Other European Innovation Partnerships could be proposed later .
Secondly , the Commission 's Green Paper entitled ' From Challenges to Opportunities : Towards a Common Strategic Framework for EU Research and Innovation Funding ' proposes important improvements to the research and innovation programme which will form part of the next EU multiannual financial framework .
Firstly , the idea is to link research and innovation by bringing together all the relevant European Union instruments into a common strategic framework allowing for the introduction of genuinely cross-cutting strategies that cover the entire range of innovation systems , from research to technological development , demonstration and the market .
There is , in addition , a proposal to link European Union financing with the major challenges that society faces , such as climate change .
The aim would be to use European Union financing as a lever to obtain more private investment , for example in the field of innovation in green technologies .
Finally , the Green Paper poses the question of how European Union financing would be used to support small and medium-sized enterprises as well .
The Commission has asked the parties involved to submit contributions on the topic of the Green Paper before 20 May 2011 .
Subsequently the Commission will present its legislative proposals for the future financing of this European Union of research and innovation towards the end of this year .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I should like to ask you , in connection with your sector , with agriculture , how you imagine innovation might help , when applied to the agro-foodstuff production chain , not only in combating climate change , but also in addressing and preventing the adverse impact that we all know we shall have on rural life .
Member of the Commission . - The question addressed to the Commission actually implies the diagnosis of the real state of the economy in Europe , as well as the prescription .
I can share to some extent both the diagnosis and the prescription .
Yes , we are in a Europe of austerity , meaning socially painful savings , politically costly and economically necessary , but challenging to some extent for the very fragile recovery of the European economy .
The European Commission is a strong supporter of fiscal consolidation as a precondition for sustainable growth , but we are more than ever conscious of the sensitivity of the economic debate now being discussed as the ' relaunch versus austerity ' problem , and this was discussed even today in the College .
When you take the long run and when you read the 2020 Strategy , this is clear , as it is with the relaunch of the Single Market strategy , but this is about the unlocking of the potential of the European economy .
The European budget should be the answer right now as we need growth and jobs right now .
This is because of the specific nature of the European budget , with its focus on investment .
The national budgets are mainly about social transfers ; the European budget is mainly about investment and therefore could have a multiplying effect on jobs and growth and when we see the proposal for 2012 , what is growing , with competitiveness , is cohesion , that is structural funding , and research and development ; the other category of growing expenses is on migration .
So this type of expenditure is conducive to growth and jobs .
In the long run the same should be valid for the proposal we are to reveal at the end of June for the next financial perspective , adding a lot on top of what I have mentioned relating to the energy and trans-European infrastructure generally that is also conducive to growth and jobs .
Therefore I can say that the European budget , due to its nature , could be the delivery mechanism in a time of austerity to replace the investment cut normally at the national level .
Therefore we should exploit this potential of the European budget to its limits .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I do not know if the Commission is currently discussing recent press reports about the Greek debt , with talk about secret meetings , debt restructuring , new loans and the possibility of Greece 's leaving the euro .
At the same time , we are living with the drastic effects of the Memorandum .
Without sustainable growth , the debt will not be paid off and the economy will not improve .
My question is this : what measures are you proposing , right now , in connection with the budget , in order to help countries which have been hit by the crisis , such as Greece ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will try to do my best to keep my answers short .
The Lisbon Treaty provides for the setting up of a European voluntary humanitarian aid corps with the objective of establishing a framework for joint contributions from young Europeans to the humanitarian aid operations of the Union .
Last year , 2010 , we reviewed the existing situation of volunteering , through bilateral meetings , surveys and a dedicated conference in September 2010 .
As a result , on 23 September we adopted the communication setting up a phased approach for the corps .
The first stocktaking phase allowed us to identify current gaps , needs and conditions for the voluntary corps to make a positive contribution to EU humanitarian assistance .
This year , 2011 , the main activity is to further develop the approach , including a public stakeholder consultation with results to be made available by the end of this month , May 2011 .
Secondly , a preparatory action which allows the Commission to finance pilot projects aimed at selecting , training and deploying a limited number of volunteers in view of the adoption of a legislative proposal .
Third , we will carry out a full impact assessment which will inform us about the potential economic and social impacts of the voluntary corps .
The results of these activities will feed into a proposal for a regulation which will be tabled in 2012 .
The results of the public stakeholder consultation , as well as the selected pilot projects , will be presented at the dedicated conference organised in June 2011 , this year in Budapest under the auspices of the Hungarian Presidency .
Member of the Commission . - Since the beginning of the Libyan crisis , the European Union has shouldered its responsibilities to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population by providing timely and significant humanitarian assistance .



To date , the Commission has allocated EUR 50 million - EUR 40 million from our humanitarian aid budget and EUR 10 million from the civil protection budget line - while the 27 Member States have collectively contributed EUR 52 million , bringing the total amount of EU humanitarian assistance to EUR 102 million .
We are by far the leaders in addressing the needs of people in Libya .
Our humanitarian funding supports activities implemented by partners , UN agencies , the Red Cross and Red Crescent , and NGOs .
Our activities address both pressing needs inside Libya and the needs of people who have been fleeing Libya .
As of today , 740 000 Muslim migrant workers have left the country in search of safety .
Inside Libya , our activities include the evacuation by sea of about 2000 civilians from Misrata , the provision of food , water , sanitation and medical supplies in Misrata and other areas of Libya , and provisional materials for food , as we expect the food situation to worsen in the next four to six weeks .
In border areas outside Libya , the Commission is supporting the pre-positioning of emergency stocks .
We are also supporting operations in Tunisia , Egypt and Algeria for people who have left Libya .
The EU civil protection mechanism has been activated twice : firstly to support Member States ' consular operations to evacuate our citizens - 5800 Europeans have been evacuated - , and secondly to facilitate the return home of migrant workers stuck in Tunisia and Egypt .
We have provided 157 flights from Member States with support from the Commission , and we have also funded the repatriation of third country nationals through the International Organisation for Migration .
In total , over 56 000 people safely made it home .
This , of course , also helps to reduce the risk of a wave of migrants into Europe .
Despite the ongoing fighting and its spread to various parts of Libya , humanitarian organisations are doing a remarkable job in preventing a major humanitarian disaster .
At this point , our main concern remains that , in large parts of Libya controlled by Gaddafi , access for these humanitarian workers is limited .
I want to assure you that the Commission will continue its efforts to help people affected by this conflict .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your dedication in this matter .
I would like to emphasise this in the strongest terms .
I would just like to ask the following question : either yesterday or today the United Nations requested a ceasefire so that humanitarian needs could be tended to .
Is humanitarian aid actually reaching the majority of Libya 's population and what percentage of the country or population do you estimate is inaccessible to the aid agencies ?
Commissioner , in the light of Parliament resolutions and the Council conclusions of last December , could you give us your assessment of the progress that has been made since the 2006 Barnier report in setting up a really coherent rapid reaction or disaster response mechanism : one that draws together humanitarian , civil protection and military assets and that has a pre-identified pool of resources from Member States rather than an ad hoc approach ?
Are we getting our act together ?
Can you reassure us ?
Member of the Commission . - The European Union is one of the major donors of food assistance .
The Commission has been committed to providing leadership in ensuring that the most vulnerable people in crisis have access to safe , adequate and nutritious food .
The Commission does not implement aid operations itself .
It provides funding to partner organisations - the UN agencies , international NGOs , the Red Cross family - or partners who have vast experience in carrying out aid operations among the most vulnerable people .
Our implementing partners have the authority to decide what the most appropriate food assistance needs are in any specific circumstance .
We encourage them to purchase food locally as much as possible .
Why ?
Because , by doing so , they provide useful assistance to local farmers and we do not end up feeding the people yet , at the same time , killing the livelihoods of the local farmers by providing our own food .
The Commission is always validating these choices and making sure that factors , such as the availability and nutritious quality of commodities , dietary habits of the local populations , availability of cooking facilities and cost considerations , including transportation costs , are taken into account .
On that basis the exact composition of our food assistance will be determined .
Obviously canned food has its advantages , including canned fish , because it can hold for a prolonged period of time and is therefore suitable for managing stocks .
It also has some disadvantages , which are sometimes related to costs or dietary habits in local populations .
So we always have to be sure that what we are doing is helping people in the most effective way .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner , which I believe .
In your speeches you have mentioned nutrition on a number of occasions and in fact canned fish tick all of the boxes : they are low in value , high in protein , with no necessity for refrigerated transport or for cold storage facilities when they arrive , and , of course , they have a long shelf life .
And when it comes to cooking , the fish are already cooked .
I am thinking in particular of mackerel and herring .
What I am saying to you is , could you use your offices to at least suggest the use of canned fish ?
We are the people who are funding this and I would like to have an opportunity to meet with somebody from your DG to discuss this , because I come from an area where there is an abundance of fish but there is no other type of job .
We should try to help our own people and by the same token help others .
Member of the Commission . - The point you are making is very valid .
We need to look at high nutritional value and also simplicity of use .
At the same time , what I would like to caution against is expanding the intervention of the Commission in deciding up front what exactly should be the composition of food assistance in any given circumstance .
We have taken a very important leadership role in the European Union with regard to food assistance by untying our food assistance or , in other words , not making it a requirement that European food assistance includes food produced in Europe .
Sometimes agricultural surpluses from Europe are used in food assistance .
We do require that food provided to people in any circumstance is the most appropriate for the particular circumstances .
And why do we do that ?
When we untie our food aid , this allows our partner organisations to purchase food locally and provides an incentive for local farmers .
We do not end up bringing food from Europe , killing the livelihoods of local farmers and then giving them development assistance and actually bringing even more food because we have been unwise in our approach to food assistance .
I can assure you that , globally , what Europe has done in this respect is seen as the right thing to do and we are applauded by people in developing countries and by our development partners for taking this approach to food assistance .
Having said that , we also support prepositioning of food , in which case canned fish is very appropriate .
I can assure you that we strive to do the right thing .
When it is the right thing we of course encourage it to be done .
You are very welcome to visit our services - we are always very happy to interact with the European Parliament .
Baroness Ludford , you have had your answer .
Do you want to press me for a supplementary ?
Is that what it is ?
You have had the answer to your question .
Yes , indeed !
The Council conclusions of last December talked about various Commission proposals during 2011 .
I cannot claim to be a specialist in this area but they have not hit the headlines and I wondered whether any have been made .
This is going back to proposals that have been made in the past , including by colleagues in my political group , for an EU fast-track organisation .
The Parliament called for a European civil protection force , with the idea of having some kind of permanent body so that we would not have to keep relying on this hand-to-mouth exercise ; we would set up the mechanisms so that we could go into action very quickly .
I know you said we have made progress , but are we getting to the really ideal situation ?
Member of the Commission . - Both agriculture and forestry can , of course , play an important role in achieving the EU 's climate objectives , and non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture are actually included in the EU 's Effort Sharing Mechanism , but emissions and removals of CO2 related to land use , land-use change and forestry ( what we call LULUCF ) are not part of the current reduction commitment as adopted back in the 2008 in the climate and energy package .
However , as part of the package , the Commission was requested by the European Council and Parliament to assess modalities for their inclusion in the EU reduction commitment by mid-2011 , and to make a legislative proposal as appropriate .
So the Commission plans to publish the relevant communication this summer , i.e. in a very short time from now .
Inclusion could strengthen the environmental integrity of our climate commitments , ensuring that all emissions and removals are covered , while enhancing the visibility of efforts by farmers and foresters to increase sinks through sustainable land-use management .
The current CAP includes instruments that address climate change , mainly through the multiple co-benefits between agri-environmental policies and climate action .
Pillar one provides income support to farmers who have to respect cross-compliance - a concept that includes baseline obligations , some of which are relevant to climate action .
Rural development policy in pillar two makes more targeted climate-change measures available to Member States .
The 2008 Health Check reconfirmed climate change as one of the major challenges to be addressed , and already measures in relation to forestry - for example , afforestation - can be supported under the rural development policy .
A reformed CAP with a greener first pillar , introducing non-contractual and annual environmental actions that go beyond cross-compliance , and a second pillar more focused on climate action , supported by a professional farm advisory service , could be tailored towards helping farmers to manage their land-use systems so as to contribute to climate action ( mitigation ) , and also become less vulnerable to climate change ( adaptation ) .
That is definitely what we intend to achieve through the next CAP .
( GA ) I want to thank the Commissioner .
It is clear that her policy is going in the right direction .
In terms of the state of agriculture in the economy of my own country , it is clearly very important indeed .
For example , in 2010 the net transfer from the EU to Ireland 's agricultural budget was estimated at EUR 978.3 million .
It is clear that farmers are willing to work with you , in terms of climate change and other things like that , but they must receive compensation and money if we want to achieve that kind of cooperation .
It is clear that they are willing to cooperate but , at the same time , they can not do so without compensation , without economics , without money .
Member of the Commission . - The European Union has for a long time been a promoter of gender equality .
In support of this , the Commission has a well-established practice for widespread consultation both within and outside the Commission .
In particular , the consultation of all Commission departments allows for consideration of gender equality aspects of all legislative proposals and other initiatives , including in relation to climate change .
The Commission recognises the serious social impact upon women of climate change , as well as the important role of women in combating climate change .
The Commission , back in October 2009 , called for there to be a platform for women to make their voices heard , in particular as agents in the fight against climate change .
In addition to this , the Commission is working closely with Member States and the EU Presidencies for the development of indicators for the follow-up at EU level of the 12 areas of concern of the so-called Beijing Platform for Action .
In this respect , in the strategy for equality between women and men 2010-2015 , the Commission has designated the development of indicators in the area of women and the environment among the priorities of the future work of the European Gender Equality Institute .
We also understand that in the first half of next year , the Danish Presidency wishes to develop indicators in this field with a particular focus on climate change .
A report is to be prepared by the European Gender Equality Institute and specific conclusions could be adopted by the Council on this issue towards the end of the Danish Presidency semester .
So climate change and women is very much on the agenda .
Thank you for your comprehensive answer .
A couple of years ago the Commission announced that the main security threat now is climate change and that mankind has approximately 10 years in which to make the changes reversible .
I personally am of the opinion that the economic crisis , revolutions in North Africa and now Fukushima have distracted attention from the fight against climate change .
Do you have this impression as well ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission has actually already responded to similar written questions from the honourable Member Mr Ziobro on the cost of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union by 2020 and on the question of carbon leakage , back in March and April 2010 .
The EU has managed to decouple its economic growth from its emissions .
EU GDP has increased by 45 % since 1990 while emissions have been reduced by 13 % , and that includes 2010 figures , meaning that was after we exited the crisis .
Over the same period , the European Union manufacturing industry grew by more than 30 % .
These figures show that continued growth can go hand in hand with reducing emissions .
For instance , it is actually estimated that , between 2005 and 2009 , 550 000 new jobs were provided by the renewable energy industry alone .
Firstly , with regard to carbon leakage , the Commission would like to stress that in the latest amendment of the ETS Directive the European Parliament and the Council have decided to tackle this issue by allocating a higher share of free allowances for sectors and subsectors deemed to be at a significant risk of carbon leakage .
The Commission 's analysis published back in May last year confirmed that free allocation is an effective means to address the potential risk of carbon leakage .
Moreover , the risks for carbon leakage have been reduced further , since now more than 80 countries , amongst which all emerging economies , are implementing the pledges they committed to in Copenhagen and are implementing their domestic targets .
I must say that the Commission has no evidence that companies are moving their production outside the EU due to climate policy .
Secondly , the European Commission has assessed in detail the costs and benefits of CO2 emission reductions on the European economy in the framework of the Climate and Energy package agreed back in 2008 .
More recent analysis conducted in 2010 shows that the costs of meeting the 20 % greenhouse gas reduction target have fallen by at least one third compared to the analysis made in 2008 .
Now they are estimated at EUR 48 billion , which represents 0.32 % of the projected 2020 GDP .
Having said that , it should also be mentioned that some of these investments will come back in , for instance , saved oil expenditure .
In developing the climate and energy package , the Commission has taken due account of the different circumstances in the Member States in terms of economic development , wealth and energy mix .
In addition , the climate and energy package contains three specific mechanisms to balance overall costs across Member States , so that efforts are shared in a fair and equitable manner .
( PL ) Mr President , thank you very much for having been so kind as to include my question .
In view of the fact that we are running very late , however , I will limit myself to one consideration , if I may .
I will happily pass on information to the Commissioner regarding companies which are deciding to transfer production outside EU Member States due to the constraints associated with reduced CO2 emissions .
In my opinion , if I present you with these concrete facts then the Commission will also be persuaded to analyse the negative consequences this process has for the European Union economies .
In view of the fact that CO2 emissions know no borders , and that after production is transferred emissions will continue , which will unavoidably have a negative impact on the environment , the European Union economy will lose out , since it is exporting jobs .
Member of the Commission . - We all agree with that , of course .
That is also the reason why , through the benchmark system , we have ensured that the sectors most exposed to carbon leakage will get almost all of their allowances for free .
But let me correct just one misunderstanding : I think we should be very careful in the European Union and not believe that others are doing nothing .
Last week , I came back from Korea .
They are also introducing carbon trading now ; they are finding out exactly how to do it .
They will start it on 1 January 2015 .
China is carrying out huge pilot projects on carbon trading .
They want to make it a national system in the very near future .
They are also introducing environmental taxes , and so on and so forth .
I could cite a lot of economies that we are competing with who have now realised that they also have to conduct ambitious environment policies , energy policies and climate policies .
They have also realised that , if they do this intelligently , it will benefit their economies in the end .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20.20 and resumed at 21.00 )

Textile names and related labelling of textile products ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Mr Manders on behalf of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on textile fibre names and related labelling and marking of fibre composition of textile products and repealing Council Directive 73 / 44 / EEC , Directive 96 / 73 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Directive 2008 / 121 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 13807 / 4 / 2010 - C7-0017 / 2011 - .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , I want to thank everyone and , in particular , all the shadow rapporteurs for the excellent cooperation we have experienced .
I want to thank the Commission for the way in which we have worked together .
I also want to thank the Council , because I believe that , thanks to the Hungarian Presidency , we have broken the impasse on this particular issue .
What I am particularly happy about is the fact that this is a regulation and not a directive .
I take the view that regulations are the right tool for completing the Internal Market , which is , incidentally , what Professor Monti also clearly demonstrated in his research .
We are producing too much legislation that is implemented at various levels , and because of that the Internal Market is failing to function as it should .
I am happy that this issue is being discussed in this case and I note that we have , indeed , improved a number of things on that score .
The proposal was dealt with by the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
In the original proposal , there was , in fact , hardly any mention of the consumer ; we , as politicians , understood that we also have to protect the interests of the consumer in this report , as , indeed , we have done .
There are several important considerations and here I am thinking , in particular , of research into allergic reactions .
The Commission has indicated that it is prepared to carry out a study of these important issues .
It will present the study by 30 September 2013 at the latest and incorporate the positive results from the study into additional legislation .
The Council has stated that it would be willing to help think things through , if the result is positive and attainable .
Let us consider allergic reactions and chemical substances - we are witnessing increasing numbers of consumers developing allergic reactions when wearing certain clothes or eating , smelling or inhaling certain products .
We believe it is necessary to examine the possibility of warning consumers of such potential allergic reactions .
Very often , deceptive trade practices are also going on .
In fact , they have been prohibited in the European Union since 2005 , but we can see that there is too little clarity about the country of manufacture when it comes to made-in labels .
There is too little legislation available , which means that it is quite often abused .
We have also asked the Commission to examine the possibility of laying down clear laws and conditions , in order to ensure that manufacturers who claim a particular product was manufactured in , say , the Netherlands , Italy or Germany can guarantee that that really is the case .
We do not want situations where 99 % of a product is made in China and only the finishing jobs are carried out in one of the Member States of the European Union , but the lovely ' Made in Europe ' label is still attached to it .
This would also cover counterfeiting , for example .
What I am particularly pleased about is the fact that we are opening the door to modern technologies , that we are not sticking with simple old-fashioned textile labels in textile products and that we are actually going to look into the possibility of using modern technologies in order to provide the consumer with the best possible information .
The Council has already directly agreed to labels indicating whether garments contain animal products , because it is becoming more and more difficult to work out whether a piece of fur is real or fake , and there are a great number of consumers for whom that kind of information is important .
The upcoming study by the European Commission is particularly intended to eliminate barriers to the proper functioning of the Internal Market and to anticipate developments in the area of electronic commerce .
Because , if we want there to be more e-commerce , then we have to ensure there are European standards for labelling .
I hope this study will lead to clarity on this .
It also seems to me that , in the modern world , we no longer need to put 23 languages on a label , because modern technologies can provide improved solutions to this problem .
I hope that the Council 's statement tomorrow will be a positive one and that it will assure us of a positive result , and I wish to thank everyone who has contributed to that positive result .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Manders , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great achievement that a second-reading agreement has been reached on the proposal concerning a regulation on the naming of textile fibres and the related labelling of textile products .
This would not have been possible without the close cooperation of the three institutions .
Allow me to convey the appreciation of the Council to the European Parliament for the excellent cooperation .
I would like to thank especially the rapporteur , Mr Toine Manders and his colleagues for the highly valuable work they have contributed to this process .
I also appreciate the work of the Swedish , Spanish and Belgian Presidencies , because the current result is due to their work of superior quality .
The Commission has been a very constructive and cooperative partner throughout the whole period , and thanks are due to them as well .
If all proceeds as planned , the Council will be able to adopt the text of the regulation in early autumn , and therefore the legislation will be applicable from 2012 .
This regulation will significantly contribute to the operation of the Internal Market , and will strengthen competition in this important sector .
The simplification and development of the present regulatory framework for the development and application of new textile fibres will motivate innovation in the textile and clothing industries .
Users of the fibres as well as consumers will be able to enjoy the benefits of the new and innovative products sooner .
The Hungarian Presidency believes that the regulation will provide greater legal certainty for economic operators , and will improve consumer protection on the Internal Market .
As a result of the provision on revision the co-legislators can make informed decisions because the Commission will conduct an in-depth survey on further compulsory labelling requirements .
These may include handling instructions , standardisation of sizes , indication of country of origin and allergens , electronic labelling and other new technologies .
In their draft joint declaration , the European Parliament and the Council emphasise that they attribute particular importance to the traceability of textile products and the use of new technologies .
We hope that the Commission will pay special attention to these issues in its report .
Until then , this piece of legislation will allow rapid authorisation of new textile fibres .
The regulation states that the label must include the accurate fibre make-up , but it also introduces a new labelling requirement concerning non-textile parts of animal origin . As Mr Manders has indicated , as a result consumers can make much more informed decisions .
Furthermore , the fact the legal instrument was created in the form of a regulation will improve legal certainty in this field .
Congratulations , once again , and thank you for your attention .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteur , Mr Manders , together with all the other shadow rapporteurs and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) for their work towards reaching an agreement after difficult negotiations .
I believe it is crucial to reach an agreement at second reading because it will allow citizens and businesses to benefit more quickly from new fibres and innovative products resulting from it , and national governments will be able to reduce costs .
Once again I thank the House for contributing to the interinstitutional debate through the amendments presented , some of which have given particular emphasis to the political dimension and consumer interest in this issue .
In fact , at the first reading of this report when it was adopted by Parliament with a large majority , it was stressed that we need to launch a broad debate on the labelling of textile products , including the issue of origin marking and we proposed to extend the scope of the regulation to certain sectors .
As you all know , the negotiations with the Council in the following months called for flexibility from all sides to identify workable solutions for the institutions .
I believe that the agreed text is a balanced compromise that incorporates many of the amendments presented by Parliament and leaves room for further developments in the near future , which - as Mrs Győri pointed out during her speech - is very important .
In the short term , or as soon as the new regulation comes into force , consumers will have more information about the presence of non-textile parts of animal origin and will also have access to information on the full composition of textile products .
Another immediate result of the new regulation is simplification , since the Commission will turn a detailed technical attachment of more than 50 pages into harmonised European standards .
However , even more importantly , the immediate results of this regulation are not the last stage of the process .
On the contrary , they are a starting point for further analysis and for improving the legislation .
In fact , in the short term the new regulation provides a comprehensive review clause which invites the Commission to set out , where necessary , further labelling requirements in this area .
The Commission will then make suitable legislative proposals in the areas which require greater harmonisation .
It is my intention - and I hereby take on the commitment before Parliament - to deal with this review both immediately and thoroughly .
We are already preparing for the task of consulting consumers on some fundamental questions , namely : what kind of information is important and how should it be made available ; in what way should technological developments , such as electronic commerce , affect the purchase of textile products ; to what extent does the growing need for traceability , sustainability and corporate social responsibility influence the textile fibre market ; how can we make better use of available technology in the digital age ; how can we , as institutions of the European Union , adapt our laws to the growing needs of citizens regarding ethical , social and environmental issues .
Mr President , these are just a few of the topics on which work has already started .
As you can imagine , origin marking will undoubtedly be one of the priorities and core elements of our work .
The review will therefore provide an opportunity to reaffirm my support for origin marking and clarify this issue once and for all , as it is an essential instrument for the competitiveness of European companies and the health of EU citizens .
We will examine this matter in depth in order to provide clear rules , prevent misleading information and facilitate responsible choices by consumers when purchasing textile products .
As stated by the rapporteur , Mr Manders , the Commission will also evaluate the link between allergies and chemicals used in textile products .
Specific analysis in this field will be able to indicate the best way to use existing legislation , such as REACH .
Let me explain briefly : through the use of origin marking , buyers will be sure they are buying a textile product that is not harmful to their health nor that of their children because the labelling will comply with all the rules of this important regulation which , at the cost of significant sacrifices , European institutions have imposed on all industries in this sector .
The review clause - and again I thank the Council for having stressed its importance and declared their willingness to work with the Commission immediately to transpose the regulation - requires the Commission to submit a report , possibly followed by a legislative proposal , by 30 September 2013 .
I am determined to cut down the time required and have already instructed my staff to start work .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have finally reached an agreement on this important dossier , thanks to a great effort from everyone to find common ground between the divergent positions of Parliament and the Council .
My goal was , is and will be to ensure that binding rules are adopted on textile product origins , since consumers and businesses must absolutely be protected .
I believe that the compromise reached today is a very good result .
I urged my fellow Members to fight the Council , and I use the word ' fight ' with good reason , because negotiations have not been at all easy .
We fought not only to achieve origin markings but also for traceability .
The latter represents a key piece of information for the consumer before a product is purchased .
Today , European consumers find textile products labelled ' Made in Italy ' , ' Made in Germany ' or ' Made in France ' , when in fact they have been almost entirely produced elsewhere .
We also ask for new labelling technologies , such as microchips and Radio-Frequency Identification ( RFID ) , to be used in order to combat product counterfeiting .
It is true that we have expanded the scope of the proposal for a regulation because we believe that the textile sector urgently needs greater protection .
The joint declaration to be adopted by Parliament and the Council shows the importance of traceability and origin marking .
I do not hide the fact that the Council 's volte-face makes me confident for the future .
We await with great interest the study requested from the Commission , whom we thank once again for their cooperation , and I thank the Mr Tajani sincerely for having just committed himself to reducing the timescales involved , because the textile industry is in urgent need .
We cannot leave unheeded our citizens ' need for truthful product information .
After all , we are all consumers and reaching this objective is in everyone 's interest .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to say a very big thank you for the excellent compromise that we have reached .
The rapporteur , Mr Manders , in particular has done some sterling work and he ensured that we experienced truly excellent cooperation here in the European Parliament .
We have come a long way since the Commission tabled its original proposal .
It was a mainly technical proposal and it was one that only contained benefits for businesses .
Fortunately , however , by working on the proposal here in the European Parliament , we succeeded in incorporating elements that make this legislation beneficial for consumers , too .
I believe that this is absolutely crucial .
As a result , we will have better labelling and a higher level of safety for consumers once we have finally implemented this legislation .
The most important aspect for me and for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament was to ensure that the textiles that are sold on the Internal Market do not cause health problems .
We are therefore very pleased that the requirement for there to be no residues of hazardous substances in our textiles that could give rise to allergies was successfully voted through - and , as the Commissioner has just said , that we are to have a study carried out to ensure that this is the case .
This is absolutely vital and it is something that we in the S & D Group are very pleased about .
We also agree that traceability and origin are extremely important , and this is also the type of information that consumers are very keen to have .
Personally , I also hope that we can achieve a little bit more than this and that we might also be able to have harmonised clothes sizes and use new technologies in our labelling of textiles in the future .
I do think that we have achieved a great deal , however .
It should be a lesson for us that , when we lay down legislation here in the EU , it is important for it to benefit both businesses and consumers at the same time .
That is the best way to ensure that we have a well-functioning Internal Market .
I would like to finish by expressing my sincere thanks once again to all my fellow Members for their outstanding cooperation .
I think we have achieved a very good result .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( RO ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur Toine Manders for the fine job he has done and for the perseverance he has shown in the negotiations with the Council on this proposal for a regulation .
I welcome the agreement which has been reached with the Council at second reading .
I believe that this is an agreement which , although it can be improved , will boost the competitiveness of the textile industry , while at the same time providing consumers with better information .
This agreement has a large number of positive points .
Firstly , the procedure for including new fibres in Annex I has been simplified .
This will help reduce the administrative costs for the textile industry and allow this money to be reallocated to innovation .
This measure will also benefit consumers as innovation is encouraged .
I also think that this regulation will offer benefits to consumers due to the labelling requirements .
Providing consumers with sufficient information so that they can make an enlightened choice is a completely natural step .
The discussions about the labelling have lasted longer than the Commission initially proposed .
However , I think that this can only benefit European consumers .
I agree that we need more time to evaluate the impact of some additional labelling requirements , especially regarding origin , the care treatment method and the introduction of a harmonised size labelling system .
This is why the study carried out by the Commission marks a first step forward .
Finally , I believe that the labelling requirement for non-textile parts of animal origin is a sign of real progress as it is consumers who do not want the textile products they buy to contain such materials .
I think that , as a whole , this regulation will help deepen the single market for textiles , a move which I fully endorse .
Mr President , simplifying the binding legal framework in respect of the labelling of textile products is intended to encourage the development of new textiles and their introduction onto the market .
The proposal we will vote on tomorrow differs significantly from that put forward by the European Commission , which mainly consisted in technical changes simplifying legislation already in force .
The original aim of the report was to speed up the procedure for registering the names of new textiles , in order to provide effective support for innovation in the European textile and clothing industry , while at the same time making it possible for consumers to benefit more rapidly from modern products .
Despite the fact that work on the simplification of procedures has slowed down during the more than two years spent on this dossier , I would note that Parliament proposed extending the original scope of the regulation , in particular to include provisions concerning the country of origin of textile products , so I am glad that a balanced compromise has been reached .
I would point out , however , that my group decided to approve the proposal in its initial version , which provides rapid benefits for business and consumers .
We proposed right from the start that work on these issues should not take place in the context of the technical report .
The Commission will therefore be asked to carry out a more in-depth analysis of the issue of mandatory ' made in ' labels for textile products manufactured outside the EU , and by 2013 it will produce a report on the possible launch of a system for country-of-origin labelling for products .
This report may be accompanied by a legislative proposal .
The compromise between Parliament and the Council also guarantees that labels on clothing products will provide information regarding the use of materials of animal origin .
If work is to be carried out in future on new opportunities for informing consumers about textile products , for example Europe-wide size harmonisation or RFID technology , let us remember to take a pragmatic approach , in line with consumers ' expectations and what industry can achieve .
Mr President , we say that consumer power is important , and if we are serious about this we clearly must also give consumers the opportunity to use their power .
We must ensure that they have adequate product information etc. to be able to make wise and informed choices .
I would therefore like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Manders , in particular for his persistence and commitment to ensure that the report includes the consumer perspective .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , who have shown a great deal of commitment to increasing consumer power .
As shadow rapporteur , I have tabled an amendment on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left concerning origin labelling , mandatory labelling of animal products and ethical and environmental labelling .
It has not all been included , but I am very pleased with the compromise that we now have and I would like to express my support for it .
There is a lack of information when it comes to chemicals and various products used in textile manufacture .
The Commission has promised to carry out a study of this , and I would simply like to emphasise how very important it is that we have such a study done in order to be able to protect public health and combat allergies , among other things , in which we have seen a significant increase .
We need to be able to see , and , where present , substantiate the connections that exist .
I am also pleased that parts of textile products of animal origin are also to be labelled , and I wanted to use my speaking time to say thank you to everyone for their excellent work to increase consumer power . Thank you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the measure in question is designed to replace three obsolete directives and relates to the labelling of textile products entering the European Union and the registration and naming of the substances they are made of .
A text was adopted at first reading which called for labels to indicate the place of origin as well as a complete and mandatory list of the product 's composition .
Unfortunately , the Council 's position appears to contradict the text approved by Parliament since , in particular , it is against any reference to origin marking and the introduction of traceability in textile product labelling .
Just to get the measure approved at the second reading , the Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) Committee has agreed to a text which does not satisfy us because it does not provide for origin marking .
We will therefore vote against it , because the aim of providing consumers with correct and accurate information about the origin and composition of the product has not been met .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , through this new regulation on textile product labelling , which we will vote on in plenary tomorrow , Europe will reach an objective it has been pursuing for years .
However , it can only be considered a first step towards comprehensive legislation to protect all European consumers by indicating the country of origin and adopting a new and accurate traceability mechanism .
I welcome the invitation to the European Commission to draft a legislative proposal for the adoption of new , more accurate and complete labelling systems .
These will offer greater information about the characteristics and origins of textile products imported from third countries and sold in the European Union , thereby protecting consumers from false , improper and deceptive claims of origin .
I hope it will encourage innovation in textiles and clothing , making it easier for consumers to benefit from innovative products .
The proposal also supports the European manufacturing industry and guarantees its business in the global context .
Finally , through these measures Parliament is sending the governments of the Member States a positive message in order that they will consent to the introduction of textile product traceability .
This will provide consumers with more comprehensive and truthful information than under current legislation on origin marking and avoid them being misled .
We now need the regulations on textile product labelling to be extended to all other market sectors , thereby coordinating the various legislative proposals and insisting that the fibres and textiles proposal , as well as the general origin marking regulation approved in Strasbourg last October , are adopted the Council in short order .
As Mr Tajani has already emphasised , the deadline of 30 September 2013 is too distant .
We are therefore relying on his stated commitment to bring it forward .
( ES ) Mr President , I should like to start my speech by congratulating all those who have made it possible to reach an agreement .
It is a report that we should all welcome because it affects the day-to-day lives of all members of the public , but , in the constructive spirit characteristic of me , I should like to point out a few things .
To begin with , I should like to draw attention to the importance of providing consumers with information that is precise and relevant , but above all comprehensible and uniform , regarding the components of textile products : exhaustive information is useless if the public is then unable to decipher it .
We have achieved a step forward that is necessary but not enough : we must make further progress and protect the most vulnerable members of the public .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is essential to establish a European size labelling system based on body measurements , because the first thing we look for when we go to buy clothes is the size .
We must therefore be much more ambitious and seek the harmonisation of sizes .

( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Manders and offer particular praise for the fact that the request that parts made of animal fur be identified has now been included .
Labelling is good for consumers , as we all know .
We also know how important it is to have freedom of choice , and in order for consumers to be able to make considered choices it is necessary to have good information that is truthful and easy to understand .
In this regard , I have a problem with origin labelling .
Modern products are often made up of textiles and parts from different countries and it is almost impossible to correctly label an item of clothing with its origin .
Mr Manders touched on this himself : where do we draw the line , what should we label and how much should come from a particular country ?
In the modern global world , origin labelling could be a way of enabling consumers to be well-informed and to make the right choices .
However , it could also be a sign of hidden protectionism , and sometimes when I hear these speeches I feel that I can both hear and see this .
It is open borders and free trade that has made Europe rich and Europe 's consumers know that . Thank you .
( DA ) Mr President , the textile industry is a global industry .
The clothes that we wear have often been around the world before they end up with the EU 's consumers as finished products .
This report is comprehensive , thorough and very technical .
Finding the right balance between competitiveness , consumers ' right to information and the possibility of traceability at global level is difficult .
Consumers have a right to know what chemical substances were used in the manufacture of a product , where the raw materials come from and other relevant information .
However , how do we find the balance between an endless declaration in the collar of an item of clothing and a small label that simply says that the clothing should not be washed ?
Labelling must be unambiguous and provide clear information to enable citizens to make their choice according to their own conceptions .
This compromise is a step in the right direction .
However , the study by the Commission will not be carried out until 2013 .
This study is to form the basis for how consumers , via the labelling , can obtain ' accurate information on the country of origin and additional information ensuring full traceability of textile products ' .
I hope that this basis will translate into a sensible and useable piece of legislation .
2013 is still a long way off , so I am pleased that the Commissioner wishes to bring forward the date for legislation that will provide full information for consumers .
Thank you Commissioner .
The European Conservatives and Reformists will vote in favour of the proposal .
( FR ) Mr President , in 2005 the abolition of textile quotas left the doors of the Union wide open to all kinds of dumping .
That was disastrous for employment and the environment , and , despite appearances , it is disastrous in the long term for consumer health .
It is high time that we introduced measures aiming to protect and develop jobs and to promote know-how among textile employees , as well as consumer health .
Even though we wanted to go further , we are approving the proposals that have been submitted to us concerning origin labelling , the study on hazardous substances and the mandatory marking of the fibre composition of textiles .
We must still make sure that we have the resources to implement this protection and information in all the Member States and to take action against offenders .
Yes , we must make sure that we have the resources to combat counterfeiting - at the borders of the Union , for example , but also in the very heart of the Single Market .
This is a question of political will .
It has to be said that , unfortunately , more resources are being put into tracking down Tunisians at the French-Italian border than into combating the sale of counterfeits .
If we consider that fact , then , it is clearly better to be a commodity than a human being in Europe .
We must change this .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while thanking the President of the Commission and Mr Tajani for their efforts , we of Lega Nord must say that we are completely and utterly dissatisfied .
This debate seems surreal to me .
It is a con , a downright con .
Some excited left-wing Members are suggesting that we agree on uniform sizing , while we do not know the origin of the goods worn by consumers .
So much for free market !
I would like the surreal debate of this Tuesday evening - which was held in a half-empty Parliament - to be heard by a few thousand of the manufacturers that survived the crisis in the sector .
I understand the logic of compromise , but the current text destroys the one which resulted from the first reading and was voted for by an overwhelming majority .
It was a balanced text that took account of the needs of both producers and consumers .
Since then it has been a complete fiasco : if I am not mistaken only two out of the 27 Member States have asked that the consumer be informed of the composition of garments , and the Hungarian Presidency of the Council has ignored this fact .
Is this not yet another demonstration that Europe is light years away from the interests of citizens , be they producers or consumers ?
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Győri , please let me divide the topic of labelling textile products into two important issues .
The first important issue is that it is necessary to indicate where , which country a textile product originates from .
The other important issue is of course that the materials the textile product is made of should also be indicated accurately .
A single system of regulations is of course beneficial in both cases .
If we take a look at the first issue , namely , the origin of products , it makes sense to begin with the cliché that there is an ongoing crisis in the European Union that is due mainly to the fact that production industries , for example the textile industry , were outsourced to different countries in the Far East for easy and quick profits , and therefore production in the European Union has declined .
We have to find the breakout points that will help the European Union overcome the crisis .
The textile industry is especially such a sector , along with , for example , agriculture , machine production or tourism .
European manufacturers are at a marked disadvantage in the textile industry , because the dumping of cheap and poor quality products from the Far East makes it impossible for European manufacturers to make progress .
Country of origin must be indicated , and I would definitely support even the indication of the EU Member State , trusting the wisdom of costumers who support their own economies , as everyone will see , say , a Bulgarian , a Czech , a Hungarian or a German person , that they are buying a product manufactured in their own country .
We must protect our markets with new technologies , and the quality of materials must be indicated , backed by strict laboratory testing .
- ( CS ) Mr President , it was one year ago last week that a very comprehensive bill on labelling textile products , as tabled by our Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , was passed by a large majority at first reading .
I greatly applaud the work of the rapporteur , Toine Manders , and others who negotiated up to the last minute with the Council on a compromise at the second reading , which allows the more rapid introduction of new fibres in European manufacturing and improves product safety .
I must express regret , however , over the fact that the Council has so stubbornly refused to introduce country of origin labelling and to harmonise size labelling .
I am very disappointed with the approach of the Council , which deprives consumers of the right to find out before purchasing where a significant part of a product was made .
After all , this not classified information .
It will reinforce the promotion of high-quality European brands , and will rightly inspire pride in citizens for what Europeans still manage to produce , despite the competition from cheap labour .
If consumers know where a product was made , they will also more easily avoid purchasing hazardous products , of which there are still very many , despite improved controls .
This is absolutely not about protectionism .
I am pleased that the Commission , at least , is prepared to present an impactsassessment by September 2013 , which , apart from country of origin , will also focus on harmonised methods for treating products , size labelling , and the inclusion of information on hazardous substances , allergens , flammability and so on .
It remains to be seen whether this will have any effect in two years ' time on the Council , which protects the interests of businesses importing textiles from third countries more than it protects European producers and consumers .
It is also up to us , however , to convince people about this , not only here in Brussels , but also our governments at home , if we want to achieve these goals .
I would like to end by thanking Toine Manders once again , as well as the Commissioner and everyone else , for today 's result .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal for a regulation is worthy of support because it helps to simplify and harmonise the different laws in the Member States .
The proposal sends out a signal that is in line with the Commission 's proposals on small and medium-sized enterprises and the strategies to stimulate European competitiveness in the manufacturing sector .
The regulation also implicitly rewards product innovation and contributes to greater transparency in the process .
However , I would point out that the compromise reached with the insertion of the review clause and the joint statement by Parliament and the Council on origin marking - the political significance of which is not lost on me - could set a precedent and compromise the outcome of the difficult negotiations between the Commission , Parliament and the Council on the complex issue of origin marking for non-EU products , which Parliament approved at first reading last October and which concerns non-textile products also .
It is high time that the Council acknowledged once and for all the democratic will expressed here by the majority of MEPs .
However , despite these concerns , we will vote in favour of the proposal for a regulation .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while on the one hand this report contains useful measures designed to simplify and harmonise this area , on the other hand I oppose it because we did not manage to include a reference to origin marking within the text .
This measure would have been of fundamental importance for the textile sector , and would have provided a guarantee for European citizens and consumers .
Our main competitors , such as the United States , Japan and even China , have already been applying a similar rule on imported products for some time .
Who knows why , but Europe seems to consider this point to be completely irrelevant and extraneous .
The issue , however , is anything but trivial : labels with origin marking can help prevent fraud , as well as protect quality .
Just last week in Prato , my hometown , more than 73 000 counterfeit items were seized and the majority of them were textile products .
Counterfeiting , imitations , extremely low-cost manufacturing in the Far East , and so on , have brought our textile and manufacturing sector to its knees , and Europe ignores our every request .
Forgoing origin marking is , sadly , only the latest terrible idea .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( IT ) Mr President , I am addressing the Members from the Lega Nord party to ask what their party has done during the negotiations and the trialogue , since I personally , together with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , asked them to make an active contribution .
It is right to criticise , but it would be better to work together to achieve tangible results and not just reel off slogans .
( IT ) Mr President , during the first reading in committee , a completely different text - one including the product origin certificate - was approved .
It is not clear why the Council and the Commission gave up on this point : we do not intend to give up , and so we are voting against the report precisely because the origin certificate has been omitted .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all here to assess a text that certainly contains a few gaps , since I think that - as is often said in this House - we all wanted something more ambitious .
However , we are also all aware that we are on the right track .
Obviously , a clear and mandatory labelling system for all items of clothing allows for greater control and means that fraud and illegality can be combated more effectively .
For example , there was practically unanimous praise for the fact that this text makes it obligatory to indicate where trimmings are of non-textile animal origin .
We hope that this will make for a more effective fight against the heinous trade in dog and cat furs , which are used as trimmings on garments placed illegally on our market .
We had hoped for a more ambitious plan including an indication of the place of origin , or at least immediate origin marking for products from those third countries that are notorious for not respecting any rules or regulations protecting consumers , workers , the environment or children - rules and regulations which are now established practice in Europe and represent a genuine guarantee for our consumers and citizens .
I should like us all to remember , however , that this is a battle we must win together and by working as a unit because , as Mrs Comi pointed out , this fight began a long time ago and today we are marking important progress .
The consumer consultations that the Commissioner has pledged to carry out will be a fundamental step , not only for the textile sector but also for all those sectors in which Parliament has often questioned the general public 's desire for information concerning place of origin .
I think that this information will be at the top of consumers ' list of preferences , and I acknowledge the efforts made on this matter by all those Members who worked personally on this important text .
( HU ) Mr President , we must pay particular attention to the interests of consumers during the discussion of the report .
Accurate indications and labelling must be sought , because these are the measures by which the added value of the European Union can be displayed for consumers .
The current legislation in force allows for derogation .
This means competitive disadvantages for the European Union , so the time has come to a legislative revision in line with the present market relations .
The rapporteur may be right in that there is no sufficient evidence for the potential effects of hazardous materials applied .
Conversely , maybe the rapporteur is not right , and it would be advisable to examine this issue more closely .
It is also important to assess cause and effect relations , if any , between allergic reactions and synthetic fibres and colourants used in textile products .
Therefore the issues concerning quality , origin and traceability must be given even higher priority .
Mr President , EU citizens have a right to know the make-up of the clothes they wear and this regulation will allow them to avoid purchasing products containing non-textile parts of animal origin , whether for health , ethical or other considerations .
When used in garments , for example as trimmings , such materials are currently not subject to mandatory labelling ; most consumers are unaware of this and may not know the exact make-up of the textiles they buy .
EU legislation providing for this already exists for footwear , and it makes sense to provide our consumers with the same level of information when they buy their clothes .
Allergy sufferers in particular stand to gain from this proposal , as fur is potentially hazardous to their health , and the Commission must also study the possibility that potentially hazardous materials and chemicals used in textiles may lead to allergic reactions .
Future applications of new textile fibre names must include available scientific data on possible allergic reactions and other adverse effects on human health .
It should be stressed that these are balanced proposals which exempt clothes made by self-employed tailors from such labelling requirements .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , rather than a technical debate , I think this is more of a policy debate within the context of decisions made by the institutions of the European Union - in this case Parliament , the Commission and the Council - to boost the real economy .
The European Commission and the Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship intend to carry on supporting industrial policy and small and medium-sized enterprises , partly so as to provide answers to our citizens on the issue of the quality of the products made by our businesses .
The competitiveness of the European economy is also measured in terms of product quality as a factor in the protection of the health of our fellow citizens .
That is why this evening , at the end of this debate , the European Commission is renewing its desire to press ahead with origin labelling .
As I already announced - and in order to reassure Mr Cancian and all the other honourable Members who have voiced concern about the overly long timescales - I can confirm that we will try to present our work ahead of schedule .
In this regard , I confirm that I have authorised my staff to continue down our chosen path , because the Commission has always supported origin labelling both for products made in the European Union and for those that are imported .
This evening 's debate has certainly not been fruitless , because Mrs Győri clearly stated that the Council sets great store by the clause we are discussing - which is the key to today 's policy debate - and that it is ready to reach a forward-looking rather than a backward-looking agreement with the Commission and Parliament in order to provide our citizens with real answers .
I continue to believe that the traceability issue affects the competitiveness of SMEs and - just as my top priority since being appointed as a European Commissioner has been SME policy , so continuing the work of my predecessor - I intend to continue protecting the health of consumers through quality products which will be the only competitive ones on the international market , because the competitiveness of European Union products is measured in terms of quality .
That is why I think it is important to continue working in this direction .
I am satisfied with the agreement reached between the co-legislators .
As you well know , Parliament and the Council have to assess it at second reading , but the European Commission intends to seize back the policy initiative and reinvigorate it .
In other words , the Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship intends to start work immediately on ensuring the protection of our products , for the sake of the competitiveness of our businesses and the health of our citizens .
Before concluding , I should like to mention our commitment to supporting innovation in the textile and clothing sector .
Adjusting legislation is one way of defending our competitiveness , but there are other industrial policy initiatives in the works as well .
I will mention just two of them .
We are developing measures to support the transfer of research outcomes and their transformation into tangible , marketable products and services .
We are also preparing a communication on the fundamental aspects of competitiveness in the fashion industry .
All of this goes towards underlining the need to protect European businesses and the fact that there can be no growth and development , and above all no jobs , in a social and market economy situation in which the market - which is also a fundamental instrument of our European Union - does not pursue a higher and more important goal , namely social policy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Let me respond in a few words to the questions concerning the indication of the country of origin , because this was the most exciting part of the debate , and I must say that this issue generated a lively debate not only during the consultation with Parliament but also in the Council , and we discussed this issue at great length .
Since consultations on the horizontal proposal concerning the country of origin in trade policy have not ended yet , it did not seem appropriate for us to create a precedent that would jeopardize the proposal and prejudice the outcome of that debate .
We also considered the possibility of establishing a system operating on a voluntary basis for indicating the place of manufacture .
In practice this option is already open to operators .
But if we laid down this voluntary system in a regulation , without a proper implementation mechanism , it would lead to unjustified burdens and distortions , and that is something we wanted to avoid by all means .
I am positive that the Commission report will assess the effects of a possible system for designating origin , so that the legislators can make a sound decision at a future point .
( IT ) ( ... )
I must also express my gratitude to Mr Tajani for his willingness to speed up the work in the Commission aimed at finding a solution on this highly important matter .
( HU ) So at the end of the day , it seemed to be a practicable solution to include a review clause in the text , and also settle the topic in a paragraph in the preamble , and it is a great pleasure for me that Mrs Lara Comi , who was the most important representative of the topic today and who is also a pioneer of the issue , has also said that this solution is an acceptable and good solution and can serve as a basis for joint work in the future .
So I would like to thank everybody for this useful debate once again , it is good that now we have a schedule concerning the future as well , and it is very important for us that , as several Members have indicated , we can combat counterfeiting as efficiently as possible and that the European consumer can trust the traceability of textile products .
So on behalf of the Presidency I would like to once again thank the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteur , the chairman of the IMCO committee and his colleagues for their joint efforts aimed at reaching an agreement on this piece of legislation in the second reading , through which the Internal Market of textile products can operate even more efficiently .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection stands for free trade and against protectionism .
Protectionism was never the intention behind this proposal , but what it is intended to do is to ensure that modern technologies are used to provide adequate information for the consumer and also to provide accurate information .
I also find it nonsensical that some members should say , after the first reading , ' Well , that is over , so now we can carry on regardless ' , because we in this House know that if we want to carry on as we were and if we want something other than what the Council or the Commission wants , then we will be thwarted in that aim .
It is easy to call your attention to this now , but I do think this is the right way forward .
I have seen how strongly Mr Tajani has supported our compromise and I call on Minister Györi to be just as strong in his attempts to persuade the Council to accept the positive elements which the study produces and enshrine them in legislation .
If that happens , I think that we will be able to show that we are making laws which are beneficial for our industry , for our consumers and also for us , because we do need to retain public support in Europe .
I thank everyone for their support and once again , Mr Tajani , thank you for your support and I hope that we will have the results of the study as soon as possible .
I also hope that the President-in-Office will succeed in persuading the Council that we can set to work in a positive spirit .
I think that the future will show that the course we are now taking is a template , an example for a great number of sectors , a course that is worth the trouble we are taking .
No legislation should ever be based on emotions , because that is not what anyone wants .
On the other hand , legislation which is underpinned and supported by scientific arguments , with input from all parties , and which will eventually lead to legislation that is acceptable for all , whilst still being workable - now , that will lead to greater prosperity in Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 11 May at 12 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
We know that on 30 January 2009 , the Commission adopted the current proposal on a regulation on textile fibre names and related labelling of textile products .
The aim of the proposal is to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products with a view to encouraging the development and uptake of new fibres .
The proposal facilitates the process to adapt legislation to technical progress by transforming the three existing directives into a single regulation , which would avoid transposition of merely technical updates , and shortens the time between the submission of an application and the adoption of a new fibre name .
The majority of Parliament supports the simplification of the existing regulatory framework , which encourages innovation in the textile and clothing sector , whilst allowing fibre users and consumers to benefit more readily from innovative products .
In its position at first reading , adopted on 18 May 2010 , Parliament approved 63 amendments with a very large majority , including rules on origin marking , indication of animal-derived materials , use of language-independent symbols and a review clause , but the Council did not accept everything .
It is important that it accept several proposals , particularly those on origin marking .
Therefore , we support the majority of the positions adopted here .
Stress tests of the EU banking sector ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the question for oral answer to the Commission on the 2011 stress test of the EU banking sector by Mrs Wortmann-Kool , Mr Gauzès and Mr García-Margallo y Marfil on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - B7-0216 / 2011 ) ,
the question for oral answer to the Commission on stress tests of the EU banking sector by Mrs Bowles , Mrs Goulard , Mr Sterckx , Mr Haglund and Mr Schmidt on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( B7-0219 / 2011 ) and
the question for oral answer to the Commission on stress tests of the EU banking sector in 2011 by Mr Bullmann on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( B7-0309 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has concerns about the European banking sector stress test which is to take place in June , because last year 's stress test lacked credibility and the consequences of that were painfully obvious when the Irish banks that passed the test landed in serious trouble shortly thereafter .
We need to ensure that the same thing does not happen this year .
The question is whether our financial sector is equipped to cope with severe weather .
This knowledge is important , if we are to restore confidence in the financial sector .
Hence my question to the Commissioner : what are the most important changes that have been made to ensure that , this year , there is no repeat of the failure of last year 's stress test ?
Mr President , last year individual countries were able to decide which banks would undergo the stress test , but this year the newly-established European Banking Authority has been charged with ensuring equal criteria for every bank and for every Member State .
This stress test will be a test , not only of the banks , but also of the credibility of the new supervision structure .
Is the Commission happy with the fact that , while in some countries the stress test will cover 85 % of the banking sectors , in others it will cover barely more than 50 % ?
Now , that is a rather remarkable statistic , and I am curious to hear your explanation of this point .
Mr President , we need a robust European crisis resolution mechanism for cross-border banks and while , by obtaining the results of the stress test as early as June , we might be helping banks in difficulty , we will be missing an opportunity , in that we will still not have a European crisis resolution mechanism in place .
The PPE Group encourages you to come up with ambitious proposals and you will be able to count on our support here in Parliament .
author . - Mr President , I should like to say this to the Commissioner : the bank crisis resolution is being elaborated at an international level and there are also important competition issues to address , but this does not mean that everything has to wait , in particular when we have a combined sovereign debt and banking crisis .
Last year 's tests were weak .
We said so then and have repeatedly said that bank stress tests must be credible , robust and transparent .
Indeed we need a whole lot more banking transparency in general .
So I suggest that we take a lesson from the US and the Dodd Frank Act which requires disclosure , with a two-year time lag , of the US Fed 's liquidity provision .
There are European names in the US disclosures , and it would be an altogether healthy thing for EU central banks to follow suit with similar disclosure about support during 2008 and 2009 as an accompaniment to the new stress tests .
Now these new stress tests are improved under the EBA but there are still issues being avoided due to guarding and prevarication by Member States .
It is about time that the message sank in that feeble political will is not the answer to this crisis and makes solutions more expensive .
Why try and hide the full level of banks ' exposure to sovereign debt , especially when we all know the likely reality ?
There really is no excuse not to stress-test the banking book .
Various assets got parked there , under the heading of Hold to Maturity , which would have been moved if they had not lost value .
Of course , analysts in the market are well able to read across from stress tests and other information and make an estimate as to what is going on in the banking books .
But a darker interpretation , reflecting on some Member States themselves , will be cast by the fact that Member States - and in many cases the supervisors are the culprits - were not bolder incoming clean .
Meanwhile actions are being provoked by the stress tests ; banks are seeking capital ; some Member States are being proactive in pushing banks to raise capital .
But there is no overall plan to address under-capitalisation .
This simply does not stack up ; surely one thing we have learned in the crisis is that we are very interconnected .
If banks do not trust one another and inter-bank lending is frozen , we have a big problem .
So please can we have proper disclosed coordination of the response ?
But let us not dodge the elephant in the room : this is not just about banks , it is about sovereign debt and the stability of the euro : inextricably linked and overwhelmingly important .



Mr President , Commissioner , it is time to carry out European stress tests that are transparent , flexible , reliable and effective : their quality and credibility are a necessary contribution to financial stability and the reestablishment of market confidence .
Stress tests are an essential supervisory tool for evaluating the specific solvency of individual banks and the ability of the system as a whole to withstand stress .
The intention of their design and implementation is to calculate how banks would withstand stress under certain adverse conditions , and to detect risks of contagion in order to prevent a domino effect that could lead to collapse .
The European Union has prior experience with stress tests , carried out by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors ( CEBS ) .
The experience dates from May 2009 , when the Ecofin Council mandated the CEBS to organise stress tests on the financial system , in cooperation with the European Commission and the European Central Bank .
The goal was to have a level of aggregated information on the ability of the European financial system as a whole to withstand stress , and they focused on the 22 largest banks .
The results were not made public , because the market was very sensitive , it was said at the time .
All that was released was a methodology providing for three outcomes - the best , average and worst - and the purpose of the tests was not market transparency .
During their development , in July 2009 , guidelines proposed by the Commission on state aid were adopted , establishing that banks needing financial aid to tackle the crisis should also be subjected to stress tests .
On 1 October 2009 , the aggregated results were sent to the Ecofin Council , which , on 2 December that year , asked the CEBS to provide it with information on the strength of the banking system , for which new stress tests would be carried out .
The results of these stress tests carried out by the CEBS were published , in line with the European Council 's June 2010 guidelines .
They affected 91 banks in the European Union , but were criticised because they lacked a European focus , because each country decided which banks should be subjected to the tests , because the scenario was different for each country , and because the information provided was often incorrect ; we all remember the case of Ireland and the lack of information on some aspects of the exposure to sovereign debt of some countries ' banks .
Despite improving the perception of some Member States , all this did not succeed in re-establishing confidence within the European Union .
These are the circumstances in which the time has arrived to suggest a new round of stress tests , but in a totally different situation , with new European supervisory authorities .
For the first time , there is a new European supervisory framework with experience of the two previous tests , enabling the promotion of transparency , the promotion of reliability and , clearly , the promotion of effectiveness , which is the key aspect of these third tests .
Obviously , the first thing we want to know is what will be done to prevent the errors made in the two previous tests .
Secondly , we want to know what will be done to cover and capture the potential for significant risk in all the Member States .
Adequate diagnosis is necessary .
The method also needs to be developed in line with the banks ' various business models and structures , so the stress tests need to be able to provide the information needed to take appropriate action .
This is a very important time , because the new financial supervisory authorities are starting to operate .
On 18 March , the European Banking Authority published an executive summary containing the methodology , and we would like to know , when the European Council thought that the information should be published , what measures ...
( The President cut the speaker off )

Mr President , I thank Mrs Wortmann-Kool , Mrs Bowles and , just now , Mr Sánchez Presedo for their three questions concerning an extremely important subject , namely the credibility of the stress tests for banks .
Honourable Members , we are in a situation where the financial industry is slowly recovering from this crisis , an unprecedented struggle - even though , for some banks , the crisis already seems to be over .
We have not yet learned all the lessons from this , and we are all engaged in an important legislative task .
In order to get to grips with this crisis and the lessons that we must learn from it , we need a supervisory framework , and we have had one since 1 January , thanks to you in particular .
We need tools for anticipating problems as well as better governance in each of these establishments .
We also need better capitalisation , and we will come back to that .
Then , we should be measuring , taking the temperature , constantly taking the pulse .
That is why , as some of you said just now , we need reliable measuring instruments .
The stress test is a key measure and a key tool in this context , and not only have we discussed it here , we have also discussed it on many occasions - and as recently as April , in fact - with the finance ministers in the Council .
As you said , last year 's stress test was clearly insufficient , and the Commission itself has said this on numerous occasions to the new supervisory authority , the European Banking Authority ( EBA ) , which coordinates the test in cooperation with national supervisory bodies .
You are therefore right to wonder about the quality and , I would say again , the credibility of the new 2011 tests , which began a few weeks ago in April , and I would like to respond to your questions and to give you our analysis on five points .
Firstly , as you wanted , the stress tests for 2011 have undergone genuine improvements , particularly in six areas that I would like to inform you about briefly .
1 .
The adverse macroeconomic scenario that is applied simulates conditions much more severe than those of the 2010 scenario .
Among other things , it adds severe real estate shocks , as well as an explicit impact on the cost of financing .
2 .
The coherence of the exercise has been very significantly improved thanks to a consolidated methodology upstream and a strict assessment subject to the adversarial principle downstream ; in other words , peer review .
3 .
Under the principle of increased transparency , the dissemination of the results in June will be improved and accompanied by a separate detailed publication of the bank balances .
That will also include the dissemination of sovereign debt holdings as well as capital structure .
4 .
The banks will also be tested on the basis of an upper capital threshold , core tier one .
5 .
The dissemination of the methodology prior to the publication of the stress test results will improve the general credibility of the exercise .
6 .
Finally , coordination among the national authorities responsible for applying what we call ' backstop ' solutions , which are to be imposed on banks that fail this test , has been significantly enhanced and improved .
That is the progress that has been made , the improvements on last year 's tests that you quite rightly hoped for and which have been made this year .
A second point that I would make , honourable Members , is that we must have much more clarity on exposures in relation to sovereign debt .
Several of you - in particular , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - asked me about the methodology applied in this context , as Mrs Wortmann-Kool did just now .
The adverse scenario proposed by the banking authority , the EBA , envisages a significant shock in the form of price fluctuations of sovereign debt and the cost of its financing .
As you noted , however , this scenario does not extend to cases in which repayment of sovereign debt is defaulted on .
This is because the shock envisaged by the EBA would only have an impact on sovereign debts held in the banks ' trading book .
Nevertheless , there is an explanation behind this choice that was made this year .
I would repeat that the stress tests simulate extreme scenarios , but ones which must nevertheless be considered plausible .
Today , in the context of the recent introduction of the new European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism and the European Financial Stability Facility , which provide several governance tools for the euro area , we think , quite reasonably - and the European Banking Authority thinks so too - that it is much more useful now to ensure complete transparency of exposures relating to sovereign debt as they appear in the banking book and the trading book .
The dissemination of these will therefore be much more detailed than last year .
Thirdly , you have also drawn our attention to the need for more consistent implementation of stress test scenarios throughout the Union .
This is indeed essential for the credibility of the exercise .
The Banking Authority is making considerable efforts by carrying out a strict assessment of the results of this exercise .
This will ensure consistency between the methodologies applied by the banks as well as a convergence - an appropriate one , I think - of the ways in which the macroeconomic scenarios are retranscribed into parameters of respective risks .
This approach does not prevent the banks from reflecting certain specific aspects of their trading book or a particular management model .
There is another element which is essential for the consistency of the exercise : the use of common definitions for the capital thresholds according to which the participating banks will be assessed .
The reference for capital announced by the EBA is based largely on the current provisions of the Capital Requirements Directive , which already takes into account the different banking structures and the management models which exist in Europe .
Fourthly , Mrs Bowles and other speakers asked us about the differences in coverage of the banking sector within the Union .
The Banking Authority has tried hard to develop a sufficiently representative sample , both at national level and across the entire European Union , whilst ensuring that the exercise remains manageable .
Honourable Members , the banks tested during the 2011 exercise account for 65 % of the European banking sector in terms of total assets .
In each Member State , the sample was determined in such a way as to cover at least 50 % of the total assets of the national banking sector .
With that , I come to my fifth comment , mentioned by Mr Sánchez Presedo in particular , concerning the question of the corrective measures - the backstops - that banks could expect if they turned out to be vulnerable or potentially undercapitalised .
These banks will have to implement appropriate measures to remedy their weaknesses and above all to turn to the private sector by financing themselves directly from the markets or by selling assets .
If , and only if , these measures turn out to be insufficient , public support could be envisaged , on condition , of course , that it conforms to the European State Aid Regulations .
My colleague Mr Almunia and his entire team are working upstream with the Member States on this very question .
If public support is needed , the banks benefiting from it should , pursuant to the December 2010 communication on the application of State Aid Regulations to support measures in favour of banks , provide the Commission with a restructuring plan which is appropriate for dealing with the problem , in order , in particular , to consolidate and restore their long-term viability .
Finally , you quite rightly hoped for a strategy to recapitalise and restructure failing banks , as Mrs Ferreira proposed in her report on crisis management .
As you know , we are working , honourable Members , on a legislative framework on the management of the crisis , the banking resolution , which we have had the opportunity to discuss several times .
My aim is to give supervisory bodies and the future resolution committee for these cross-border institutions a toolbox in order to take preventative measures and to prevent risks that are diagnosed fairly early on from turning into crises , and to prevent the crises themselves from turning into catastrophes .
Therefore , to ensure - and to finance , if necessary - early intervention , and to ensure that the banks pay for the banks : that is what we consider to be an orderly resolution , and I intend to present this proposal both to the Council of Ministers and to you yourselves before the end of the summer .
Those are the technical responses that I wanted to provide , in as precise a manner as possible , to the three extremely relevant questions that were asked at the beginning of this debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , as you acknowledged just now , last year 's tests have not had the anticipated effects .
We ought to avoid the same errors of conception and implementation .
The fields of investigation must be consistent and similar .
There will be no stabilisation if the diagnosis is not correct .
Governments must be aware of that .
This being so , the tests must quite clearly be realistic .
The solutions that you have just given us , in a particularly detailed fashion , are of a kind that can provide an answer to our questions .
It is now the job of the European Banking Authority , in supervising and examining the conclusions of these tests , to give a first test of its effectiveness .
The tests must allow us to better define the potential recapitalisation needs of the banks and to take the measures that you have just mentioned .
However , performing credible stress tests is the best way to calm the financial markets and to limit the influence of credit rating agencies and the negative effects of their decisions on the whole of our economy .
The credibility of the results of these tests can end the dependency on these agencies , or at least can reduce it .
The supervisory authorities have no choice but to ensure that the tests are successful ; that is , that they provide convincing evidence .
Let me use my allotted time , Commissioner , to draw your attention to the fact - in my opinion , a serious one - that the legislation relating to credit rating agencies , which has now entered into force , has not been applied , and that the authorities to which these agencies submitted their files did not take steps to inform them of the requirements of the agreement .
We planned a transitional period pending the establishment of the European Securities and Markets Authority , yet today we are continuing to act as if nothing had happened .
Mr President , Commissioner , if there is one thing we have learned in Europe from the recent financial crisis , it is that full capital adequacy of our credit institutions and effective supervision of the level of risk they undertake are key points in overall economic - not just financial - governance .
Lasting and cohesive restoration of growth in the European economy necessarily depends on the restoration of confidence in the banking sector and the restoration of a financial system in general that functions smoothly and transparently and resumes its basic role as a source of finance for the real economy .
As we have seen in practice , and as various speakers have pointed out , last year 's stress tests did not achieve their objective of highlighting which banks enjoy the necessary confidence of their consumers , their creditors and the national regulatory authorities .
This year , we are in a different situation .
The stress tests will be carried out by the new supervisory authority , the European Banking Authority , and we must avoid last year 's failure at all costs .
This will basically depend upon imposing common stress criteria to banks , which are interpreted and applied uniformly and broadly , so as to cover the various risks to each national market .
Commissioner , this is , without doubt , the top priority at the stress test stage ; however , I would also point out that , in the second stage , full and fundamental preventive supervision will need to include appropriate mechanisms to address what , to date , has been a particularly shadowy banking sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , a lot of things have been said about methodology .
You have responded in detail .
I would just like to make a brief comment about what is going to happen after the stress tests , by echoing slightly what Mr Gauzès said , which is that one cannot indulge oneself by adopting laws : they have to be adhered to .
For my part , I see these tests as supplementing the economic governance package .
We can do whatever we like with regard to sovereign debt , but if we do not clean up the banking sector , we will achieve nothing .
I simply wanted to draw your attention to what is going to happen and to how these famous backstop measures will enable action to be taken at the end of the stress tests .
I also wanted to draw your attention to what happened during the hearing with Mervyn King and Andrea Enria , whose very determined action we applaud .
They came to see us in their capacity as Vice-Chairs of the European Systemic Risk Board , and we had the pleasure of hearing , from Mervyn King in particular - it was rather amusing , if you recall last year 's negotiations , Commissioner - that the safeguard clauses , which the Member States delighted in adding to the package developed by the Commission , would not prevent them from following the recapitalisation guidelines given by the European Banking Authority ( EBA ) .
I just wanted to bring that small point to your attention .
From a systemic point of view , the Systemic Risk Board itself believes that this is important , and I believe that if the quality of the work done by the EBA , with your support and under the supervision of the Systemic Risk Board , means that we can happily shelve those absolutely ridiculous safeguard clauses that the Member States sought to include in the supervision package , then we will have taken a step forward .
I therefore hope that the Commission and the Board will be very keen to ensure that concrete measures are taken by the Member States , large or small .
Spain has set an example by doing a certain amount of work ; we hope that the others will follow .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , last summer 's stress tests were meant to restore confidence in banks .
This was Europe 's attempt to tell global markets to ' calm down , dear ' .
It failed .
Nineteen weeks later , the Irish banks collapsed and taxpayers across Europe were forced into a bail-out , and just last week we learnt that EUR 12 billion of the proposed Portuguese bail-out is for their banks .
The sovereign debt crisis will not be solved until the bank crisis is solved - and the bank crisis will not be solved until markets are confident in providing capital and liquidity to banks .
Stress tests are meant to stress risks .
To assuage market concerns they must stress the risks that the markets are concerned about , and right now the markets are concerned about sovereign debt levels .
Refusing to test the sovereign debt held on the whole bank balance sheet will not restore confidence .
The European Banking Authority is of course caught between a rock and a hard place : publicly admitting that the risk of a write-down exists may perpetuate the risk of it occurring , but denying that it exists at all would be downright irresponsible for a regulator .
And then there are the trillion dollar questions .
Behind closed doors the argument has focused on the numerator .
What type of capital do banks hold ?
The longer individual countries fight for their own opt-outs , the more everyone becomes aware that not all banks are equal and market concerns multiply .
But we should also be concerned about the denominator .
What is the risk of the assets on the balance sheets , and can you trust the risk weights applied to those assets ?
If US banks have risk weights 50 % higher than European counterparts , are Europe 's banks being allowed to fundamentally misrepresent the risks on their balance sheets ?
The financial crisis should have taught us all to value transparency .
For depositors , investors , borrowers and taxpayers these stress tests do not offer transparency and that is a travesty .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , the reason why the issue of the bank stress tests is of such decisive importance and is regarded so critically by our citizens is because the banks are at the centre of this crisis .
It was the banks who invested huge amounts of money without considering the risks , creating property bubbles in a number of Member States , who are now stricken by this crisis .
Something that we always believed to be impossible , namely that the markets might be less well informed than many external observers , has actually come to pass and the markets got things severely wrong .
It is evident that the banks that caused the crisis were unable to make the right decisions during the crisis .
It is now also apparent that national debt has also increased enormously during the downturn , firstly due to the cost of rescuing the banks and the associated guarantees and secondly , and more importantly , due to the cost of the downturn itself .
Thus , the central question is : are any serious lessons being learned from the banking crisis ?
It is not simply the case that the banks are responsible for what happened in the past , but also for present difficulties , because the markets are still not operating correctly .
A total of EUR 427 billion in outstanding demands have now accumulated between the central banks in the accounts of the European Central Bank system and the TARGET2 payment transaction system ; this is because the system has intervened between the central banks in place of the non-functioning markets .
Because of the weakness in the banking system , we are hesitant about introducing the debt restructuring measures urgently needed in the weaker countries .
To put it in a nutshell : people in Greece , Ireland and Portugal have the feeling that they are suffering because the structure of our bank system is weak .
European stress tests have been carried out over the last two years .
We believed that we would finally find out the truth .
As has already been said many times , the 2010 stress tests were weak , particularly in relation to government risks , which were ignored almost entirely .
These bank stress tests did not reflect reality .
The picture is very similar in 2011 .
Although we are grateful for your contribution Mr Barnier , you have not explained why the risks associated with government bonds are recorded in the trading book , but not in the banking book .
The explanation is always the same : we always have the rescue packages to fall back on .
However this is just an audacious way of pre-empting a political decision .
After all , the rescue packages cannot simply be taken for granted , but must first be approved by the national parliaments .
If these rescue packages are quoted as the reason why risks are not priced correctly , then in practical terms this is like nationalising private risk as a fait accompli .
What is more , we still do not have a proper stress test for the insurance market .
I am calling on you , Mr Barnier , also to take a close look at this area .
I am disappointed that the European Banking Authority , which we established and which is responsible for the stress tests , actually failed its own stress test .
Mr Barnier , please stay on track and pursue this matter with greater urgency .
This whole issue seems to illustrate the words of Bertolt Brecht when he said : founding a bank is a much worse crime than robbing one .
However , he was wrong .
We must now learn that carrying the burden of the banks ' debt is much worse .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , the most fundamental weakness of the proposed stress tests has now been referred to .
It is the possibility of widespread sovereignty faults .
Surely , this is a very likely development , given the incredible level of debts that have been loaded onto economies that are simply unable to pay .
For example , the Irish State is on track to owe EUR 750 billion by 2014 , and we have a government debt that is more than EUR 120 000 per worker .
Irrespective of a potential cut in the interest rate and our so-called bail-out , this is unsustainable and the Irish State will default .
I understand that German banks are exposed to Greece , Ireland , Portugal and Spain , the so-called ' PIGS ' , to the tune of EUR 400 billion .
French banks are exposed to the tune of EUR 260 billion and British banks EUR 300 billion .
This massive exposure explains the vicious austerity applied by the Commission and the European Central Bank to working people in the peripheral economies .
It is my understanding that the stress tests will assume that the funding needs of the banks remain stable .
Given the potential for a deepening of the crisis , this is unlikely to be the case .
For example , EUR 34 billion left the six Irish domestic banks in the last three months of 2010 , forcing them to rely on what is supposedly short-term funding from the ECB to the tune of EUR 160 billion .
On the restructuring of the banking sector , surely the most fundamental lesson that has to be drawn from the experience of the last number of years and the major crisis is that the major financial institutions and banks cannot be left in private hands .
The pursuit of profit by these private institutions has played a significant role in wrecking our economies , for which working people have paid a terrible price .
The major financial institutions , the major banks , must be taken into democratic public ownership .
The dictatorship of the financial markets must be ended , and their massive resources should be used to benefit ordinary people through the granting of loans to small businesses , affordable mortgages to help homebuyers , and so on .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( SK ) Mr President , on 18 March the new European banking authority published the scenarios and the stress tests through which it wishes to check European banks .
If we want the experts to accept the results of these tests , we must avoid the superficiality and inconsistency which characterised the banking sector tests of July 2010 .
In view of the fact that the credibility of the entire European financial sector will probably be assessed according to the stringency of these tests , it would be good for the tests to be as comprehensive as possible , and for them to reflect in their stringency the actual risks the financial sector may face in the current period .
In my opinion , these tests should not therefore avoid an adequate assessment of the exposure of the banks towards specific state debts , or the debts of other banks , in order to take account of the worst case scenarios in the tests , such as a country becoming bankrupt , for example .
We must also ensure a balanced and fair approach towards assessing the various banking structures and business models in the individual Member States , and try to ensure that the new stress tests relate , as far as possible , to the entire banking sector in each Member State .
Only thus will we regain the confidence of the financial experts .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , in the analysis of the banks carried out in 2010 , it was uniformly recognised that one of the problems of these tests has been the predominant national logic , whether with regard to methodology , to diagnostics or to the choice of criteria .
Later , in the report that you kindly mentioned , for which I was rapporteur , this Parliament asked for the strengthening of a European dimension for managing bank crises .
In the meantime , the Systemic Risk Board and the European Banking Authority ( EBA ) have been set up , indicating that finally , we were going to give the banking sector a European dimension .
However , the stress tests that we are discussing were referred to as follows by the European Council on 24 and 25 March .
I will read it in English , because that is the document I have .
' Member States will prepare , ahead of the publication of the results , specific and ambitious strategies for the restructuring of vulnerable institutions , including private sector solutions ... but also a solid framework in line with State aid rules for the provision of government support in case of need . '
( PT ) Therefore , as regards the stress tests , what we are doing at the moment - without any clear , comprehensible framework harmonising the various national practices - is again recommending that it is up to the Member States : we are again reinforcing the national dimension of approaching the solution and of correcting the stress tests on the banking sector .
This leads me to a fundamental question .
With this type of methodology , will we not lose a golden opportunity to finally create a European , rather than national framework to solve the problem of regulation ?
( SV ) Mr President , we are living in difficult times .
The financial crisis has shown us how important it is for citizens to have confidence in the banks and the payment systems .
Stress tests for the banks are therefore an important instrument for examining the resilience of the banks to unexpected shocks .
Financial stability is about how well capitalised the banks are and how much resilience they have .
Our experience shows that vigorous tests increase confidence in the banking system and the tests should be tough , credible , comprehensive and have clear requirements .
The example of Ireland demonstrates the opposite , unfortunately .
I would like to emphasise the importance of openness and transparency with regard to publication of the results of the stress tests .
Publication of the individual tests is very important in order to help strengthen citizens ' and the market 's confidence in the banks .
Just as Mr Barnier said , it is all about confidence .
Future stress tests need to be continually developed in order to include real market conditions and risks .
By reporting the level of exposure to sovereign debt , the market players can make their own risk assessments .
This is important in order to strengthen the market 's confidence in the design and credibility of the tests .
The Commission , the European Systemic Risk Board ( ESRB ) and the European Banking Authority ( EBA ) should be clear about what the stress tests are intended to show and they should check and ensure that the assumptions of the stress tests reflect the risks .
If the stress tests reveal that any particular banks do not meet the requirements , the Member States must take immediate action .
The Swedish experience of expansive banks in the Baltic States demonstrates that the risks can quickly build up as a result of growing imbalances .
History has taught us that caution is necessary , but delays or hesitation in the face of unsatisfactory results can be devastating . Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , stress tests are the latest thing .
We have a deep economic and financial crisis , so we will make our banks take stress tests !
We have a nuclear crisis , so let us make our nuclear power stations take stress tests !
As if the very idea of stress tests was going to reassure our fellow citizens or the financial market .
Because , clearly , everything depends on the possibilities they cater for , and as you said , Commissioner , we cannot say that last year 's financial stress tests were very credible from that point of view .
Furthermore , the nuclear stress tests , as your colleague Mr Oettinger acknowledged this afternoon , are also a big joke - they have been so far anyway - since the possibility of an aeroplane crashing into a power station has not been taken into account .
I would therefore like to say that , in a case such as that , where an aeroplane crashes into a nuclear power station , there is clearly a default risk .
Commissioner , you say that plausible possibilities should be taken into account , and so we are not taking into account the possibility of a sovereign State defaulting in Europe .
I would therefore like to make the following point : either you regard this as a possibility to be rejected , and if so I would say to you that you are in denial , because the figures of the Greek debt and the Irish debt clearly show that , sooner or later , those States are going to have to restructure their debt , or you are playing for time , and if so I would say to you that that is equally irresponsible , because the longer it takes to tackle the issue , the more it will cost society as a whole .
I therefore appeal to your sense of reality and responsibility in this matter , Commissioner .
You are an ambitious European ; you know that the people whose stress levels are tested every day are our fellow citizens , who know only too well that , until we take the bull by the horns , we will be unable to guarantee their security or the security of the financial market .
Taking the bull by the horns today means radically restructuring the finance industry in Europe .
I know that you have started , but this also implies the need for a European budgetary federation .
We will discuss this point again tomorrow , however .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to express my thanks for the detailed answer to my parliamentary question of 8 February on the stress tests as they related to the Irish banks .
We have made something clear today : credibility engenders trust .
Also , a serious , upright and determined approach will help us overcome the crisis in credibility .
It is for this reason that I am forced to say that I do not believe the last stress test was adequately evaluated .
The consequences are unknown .
Despite the logical conclusions that you have outlined today , I am still not clear about the consequences of the forthcoming test .
For this reason I have three questions .
My first is this : Commissioner , how can you guarantee this time that a long-term view will be taken , rather than the short-term focus applied last time with the Irish banks ?
Secondly , is the European public debt crisis deteriorating before our very eyes , as Mr Giegold describes ?
This deterioration will only be tested in the banks ' trading books in the current stress tests .
However the titles held by the banks until final maturity are listed in the banking book .
Yet the banking book will not be included in the stress test .
How can you justify this distinction ?
Thirdly , will this not yet again give rise to a feeling that the long-term survival of the banks is guaranteed because our main problem , the state debt crisis , is not adequately being evaluated ?
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen I should like to thank you for your answer .
The important thing is to make the proper diagnosis , but also to be able , after the diagnosis , to apply the proper treatment .
We therefore need to make the stress tests more transparent and reliable - and we are headed in the right direction - but we also need to make the response more effective .
We need solvent financial institutions , a stable financial system and , above all , the restoration of the flow of credit into the real economy .
Banks that pass the stress tests are not exempt from making every effort to tackle adverse scenarios and to prepare for an increasingly demanding regulatory situation .
Banks that do not pass the tests should immediately seek solutions to tackle the situation , and the Member States - those that have not done so already -should adopt initiatives to help them and contribute to their recapitalisation or to seeking means of resolution .
The European Banking Authority can issue recommendations to correct risks detected , so as to identify any institutions presenting systemic risk - which will be subjected to a higher level of supervision - and so that rescue , recovery and resolution procedures can be followed .
You will have our support for those procedures , Commissioner , so that an ambitious European framework can be created even in order to go further , because monetary union requires greater financial integration , but it also requires greater fiscal and political integration .
( RO ) Mr President , the stress tests are important for assessing the health of the banking system .
However , two conditions are absolutely essential .
Firstly , the quality of these tests and the accuracy of the actual assessment process .
I would like to mention that the banks have had different business models in different countries .
In Romania , as in other countries , the banks were not involved in transactions dealing with toxic assets .
On the other hand , however , they carried out expansionist lending based on external resources assigned in the short term and providing funding in the long term .
However , the results were the same : losses , particular vulnerability generated in the relevant countries and , obviously , a lack of responsibility for risk management .
The second condition is the transparency of the test results which we will apply in the banking systems .
This transparency is demanded by both financial markets and citizens .
( SV ) Mr President , during the turbulent period that we have been experiencing with regard to our public finances over the last few years we have lost our focus on the root of the problem .
In our work to rescue the public finances of the weakest countries we have tended to forget that it is the banks that are our biggest problem .
This is the case partly on account of the fact that the long line of disasters in the banking sector is the main reason why the public finances of so many countries are so fragile now and partly because many of the key weaknesses of the banking system still remain .
We need to find viable solutions for the public finances of Athens , Dublin and Lisbon .
However , these solutions will not be worth very much if we do not at the same time support those European banks that are still not able to stand on their own feet .
If we do not make the effort that is needed at this stage to create a sustainable banking sector , it will sooner or later result in a burden on public finances that even the strongest countries will find it difficult to cope with .
What is particularly disheartening in this context is the fact that several countries that currently have robust finances are doing so little to deal with the weaknesses in their own banking systems .
They loudly demand that Greece , Ireland and Portugal improve , but fail to do their own homework , despite the fact that they have the resources .
That is unacceptable .
It is clear that the ongoing stress test must be carried out in a stringent and transparent way that inspires confidence .
It is equally clear that the stress test must be followed up with appropriate initiatives to address the weaknesses that are identified .
A common European strategy for this would be very valuable .
I expect the Commission shortly to take such an initiative on the basis of the guidelines proposed by Parliament in Mrs Ferreira 's report on crisis management in the banking sector .
At the end of the day , however , the main responsibility remains at national level .
All countries , and the strongest ones in particular , must ensure that they deal with the shortcomings that still remain in the banking system . Thank you .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barnier , the EU stress test for banks conducted last summer is in need of a radical overhaul .
It is patently not enough simply to focus on the banks ' capital base .
The impact of the crisis on the banks ' liquidity must also be examined .
As a reminder : banks like Lehman Brothers collapsed because they were faced with significant liquidity problems .
I fail to understand the debate as to whether or not the results of the liquidity check should be published .
Anyone who insists that the data should be kept secret is undermining the purpose of the test .
There is little doubt about what is intended : the aim is to stop the markets from losing confidence in the banks that fail the tests .
However the effect of keeping the public in the dark about the results of the tests would simply be to engender even more uncertainty .
Rumours and half-truths flourish in such an environment .
Even though people will criticise the new methodology and various parameters , the common objective must be clear .
Transparency is essential in order to determine the European banks ' susceptibility to crisis .
There is an urgent need for broad-based confidence and the banks must play a role in this in their own interests .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Barnier for the excellent work he is doing .
We need to restore stability and confidence , and I think that an enormous effort is being made to that end .
The legislative framework for the management of the crisis is providing Mr Barnier with the means to take a range of preventive measures as well as to manage the current situation .
We need to watch out for and resist the bureaucratic temptation to create bodies , agencies or other instruments that could complicate life in future .
A coordinated approach within a general European Union legal framework is essential to prevent problems and future financial crises and to allow the banks to operate in a more orderly fashion and under the same conditions throughout Europe .
I am of the opinion that , in order to ensure transparency , regulators should be continually developing standard rules and procedures .
I would stress , however , that care must be taken when publishing results .
The financial year 2010 showed clearly how sensitive and important the publication of results is in terms of consistency .
They can also produce counterproductive reactions in the markets and cause disruption .
Attention must therefore be paid to this issue , and it must be taken seriously into consideration .
Mr President , banks were once revered in Ireland .
Now they are reviled , and there is no need to go into the reasons why .
I am here to ask questions rather than give insights , and I have a number of questions .
Firstly , do all banks have to be stress-tested ?
Secondly , can we be assured that the stress tests from now on will reflect the true position of banks ?
And thirdly , what authority does the European Banking Authority have to impose its authority on errant banks , banks that are over-exposed , banks behaving recklessly , and so on ?
Finally , Mr Gauzès referred to the need to rid ourselves of dependency on the rating agencies .
How can this idyllic situation be brought about as soon as possible ?
( PL ) Thank you very much for the opportunity to ask a question .
I would like to make it quite clear that if it were not for the measures taken by the European Commission and by you yourself , Commissioner , there can be no doubt that we would be worse off today as regards the situation in the European banking system .
The situation is very dynamic , however .
We have fortunately resolved some of the problems relating to bank liquidity , but new problems and threats are emerging .
In connection with this , I should like to ask , Commissioner , if you could give us your current thoughts regarding the threats which are emerging at present , and the threats which we will need to deal with in the near future .
I wish to stress most emphatically that some of the problems are fortunately already behind us , but that other problems are constantly emerging .

Mr President , lest we forget that there are people affected by these problems , I met a young Irishman on the flight to Frankfurt today , on his way to Australia with a one-way ticket , and he is just one of thousands who are doing this because of our economic and banking problems .
Would the Commission accept that the damage done to Europe 's credibility by the fudging of the first banking stress tests - and I say this with great regret - is almost irreparable ?
European Union citizens are looking on in distress at what has happened in relation to banking .
We have damaged confidence in the European Union and in the eurozone .
As you know , the Irish banking sector has had its second round of stress tests and the new government has put in place a restructuring plan .
The additional capital required was EUR 24 billion .
The impact on the Irish economy now is that good enterprises are starved of capital as banks struggle to meet the various requirements .
This is an impossible scenario , and I would ask the Commissioner to address it .
( RO ) Mr President , the fact that the previous stress tests were not credible makes carrying out the next tests complicated .
The crisis in Ireland has altered the new data in the European banking system considerably .
In this context , future tests must be much more precise in terms of providing information .
The national authorities must apply the action plans already .
This would therefore resolve the problems from stress tests in general .
We should not expect to see banks failing the test .
The new tests should highlight the weaknesses of the banking system , while identifying where the capital needs to be consolidated .
I should emphasise the importance of the Commission adopting a fair approach in applying the stress tests in absolutely every Member State .
Finally , I also find useful the information from the Commission on the major modifications it has proposed .
( HU ) Mr President , the importance of this topic is best highlighted by the fact that three MEPs have addressed similar questions to the Commission .
This is not an accident , because if we conduct a stress test similar to last year 's , which has not managed to restore confidence in the European banking sector , this might damage the credibility of the European Union .
The work of ESRB and EBA preparing the test seems to be sound , both as regards its unified methodology and the method used to conduct it .
However , some questions still remain open for me , even after the answer of the Commissioner .
For example , does the selection process manage cross-border business and shareholder relations , as well as different business models ?
Another question is whether it can be stated with absolute certainty that such a series of stress tests will not ignore any bank whose operation might present a risk to the European economy .
Mr President , I am grateful to everyone who has taken the floor at this late hour for demonstrating the European Parliament 's vigilance , and I would even say its intelligence , on this difficult issue .
Firstly , to come back immediately to the issue raised just now by Mrs Gáll-Pelcz , who talked about the responsibility of the Commission - I am used to facing up to my responsibilities - I would point out that these stress tests that are being performed today have been designed by , and are the responsibility of , the new authority that we have created together , the European Banking Authority .
Of course , we are working closely with that authority and we , like the European Central Bank , have helped prepare this new round of tests with the EBA , but it is the EBA that is mainly responsible for this .
Mr Zemke asked a rather broad question about future threats and risks .
Firstly , I believe there is no such thing as zero risk , either in this field , or in the environmental field .
I think it is very difficult to predict the future , and we know after all , Mr Zemke , that the markets move much more quickly than the age of democracy , than our age , no matter how quickly we move or how quickly and effectively we want to move .
How , though , can we be better prepared than we were four years ago when faced with the crisis that originated in the United States and nearly swept everything away ?
By creating tools , frameworks for governance , supervision , responsibility , transparency , everything that was lacking , everything that had been part of the very powerful tide of ultraliberalism that first swept through the world in the 1990s , everything that was partially dismantled , too , with the foolish idea that the markets could regulate themselves .
Within the framework of the G20 , and perhaps going further in some areas than the G20 had requested , we are today patiently recreating the governance , regulatory , transparency , I was going to say quite simply ' moral ' - if I can use that word - or ethical frameworks and tools that have been singularly lacking in the financial market set-up for around 15 years .
That is why your understanding of this situation is important , and why your role in creating proper European supervisory authorities - Mrs Goulard mentioned the European Systemic Risk Board - is very important .
That is why - and this is also addressed to Mr Gauzès , who mentioned rating agencies - we are including this action , the specific topic of tonight 's sitting , everything that we are doing patiently , week after week , in the major European financial and economic governance project , and we have more work to do yet .
I do not have a problem with using the word federation in the context of this major project ; I think it was Mr Giegold who used that word earlier .
We need to pool our energies and our policies more , and at times we need to go beyond mere coordination .
I agree with Mr Gauzès on the importance of continuing the reforms in the area of rating agencies .
We are working on a third reform , which will complement the previous two .
As for the issue that you raised , Mr Gauzès , with regard to excessive dependence on ratings , we are going to get rid of a number of ratings very shortly , at the beginning of July .
We are going to get rid of several references to ratings so as to prevent this excessive dependence on ratings by the banks , and not just by the banks in fact .
We are going to work on this point , therefore .
Mrs Goulard referred to the comments made by Mr King and Mr Enria , and I have noted them down .
I thank her for having drawn my attention to their comments , which demonstrate , moreover , a proactive and changing approach , which I am very pleased about .
I should also like to thank her for having mentioned the very important role - and we know how much we owe you , Mrs Goulard - of the Systemic Risk Board .
We must work with all these stakeholders and the EBA , and naturally we must have regard for the role of the Systemic Risk Board , so that we apply the stress tests consistently and so that we learn from them .
Ultimately it will be up to the Member States rather than the EBA to learn lessons by putting in place conditions and backstops , which we will be monitoring closely in the period immediately after the stress tests .
When the three European supervisory authorities and the Systemic Risk Board were set up , I said that we were going to test the ground by walking on it .
That is what we are doing .
I believe that the EBA is doing a good job under the leadership of Mr Enria ; the same applies to the other authorities , to the Systemic Risk Board and , Mr Giegold , to the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ( EIOPA ) .
Earlier you mentioned the tests in the insurance sector ; the EIOPA is currently preparing a series of tests in that sector , as the EBA did for the banks .
You raised a sensitive and very important issue , Mr Giegold , as did Mr Karas and Mr Schmidt earlier , namely sovereign debt shock .
As I have already said , and I will not be saying anything else on the matter this evening , the EBA has been tasked with designing and developing the tests .
It felt that a banking book shock was unrealistic , and so there was no point in carrying out tests on the banking book at this stage .
All I can say is that we have this dialogue with the EBA , we are determined - Mr Giegold has drawn all the lessons from this new round of tests , just as we drew lessons from the previous round , which was unsatisfactory - and we have an ambition - Mr Sánchez Presedo asked me to show ambition - which is to be demanding and rigorous when holding this dialogue , while respecting the powers and the independence of the EBA , just as we in the Commission demand respect for our own independence .
My ambition , Mr Giegold , is to reflect rationally on what we have learnt from this round of tests , which will end in June , and to learn as much as we can from our dialogue with the EBA , in order to improve the following round .
Mr Mann , like you , Mr Giegold , mentioned the evaluation of liquidity risk .
As you know , the evaluation of this liquidity risk is not part of the stress test itself , the results of which will be made public .
At the beginning of the year , the European Banking Authority announced that it would be carrying out a separate thematic review of the liquidity risks in the EU banking sector as part of its regular risk assessment cycle in the first quarter of 2011 .
It will therefore address this issue in this parallel context , so to speak .
Mr Karas called on his fellow Members and the Commission to integrate everything that we are doing into long-term strategies , and I would like to say to Mr Karas that this is a general principle to which I subscribe , and it is also the spirit in which I am working with my teams in order to propose all the new legislation that is part of this financial and economic governance that we need .
This specifically applies to the issue of governance , to what we are going to do in terms of shareholder liability - we are working from a long-term perspective - and to what we want to do , as I was saying earlier to Mrs Ferreira , with regard to bank resolution .
It also applies to another point that I have in mind ; although you have not mentioned it , it is one of the reasons for , or one of the causes of , the crisis : the obscene pay and bonuses , which were even higher when more risks were taken , since those taking the risks knew that everyone else would pay for them .
When we review the application of the current guidelines on pay and bonuses , and see where they fall short , I will clearly ensure that , as many of you have requested , they are transposed and applied in every Member State over the coming weeks .
When I say that I am considering new guidelines on this issue , it is precisely in order to address one of the causes of the crisis - this crazy risk-taking - and to make those involved in the banking sector more prudent and responsible again .
Mrs Ferreira and Mr Lamberts made the point that the stress tests were inconsistent.I have said what I think about the shortcomings of the previous tests .
We need more consistency , we need more Europe in the application of these tests , and that is why the peer review with the EBA will also be very useful .
Regarding the issue of a harmonised bank resolution framework , that is precisely what we are working on , Mrs Ferreira .
I can confirm to you that we will be presenting our proposal before the end of the summer , and that we will be relying in a very real and sincere way on many of the proposals you have made .

Several of you , including Mr Ludvigsson , Mrs Ford , Mr Cancian and Mrs Băsescu , just now , called for the tests to be - I shall repeat what I heard - rigorous , credible and transparent .
Once again , in the overall context of this financial and economic governance that we are in the process of establishing together , the 2011 tests will be more rigorous , credible and transparent than the previous round , and we are going to build on the lessons and the review of this 2011 round in order to ensure that , as you have requested , the subsequent stages in the banking sector stress tests are even more effective , rigorous , credible and transparent .
Thank you very much , Mr Barnier .
Our discussions have gone on a little too long .
It is very much to your credit that you have responded to each speaker .
However , perhaps in future , for educational reasons , we should agree that the final statement by the Commissioner will only respond to those speakers still actually in the Chamber .
This would save us a little time .
The last debate has actually taken us right to the limit of the time we have available to us .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( LT ) As we can see today , the stress test of banks operating in European Union Member States carried out last year failed to reveal the true situation in this sector .
The Irish example has shown that this check was fundamentally unreliable .
This year a slightly improved test was also carried out , and we are all awaiting its results .
I feel that in order to restore EU citizens ' faith in the banking and financial system in general and to ensure the credibility of the whole European financial institutional framework , the newly created European Banking Authority must be given much greater powers and a more important role .
I believe that tests should be carried out systematically and cover as broad a range of risk elements as possible - these vary across the Member States .
The European Banking Authority should also lay down clear procedures and have the opportunity to submit decisions that are obligatory for banks if the checks carried out reveal banks ' financial instability or unreliability .
It is interesting that after the failure of the stress test the press was flooded by false success reports even last year - obviously this was also due to the machinations of the European Commission .
And now not just us , but everybody from the liberals to the PPE demand an explanation for the failure .
They , however , are seeking a solution in false answers , for example in the form of additional governmental capital injections pumped into banks or in further Brussels centralisation .
But the actual reason for the failure is precisely that the Brussels bureaucracy is simply not able to assist us efficiently in most of fields of our lives .
So after the fiasco they should not want to withdraw further licences from Member States and waste billions of euros on establishing further mammoth authorities ; instead , they should admit that Europe cannot exist as the United States of Europe , and the more power is given to Brussels , the more efficiency will decrease .
Enforcement of regulations on the shipping of toxic waste to developing countries ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the question for oral answer to the Commission on the enforcement of regulations on the shipping of toxic waste to developing countries from Mrs Bearder , Mrs Ek , Mr Ouzký , Mr Seeber , Mrs Klaß and Mrs Harms on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the European Conservatives and Reformists , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - B7-0217 / 2011 ) and
the question for oral answer to the Commission on the enforcement of regulations on the shipping of toxic waste to developing countries from Mrs Wils , Mrs Liotard , Mrs de Brún , Mr Ferreira , Mrs Matias and Mr Chountis on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left - B7-0218 / 2011 ) .
author . - Mr President , does the Commissioner not consider that , if any of us woke up one morning to find our rich neighbours had dumped their toxic rubbish in our front yard , we would be furious ?
Yet that is what the EU is doing every day .
Every year tonnes of toxic waste is shipped from the EU to developing countries against European environmental law , smuggled through ports with very weak controls .
Almost three quarters of electric waste in the EU is unaccounted for and only one third of electronic waste is treated according to EU legislation .
In the UK the average Briton throws away four pieces of electronic waste every year .
That is 500 000 tonnes of broken TVs , computers and phones , but over half of this is not recorded as being recycled - it just disappears - and that is only in my own country .
The export of controlled waste from the EU for disposal is prohibited under current legislations , yet annually illegal shipments from the EU are thought to average about 22 000 tonnes .
The WEEE Directive states that exported electronic items must be in working order .
However , this relies on effective EU-wide inspection policies which are clearly missing .
This waste contains lead , cadmium , barium , mercury , brominated flame retardants and other chemicals and plastics that become hazardous when burned .
Burning is often the cheapest method to recover these valuable metals as adults and children scramble over the dumps of rubbish in their quest to earn a few cents .
We cannot ignore the environmental and health impacts of this scandal which affects the most vulnerable .
Frankly , as a European , I am ashamed .
I thank the Commissioner for the answers and the responses , but we need to know the specifics of how he is going to close this loophole in the Waste Shipment Regulation .
Does the Commission have any plans to address the tonnes of EU waste already dumped in African countries ?
Does the Waste Shipment Regulation need to be revised or is it just a matter of enforcement ?
This is an urgent problem and action needs to be taken now .
I await your response .
deputising for the author . - ( DA ) Mr President , I am pleased that so many of my fellow Members are aware that our waste does not simply disappear of its own accord , but unfortunately often ends up out in the wider world where no one deals with it properly .
There is actually nothing new about this , of course .
A great many European countries started to send their discarded ferries filled with asbestos to India many years ago , where bare-foot workers separated old iron from the hazardous components on an open shore - as they still do today .
An even worse situation is that of the African children who sit on the ground and separate out our electrical waste right down to the individual components .
Is this acceptable ?
No , of course it is not .
However , the EU lacks reasonable and realistic means to enforce the sound regulations that were laid down as long ago as 12 July 2006 .
The directive is enforced via the individual Member States , as stated in Article 50 of the same regulation , but some States turn a blind eye when it comes to this enforcement .
Something has to be done , however , because 70 million tonnes of hazardous waste per year - and rising - is no trifling matter .
I therefore have another question in addition to the written questions that the Commission has already received , and that is : Has the Commission considered utilising special port areas for unloading hazardous waste in selected ports ?
That would provide better means of control in general .
Could the Commission envisage carrying out some publicity work to encourage EU citizens to take their hazardous waste to specific places in the Member States ?
It is extremely important to make our citizens aware of the problem , because without their help in the struggle to manage hazardous waste we will get nowhere .

author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barnier , it is not just in the banking sector that we have regulations that do not work , but also in the environmental area .
Although we have a regulation covering the shipping of waste dating back to 2006 , this does not work because there is an increasing trend towards shipping hazardous waste beyond the EU 's borders , in particular to developing countries where the proper disposal of these hazardous substances cannot be guaranteed .
This cavalier approach to disposal leads to environmental and health problems in these countries that can cause many fatalities in extreme cases .
In addition , here in the European Union , we are discarding valuable resources .
Part of the 2020 strategy includes a strategy on resources and waste is one of our resources .
We should make every effort to improve our research activities in this area so that valuable materials can be segregated at the end of the product lifecycle .
In a speech on 7 April of this year , your colleague , Commissioner Potočnik , announced that , despite the Commission having avoided this issue and done nothing for many years , he intended presenting a communication in the autumn of this year in which he would tackle the problem , in particular with regard to implementation of existing regulations and an improved inspection system , as well as a broadening of the scientific base .
Commissioner , I would like to know whether this communication is already being prepared by the Commission services .
In other speeches , Commissioner Potočnik also referred to a new agency .
Although we already have a large number of official bodies , he is obviously thinking of a way to strengthen the control of the Member States ' authorities in this area .
I would like to know how things stand in this area , because at present it would seem that we are unable to resolve this problem .
What steps does the Commission intend to pursue in this area ?
deputising for the author . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the poor implementation of the Waste Shipments Regulation has been a serious problem for a long time now .
This has been emphasised by the European Union Network for the Implementation and Enforcement of Environmental Law since 2003 , and it has made clear proposals for improvements .
The Commission , however , has done virtually nothing , unless you count the many studies it has conducted and its proposal for a new Renewables Directive .
For more than 10 years now , Parliament has been calling for tighter controls , including legislation on European inspections : for minimum criteria for inspections in Mr Jackson 's report in 1999 , for legislative reform for shipments of waste in Mr Blokland 's report in 2003 , and for minimum criteria for inspections in the 2008 resolution .
All these the Commission has mainly just ignored .
In 2006 , we were shocked by the massive Trafigura scandal , when huge quantities of toxic waste were dumped in Côte d 'Ivoire .
The then Commissioner for the Environment , Stavros Dimas , promised to look for ways to strengthen the Waste Shipments Regulation and its implementation in the Member States , but nothing concrete happened .
Two years ago , a Commission study recommended that a special agency should be set up for the implementation of legislation on waste .
It would execute numerous tasks , such as checking the investigation systems in place in Member States and coordinating controls and inspections , but no proposal was put forward .
Last year , a Commission study came to the conclusion that the best option would be a legal instrument governing the criteria for inspections , but no proposal was put forward , although Commissioner Potočnik has said that the implementation of EU environmental legislation is his priority .
Now I would ask the Commission when it actually intends to introduce proper measures , instead of just conducting more studies .
When will we have a proper legislative proposal , and not just communications and studies ?
As my colleague Mr Seeber said , this would also improve Europe 's resource efficiency .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , illegal waste exports and the illegal disposal of waste pose an increasing threat to the health and environment of millions of people in developing countries .
The volume of toxic waste is continuously increasing in the EU .
Because of the high cost of recycling and disposing of waste , there is an enormous temptation to ship this waste to countries with less stringent environmental controls and lower disposal costs .
I am pleased to find that this problem is accepted by all sides of the House and hope that Parliament will take a concerted approach to this issue .
The legal loopholes that permit these hazardous exports must be closed .
The existing regulations on the shipment of toxic waste to developing countries must be tightened up and enforced .
We need a legislative proposal for environmental inspections , something that Parliament already called for in 2008 , so that ships can be inspected effectively by the authorities in the local ports .
This must also be linked with the possibility of impounding ships in ports throughout the EU if there are grounds to suspect breaches of the law .
We propose that this should be reinforced in a joint resolution by all sides of the House .
The entry of waste into the EU must also be better controlled .
Off the coast of Calabria , just a few miles away from the port of Cetraro , there is a sunken vessel known for carrying highly toxic waste .
It is assumed that many other toxic waste transporters have been sunk just off the coast in the Tyrrhenian Sea .
This example illustrates the need for transparency in the shipment of waste and for reliable official inspections .

Mr President , honourable Members , firstly , my colleague and friend Mr Potočnik sends his apologies , as he is in New York this evening for the signing of an important agreement - the Nagoya Agreement - on biodiversity .
Nevertheless , I am pleased to have been given the opportunity to stand in for him , or to try to do so anyway , since the issue you are discussing is one that has always interested me , ladies and gentlemen .
I was Environment Minister in my own country and I have not forgotten the efforts that we made , during my first mandate as Commissioner around 10 years ago , to begin to address this extremely serious issue with Parliament .
The Waste Shipments Regulation prohibits exports of hazardous waste to developing countries , as well as exports outside the Union and the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) countries of waste intended for disposal .
However , we know - and you have pointed it out - that the efforts made to enforce this ban vary greatly between Member States .
Operators often seek to benefit from inadequate inspections in order to get round the ban and smuggle the waste through other Member States where the inspections are less rigorous , as you said .
Furthermore , false declarations are often used to export waste as second-hand goods , which complicates the work of the authorities responsible for monitoring and enforcing the rules .
Then there is the obviously low treatment cost in third countries , which is the main economic factor encouraging or driving these illegal shipments .
There is also the very serious situation of countries that receive , so to speak , this waste , these illegal shipments , which cause significant pollution of the air , water , soil and homes , and which threaten - as you said a moment ago , Mrs Wils , and as Mrs Bearder and Mrs Rosbach said with the same emotion before you - people 's health , and particularly children 's health , which is the most shocking of all , as well as the health of workers and of a large proportion of the population .
The already toxic nature of the hazardous substances contained in waste often poses a further increased risk when inappropriate waste management techniques are used , which is often the case in these countries of destination .
Furthermore , illegal shipments of waste to third countries obviously have an adverse effect on trade and competition since , economically speaking , businesses that comply with the legislation evidently face competition and are put at a disadvantage .
The European recycling and waste management sector , which is bound to comply with the EU 's rigorous environmental legislation , is a dynamic one .
It has a healthy EUR 95 billion turnover .
It provides , or supports , 1.2 to 1.5 million jobs and accounts for 1 % of GDP , and this waste management and recycling sector , which operates by the rules , is also competing with , and put at a disadvantage by , these illegal shipments .
Effective enforcement of the Waste Shipments Regulation at EU level would encourage this sector , I believe , to invest and to create even more jobs in the future .
Illegal waste shipments and poor quality recycling also lead to a loss of resources , since secondary raw materials can go a long way towards meeting Europe 's raw material requirements , and can also improve the effectiveness and use of resources .
On the basis of this diagnosis , then , we need to improve the situation .
That is why the Commission has sought to find out whether additional legislative measures need to be taken at EU level and , if so , which new , specific requirements and criteria they would include for waste shipment inspections .
We are currently completing an impact assessment of the various possible approaches to resolving the problem that I just mentioned , including national inspection and mandatory national risk assessment plans and programmes , as well as more targeted training for national officials responsible for enforcing the provisions and , on the other side of the coin , for proving that those who declare waste to be second-hand goods are doing so fraudulently .
I should like to conclude , Mr President , by raising the following points in response to some specific questions .
Firstly , it is possible to circumvent the Waste Shipments Regulation by claiming that the articles being exported are second-hand goods rather than waste .
The main problem is that the Member States are not implementing the inspection requirements properly .
To remedy this , the Regulation needs to be supplemented by more detailed rules on national inspections .
The legislative measures should be accompanied by adequate training for officials in charge of enforcing the rules , as I said .
Secondly , non-legally binding guidelines at EU level could support and facilitate the implementation and enforcement of the Waste Shipments Regulation , particularly by customs officers , and thus help to combat illegal activities .
However , guidelines alone will not be enough .
We also need binding rules to combat this problem .
Thirdly , waste production has increased or stabilised in recent years .
Waste management is improving throughout the Union , and recycling has increased over the last five years .
Yet what is remarkable today is the great disparities between the Member States with regard to the implementation of our waste requirements .
The Commission , ladies and gentlemen , is conscious of the environmental , economic , social , human and public health consequences of illegal waste shipments , and the Probo Koala affair , in which several people died after being exposed to hazardous waste illegally dumped in Côte d 'Ivoire , is one of the worst examples in living memory , and here too there are lessons to be learnt .
The Commission has launched numerous studies on this issue , and the results of these investigations can be consulted on our website .
Once illegal shipments of waste have been detected , there are measures laid down in the regulation to remedy the situation .
The waste must be sent back to its country of origin , pursuant to EU legislation and international law .
If the companies responsible cannot be located , the country of origin in the Union must pay a fee to have the waste repatriated and treated .
In some cases , Member States have to bear costs in excess of EUR 1 million .
In the Probo Koala affair , which I mentioned a moment ago , the company Trafigura had to pay the equivalent of EUR 152 million in clean-up costs and EUR 33 million in compensation to the residents of the affected towns .


Lastly , I should like to say to Mr Seeber that , as far as I am aware , Mr Potočnik promised to present that communication on the implementation and enforcement of EU law and he is in the process of drafting it .
Mr President , many of us are outraged at the fact that , despite a comprehensive public debate on this , Europe is still dumping hazardous waste in poorer countries .
As many here have already said , we are right to be outraged .
Not only do we use products that exhaust and damage the environment and then also fail to deal with them properly once we no longer want them , we also dump the hazardous waste , which damages the health of innocent people , often children , and makes the land and water in other countries toxic for generations to come .
That is absolutely unacceptable .
How can this be allowed to continue ?
We have legislation and we have a ban in place , but it is not working .
Therefore , the Commission must now propose amendments .
Of course , the best solution , as always , would be for there not to be any hazardous waste .
The extensive work that we have carried out to identify and phase out hazardous chemicals , within REACH for example , is therefore important in this case , too .
Since the ban on the export of hazardous waste is not working , I think that we should be especially pleased that we have strengthened the legislation concerning waste electrical and electronic equipment ( WEEE ) by setting high collection targets .
However , knowing how poor the Member States ' compliance with the export ban is , there are good reasons for the Commission also to closely monitor the Member States ' actions with regard to WEEE and other legislation stipulating how this type of product should be dealt with .
As many people have said , including the Commission , we need some form of clarification and simplification of what rules actually apply when it comes to the shipping of toxic waste to developing countries , so that it will be easier for the police and other border control officers to take measures to deal with the crimes against the environment that the export of hazardous waste actually entails .
However , we just as surely need the Member States to give higher priority to this matter .
I think the fact that the Member States are failing in their responsibility to check their compliance with EU legislation is a constantly recurring issue .
It is very clear here that the Member States are not fulfilling their obligations .
The Member States must take greater responsibility , and we expect the Commission to ensure that they do .
What you have presented here today , Mr Barnier , seems to me to be a definite step in the right direction .
Once we are able to see the whole communication we will be able to decide whether or not we think the number of steps taken are sufficient . Thank you .
- ( CS ) Mr President , the exponential growth in the volume of waste from European manufacturing and consumption looks like a time bomb , both in the EU and in the developing countries to which hazardous waste is exported , much of it illegally .
Commissioner , I welcomed your communication of the Commission 's specific desire to remove the gaps in the legislation relatively soon .
Along with the speakers who came before me , however , I believe there is little desire on the part of Member States , in particular , to invest in controls and to introduce sufficiently harsh penalties for breaches of the existing rules .
As the Vice-Chair of the Delegation to the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I believe we also need to establish a common strategy with the ACP countries for the fight against illegal imports of toxic waste to these countries , and in particular action plans for introducing a system for the safe management of waste in African countries , including support for recycling technology .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the seemingly strict EU regulation concerning hazardous waste has many loopholes in practice , which can be eminently used by organised groups of criminals and the hazardous waste mafia .
Illegal disposal of toxic waste classed as hazardous has become one of the most lucrative businesses .
One reason for this is the extremely high cost of legal disposal and recycling ; another reason is the over-bureaucratisation of obtaining legal licences .
The solution has to be bi-directional : the administrative burdens of enterprises that recycle and dispose of hazardous waste legally has to be relieved , and of course in parallel , producers of hazardous waste should be encouraged to choose the legal course and made interested in restraining the hazardous waste mafia .
On the other hand , criminal law sanctions for environmental crimes must be radically tightened , and inspection must be uniformly increased at EU level .
- ( SK ) Mr President , it is a quarter to midnight and we are debating a serious matter : the exporting of toxic waste to developing countries .
It is scandalous that European countries in the modern age are engaging in the kind of activity we saw in the Oscar-winning film Erin Brockovich , which featured Julia Roberts , and where we saw that only in California could something like this happen , with factories exporting toxic waste and people then falling seriously ill and even dying .
It is a very sad fact that EU Member States export their toxic waste to African countries that are almost powerless to prevent this , and it includes toxic elements such as lead , cadmium , mercury , asbestos and others .
In my opinion it is good that the Commission wants to continue working on this .
I would like to call on Commissioner Barnier , who promised us that the Commission would take a more energetic approach , to adopt measures to improve this situation .
Mr President , there is a problem in the European Union because our citizens are dumping on their own doorsteps .
To do that in Europe is one thing but to do it to the developing world and to the poor is , as the authors of this question said , reprehensible .
I will listen carefully to the Commission 's response about new legislation .
I am always concerned that we layer legislation on top of existing laws without looking at the enforcement aspects , and I would ask the Commission to address the issue of enforcement .
I think in many areas we do not have sufficient numbers in Member States to correctly keep control and account of the transportation issue , in this case of toxic waste .
The consequences for the health and welfare of those who handle this waste in a very inappropriate way are extremely serious .
This is a moral and ethical question .
Perhaps if our citizens were aware of this - I think they are not - they might think twice about their purchasing and disposal methods .
Mr President , Mrs McGuinness made an important point just now , namely that there is a moral and ethical dimension to this issue , given all the public health , biodiversity and economic concerns we have raised .
That is why - and I say this to Mrs Westlund and Mrs Roithovà , as well as to other speakers - the Commission is determined to act .
In order to support the impact assessment , which will demonstrate the justification for this initiative , the Commission will propose tightening up EU legislation , in particular so as to improve inspections and enforcement of the Waste Shipments Regulation .
This should greatly reduce the considerable number of illegal shipments .
All possible solutions are being examined .
Give Mr Potočnik the few weeks he needs to draft this legislation .
I can say on his behalf that it will be before the end of this year , 2011 , that the Commission , taking into consideration the very important debate that you have held , despite the late hour , presents its legislative proposals to step up the fight against these illegal shipments and all their consequences .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
, in writing . - Earlier this year I made some enquiries to the European Commission in response to press reports about shipments of toxic waste from Italy to Romania .
Although no evidence was found for the shipments , what was clear from the outcome of my enquiries was that we could benefit from more regular inspections of cargo , as this would act as a deterrent to those involved in the illegal shipment of waste .
Such measures may have an additional impact in the case of third countries because they may lack the capacity to properly monitor incoming shipments and therefore prevent the entry of toxic material into their territory .
We should give serious consideration to the benefits of thorough , regular inspections , coordinated at EU level , especially in the case of shipments to developing countries .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to apologise for the delay .
There was a very exciting and interesting discussion between President Barroso , Commissioner Lewandowski and the leaders of the political groups , so we are a few minutes late .
There is now a very important discussion ahead of us and I would like to invite you to this discussion .
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Delegated acts ( Rule 87a ) : see Minutes
Main aspects of the common foreign and security policy and the common security and defence policy - Situation in Syria and in Camp Ashraf - Report : Albertini - Annual report from the Council to Parliament on the main aspects of CFSP in 2009 - Report : Gualtieri - Development of CSDP following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty - Report : Muñiz De Urquiza - The EU as a global actor : its role in multilateral organisations ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the main aspects of the common foreign and security policy and the common security and defence policy ( Article 36 TEU ) ,
the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the situation in Syria and in Camp Ashraf and the situation of the Coptic Christian community of Egypt ,
the report by Mr Albertini , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2009 , presented to the European Parliament in application of Part II , Section G , paragraph 43 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 ,
the report by Mr Gualtieri , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the development of the common security and defence policy following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and
the report by Mrs Muñiz De Urquiza , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the EU as a global actor : its role in multilateral organisations .
Before we begin , I would like to say a few words .
On Monday , we remembered Europe Day , a day in celebration of the European Union .
Without doubt , what we most need in the European Union today is a common foreign and security policy .
We face historical challenges , only one of which is the need to overcome the crisis which has been imported into Europe .
We must prepare for this kind of situation in the future and solve the problems of the crisis which exist outside Europe , too , and not just those inside Europe .
We also have the growing disorder in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen , as well as the renewed unrest in Tunisia and Egypt .
We should not forget our eastern neighbours - indeed , a few days ago , we launched Euronest .
We have our common European diplomacy , which needs to be an effective tool for action outside the European Union , because it is not possible to solve problems inside the European Union today if we do not begin seriously to solve problems outside the European Union .
The European Union must have greater political strength and not just economic strength .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , this will be the first of three contributions that I will make to honourable Members this morning , so I want to start by giving you my vision of the issues that face us and also to try and touch upon some of the detail of the issues that honourable Members have added to this debate , knowing the importance that you attach to them .
Let me begin .
There are storms blowing across the countries we call our neighbours - Arab spring , winds of change , whatever imagery we use .
None of us in this House know where it will end and what that end will bring .
Aspirations are high and expectations too that the revolutions will have been worth the blood that has been spilt , worth the turmoil and fear , worth the economic havoc in a world already grappling with the worst economic problems for decades .
The uprisings across North Africa and the Arab world pose great challenges for Europe , but also opportunities we cannot afford to miss .
Two principles have to underpin what we do .
The first is that we in Europe know how long and painful the journey towards liberty can be .
Our own path to 20th century liberal democracy was a very slow one .
The European Union itself was born in the ashes of conflicts that remind us how terrible life can be when democracy breaks down .
Add into that the mixed record of Europe 's empires and some humility is in order , even as we assert that democracy is the necessary foundation of human progress .
Second , democracy is , of course , about votes and elections - but it is also about far more than that .
What we have learnt in Europe the hard way is that we need deep democracy : respect for the rule of law , freedom of speech , respect for human rights , an independent judiciary and impartial administration .
It requires enforceable property rights and free trade unions , and is not just about changing governments but about building the right institutions and the right attitudes .
In the long run , surface democracy - democracy that floats on the top with people casting their votes freely on election day and choosing their government - will not survive if deep democracy fails to take root .
But there is no certainty - not in the outcome in any country - and no quick fix or short-term solution that will create the world so many people want to see .
Meanwhile , the spectre of religious intolerance casts its shadow - witness the recent events in Egypt - finding its excuse in uncertain times to play on fear and to wreak destruction .
Freedom of religion or belief is a universal human right that must be protected everywhere .
We need to condemn all those who seek to use religious belief as a means of oppression , and support those who advocate tolerance , whether in Syria , in Pakistan , in Egypt or elsewhere .
Europe has choices to make too .
When we look at our neighbourhood , we have to be ready to rise to challenges that are being asked of us .
I can make hundreds of statements - and I do .
I deplore , I condemn , I urge , I demand , but we also need to act and that action has to come in different forms .
Let me mention sanctions .
We impose sanctions against regimes that treat the lives of their citizens as worthless , with people killed at the hands of police or security services that they command .
Sanctions on Syria were imposed yesterday - an embargo on arms , an asset freeze and a travel ban for 13 key individuals in the regime , the freezing of our association agreement and of our cooperation with Syria .
Let us be blunt and clear , as I was with the Foreign Minister of Syria yesterday .
What is happening in Syria is a popular aspiration for democracy and the rule of law - it is not some foreign plot .
By failing to see what it is , the regime loses its legitimacy and estranges itself from the people and from the international community .
Violent oppression and threats inside and outside are tools of an era that is long gone .
Our concern , in this House and in the European Union , is with the people of Deraa where the UN has been refused access , in Baniyas where the crack-down continues , in Hama where the tanks have moved in .
The Syrian people will not bow to tanks .
We say to the regime to change course , and to change course now .
( Applause )
I said yesterday to Minister Moallem , the Foreign Minister of Syria : You must allow immediate and unhindered access to humanitarian support and to the media .
Only then can your claims of support for peaceful protests be substantiated .
In our eastern neighbourhood - in Belarus - President Lukashenko failed to use last December 's presidential elections to show his readiness for change and a more open and democratic , European society .
Not only did he not take this chance but , in using violence against peaceful demonstrators and multiplying the number of political prisoners , he has shown contempt for democracy and the rule of law .
I met with the families of those who have been imprisoned and I know that he left us with no other option than to adopt strong sanctions in response , targeting those in the regime responsible for the crack-down , including President Lukashenko himself .
I also know that we should step up our support for civil society and for people-to-people contacts .
Then there is our direct engagement in Camp Ashraf .
What happened on 8 April is deplorable and has , and had , my strongest condemnation .
I have been adamant that we need a strong united EU response .
I have written to the Foreign Minister of Iraq and I spoke to him again yesterday .
While I do not question Iraq 's sovereignty over all its territory , it has a duty to protect the human rights of Ashraf residents .
I have condemned that violence and called for an inquiry - an inquiry that has to be as thorough as it is independent and that should tell us exactly what happened .
But , as honourable Members know from the letters I have received individually and collectively in this House and beyond , there is no simple solution here .
Several options for a long-term solution are being considered , with the United Nations in the lead , all of them with challenges .
I am very grateful for the work of this House , for the work of those who have travelled there and for the contributions I have received .
We need to take this also to the Foreign Affairs Council and we need to discuss this with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees .
Our Ambassador to Iraq arrives today , and she knows the importance that I attach to this issue .
We need to pursue and make sure that we find the correct course of action here , but the inquiry and the condemnation are absolute .
In Yemen , too , the Gulf Cooperation Council has put forward its proposals and President Saleh has once again hesitated .
I spoke to him not long ago .
We talked about the discussions he had had with the opposition and the proposals on the table .
I told him that he knew what he had to do - in the interests of his country - and that he should do it .
In my meetings in the Gulf , I met with the King of Bahrain .
We discussed the initiative there for the dialogue without preconditions that the Crown Prince has put forward , and I urged him to pursue that dialogue .
The current course there is not the answer .
We need to see fair and civil trials , if there are trials in Bahrain , and that the death penalty is avoided in all circumstances .
In all of these cases , it is about the direct engagement that we have and the pressure that we apply and the directness of our approach .
Be under no illusion : we are very clear , I am very clear , with all of the leaders I speak to about what I believe needs to happen , and I do so with the support of this House and with the support of the Foreign Affairs Council of the 27 Member States .
Of course I want to talk about Libya .
There are Members of this House who wish we had a stronger defence and security policy .
I say to them this : in the last few weeks and months , we have seen how far we have come in some ways , but also how far we still have to go .
We did engage together to plan the military support for humanitarian needs : ready at the request of the United Nations to support the people with resources from across Europe .
Just as we did when the terrible earthquake struck in Haiti - military hospital ships , heavy lifting equipment , civilians and military working side by side in that case .
Do not misunderstand : I know that humanitarian aid is apolitical and that humanitarian workers must not be put at risk but , in the primary objective of saving lives , sometimes it is only the military who have the equipment or people to achieve that - delivering aid at speed , putting in place the infrastructure - and that is why , should a UN request arrive , we will be ready to help .
We need to get faster and smarter in how we do this .
I am the first person to say and admit that there is much more we need to do , and I will talk more of that later on this morning .
We are improving our collaboration with NATO , sharing details of our operations for the first time as part of continuing to develop our relations .
Last Friday , I co-chaired with Secretary-General Rasmussen the meeting of the PSC Committee and the North Atlantic Council in our first ever discussion on Libya .
There is also our collaboration with the African Union with President Jean Ping , and the Arab League with Amr Moussa and , of course , his successor , and with the Organisation of the Islamic Conference and Professor Insanoglu , under the leadership of the UN special envoy , Al-Khatib .
It was in my discussions with Ban Ki-Moon that we agreed to bring together the regional organisations for a meeting in Cairo and to follow up after the contact group meeting in Rome .
We are discussing together how to play our part in the future of Libya - to support the national dialogue , to help with the constitution and to prepare for elections .
I have sent two missions to Libya to meet with and work with young people and with the women in Libya .
As the leader of my team said to me , it is the first time that they have ever discussed a constitution - words and arguments they have never known before .
They talked of how they longed for the end of the regime , so let us also be clear : Gaddafi must go from power and must end his regime .
( Applause )
I intend to open an office in Benghazi so that we can move forward on the support we have discussed with the people ...
( Applause )
... to support civil society , to support the interim transitional national council and Mr Jibril ( we have had many meetings with him ) ; to support security sector reform ; to build on what the people told us that they wanted .
They want help with education , with healthcare , with security on the borders , with the kind of support that we are able to give and want to give them .
And with all that we do , the silver thread of human rights runs through our work .
Then , there is the new Neighbourhood Policy - a different level of ambition and vision .
Mutual accountability is at its core : the EU and the neighbourhood are responsible to each other for delivering on the commitments that we make to the countries and to the people of our neighbourhood and to the people of Europe .
Building on what we have already talked about are mobility , market access and money , or the ' three Ms ' , as a simple way of describing it .
Some things are extremely important to support these countries into the future .
One example is the mobility of young people .
These are young societies where young people long for greater opportunities , and the European Parliament has a big role to play in supporting those opportunities for young people to gain benefits and knowledge from Europe .
So too with Member States : the opportunities to travel , to study .
For businessmen and women , it is important to have the chance to explore new markets , to sell their goods and services , and they are in the gift of our Member States , some of whom have long relationships with the countries concerned , but who now need to step up and provide those opportunities .
On market access , we know that we have a genuine contribution to make to stimulate economic growth and the recovery .
You know the effect of this turmoil on the economies of the countries we are describing .
Some of these countries rely on us as their major export market and the source of their imports .
Allowing those countries to develop their markets could make a real difference , supporting not just the opening of markets but how they gain access to them , ensuring that they can reach our standards , and ensuring that they have real opportunities .
Nowhere is that more true than in small businesses , but we have to have the political will to do it .
We have to have the political will to be committed to ensuring that we make our markets available .
That is a challenge .
It is a challenge in any circumstances ; it is a challenge in economic times , but I would argue it is a challenge we have to rise to because , if we do not , then the failure of the economies in our neighbourhood will have a direct impact on us .
Then there is money , or rather resources .
Not just what we can do in direct support - although that is important - but what we can leverage .
We have already hosted a meeting of senior officials from around the world and from the big financial institutions to discuss what we might be able to contribute if asked , and will , but in consultation with our neighbourhood , we have to do more to support resources coming together more effectively .
Nowhere will this policy matter more perhaps than in Tunisia .
Prime Minister Essebsi 's speech on television may help as the country moves towards elections on 24 July , but he acknowledged the problems of a country where economic growth rates are down to between 0 and 1 % .
We have to ensure support to Tunisia , to its economy and its civil society , and that means thinking not just of the long term , not just of the importance of a new strategy , but of what we do now and how we support countries - Egypt , Tunisia and others - right now with the budgetary problems that they have .
That is the reason we have started discussions with the financial institutions , with our Member States , with those who are engaged in wanting to support these countries , because helping them deal with deficits when tourism has collapsed , when the economy is not working properly , matters right now .
Honourable Members must understand that there is an immediate urgency and there is a long-term strategy , and we need to have both in what we do .
On Egypt : I have been there three times in recent weeks and I have spent a lot of time with some of the young leaders from Tahrir Square , and also meeting some of the women .
The women in particular are looking for the stronger voice that they believe they have been promised in the future of Egypt .
I met one woman who will be a presidential candidate and who is determined to show that women have that role to play in Egypt .
I have talked with many government ministers , and let me give you the example of the Planning Minister , Fayza Aboulnaga .
She wants to build houses for people ; she has a big vision of what building a million houses over twenty years could mean for Egypt .
We need to take these big visions from countries with whom we are working and translate them into what it is that we can provide and support .
So , integrating training and education , infrastructure around housing programmes , opportunities for small businesses to grow , working with UN women - as I am - to consider how we build safer communities around the housing projects , how we work together to design a much bigger , grander vision that is built upon what the Egyptian people want .
I am talking to the Foreign Minister of Egypt , Al-Araby , who is committed to working closely with us on the Middle East Peace Process , keen to develop the strength of the relationship that we already have , and keen to see us as partners in collaborating in the region .
There will be many challenges for Egypt in the coming months and years .
We have to be there to support them through each of those challenges and be willing to put our resources , our knowledge , our expertise and our contacts in favour of supporting them .
I have always said in this House and beyond that the External Action Service is a force to prevent and resolve conflict , so let me just mention , too , that this is why our role in Serbia and Kosovo matters .
It is why the vote that we won at the UN , the voice that we now have , can play its part .
It is why we have to engage the leaders in Bosnia to get them to get their eyes off the floor , to get them from thinking only about their own communities to thinking about the needs of their country , and to see their future and to see the European Union .
It is why too we play a role in the Middle East Peace Process .
Honourable Members know well that stability in the Middle East requires peace .
The quest for a negotiated agreement has dominated the region for decades .
We have brought new vigour to the Quartet in recent months .
I hosted a Quartet principals meeting in February and the follow-up of the Quartet envoys has been working with the Israeli and Palestinian negotiators for the very first time since the Quartet was established .
I wanted another principals meeting in April , and we have prepared a substantial statement based on our position .
I continue to believe a negotiated solution is the way forward , and we will stay engaged and have another envoys meeting later this month .
We , too , have been a strong supporter of Palestinian state-building , so when the ad hoc Liaison Committee meeting was hosted by us on 13 April , I listened to the praise for the work of Salam Fayyad , for his remarkable achievements in governance , the rule of law and human rights , education , health and social protection - sufficient for a functioning government according to the World Bank .
I have acknowledged the importance of Palestinian reconciliation behind President Abbas as an opportunity and something that the European Union has called for for years .
What is happening now is the most serious effort so far to establish unity , which is , in itself , key to achieving the two-state solution .
I have been in close contact with President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad , as well as with Egypt , the Arab League , the United States and with Israel .
Non-violence , the continuation of state-building and abiding by existing commitments will be crucial , and we must judge this effort by its results .
I do believe that Israel should hand over the tax revenues owed to the Palestinians , but I want to be clear that our position on Hamas has not changed and Israel 's security remains a key concern for all of us .
I also want to say that I do not consider a flotilla to be the right response to the humanitarian situation in Gaza .
I have been there twice .
I continue to highlight the plight of the people , especially asking for more access to enable the economy to start to develop .
The situation there frankly , especially for the children , is awful .
We have put forward proposals to Israel to support that greater access .
I want to see the people of Gaza with a future , but I also want to see Gilad Shalit , captive for years in Gaza , given the chance to go home to his mother and father whom I have already met .
Europe 's experience tells us that true democracy is the necessary foundation of tolerance , of peace and of prosperity .
In North Africa and the Arab world , that destination will not be reached quickly or without setbacks , but building deep democracy is the only way that destination will be reached at all .
We have the experience to help every country that asks us now to help them make that journey to democracy .
It is why I am proposing to support the endowment for democracy which will enable us , too , to use our resources to support opportunities , particularly for young people , to engage in political life , to support the development of political parties , to enable people to do what honourable Members in so many countries represented here had to do themselves - i.e. develop the political process by building those political parties , civil society , and deep roots that mean democracy flourishes and grows .
I often say when I visit these countries that it is not about electing a government so much as the right to be able to throw a government out .
Democracy is about being able to say bye-bye as well as hello , and that is important : knowing that you have the right to use your ballot box , once , twice , three times , four times to change your government , to demand of your government , is critical , and you can only do that when democracy is deep and flourishing .
It is why what we have seen happening in Cote d 'Ivoire is so important , seeing President Ouattara finally take his place , and the role we have played has been significant in supporting that process .
It is why it is good to see the Nigerian elections going well and Goodluck Jonathan now being appointed properly .
It is good to see democracy begin to take hold and flourish and deepen , and that is what we have to support .
Change does not necessarily ensure progress , but progress absolutely requires change .
That means we have to be more determined to act .
Some of the things I describe require Member States to act , some require the Commission to act , many need the support of this House , and we have to decide that we will all play our part .
If we only do it when the media 's attention is on those countries or on us , then we will fail .
We must be in this for the long haul and we have to be determined in saying to our neighbours not just that they should start the journey towards democracy , but that they should complete it .
There have been three excellent reports which I shall speak on in my next intervention , but I do want to thank the rapporteurs .
I am going to end with a very small quote from an anthropologist , a woman I admire very much , Margaret Mead .
She said : ' Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful , committed citizens can change the world .
Indeed , it is the only thing that ever has ' .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , foreign policy has been dominated by the revolutions - some more peaceful than others - taking place in a number of neighbouring Mediterranean countries and , more recently , by a symbolic event in the fight against international terrorism , namely , the end of the Bin Laden era .
What is Europe 's role in all of this ?
Are we willingly and actively involved in the situation ?
Yes , we certainly are .
The action being taken in Libya under the auspices of the United Nations and on the initiative of certain European Heads of State or Government has demonstrated that , when it wants to , Europe - or some of Europe - can act decisively in difficult times .
Does this make us a key international player with influence to match our economic strength ?
The answer is a resounding ' No ' .
Europe is still effectively a bit player , at best a Tom Thumb in politics and geostrategy , despite the ever-increasing expectations of European public opinion .
Europe backed stability and development aid in the Mediterranean .
Yet the people are - quite legitimately - demanding political freedom and are fleeing their countries because there is no prospect of a life of dignity and opportunity for them and their children .
The humanitarian assistance that we have provided over recent months has definitely been useful .
Baroness Ashton , we need to do more .
Have we begun to learn from these events ?
I would like to think so .
What is worse is that the waves of migrants coming to our shores in flimsy vessels , who are dying at sea - and let me point out that we have inadequate information on the number of deaths - are all too often met by division , quarrelling , closed borders , with some countries even calling into question the Schengen Area , an essential instrument for freedom of movement .
( Applause )
Is all of this worthy of Europe , of European values , principles and ideals ?
I do not think so , nor does my group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) nor , I am sure , do the majority of Members in this House .
Ladies and gentlemen , the reason why we are meeting with the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy this morning is that we sought to give Europe a voice and a face under the Treaty of Lisbon .
We now need to move on and take action .
That entails making choices and sticking to them .
What , then , are Europe 's priorities ?
Relations with our eastern and southern neighbours ?
Combating terrorism ?
A solution to the conflict in the Middle East ?
Trade policy ?
Tackling all of the above at the same time is no easy task .
Who are our preferential partners ?
The United States , emerging countries , or others ?
How can we achieve the best results ?
By leaving individual Member States free to define their own policy , as we have for the last 60 years , or by speaking with one strong voice ?
Ladies and gentlemen , an intergovernmental solution is no longer the right approach to foreign affairs , security and defence : instead , we need more Europe .
We need to move away from national egos and towards greater effectiveness at European level .
Baroness Ashton , we will only have a robust foreign and security policy if we put all our weight behind and all our energies into a few clearly defined objectives .
Ladies and gentlemen , 2011 should be the year of the Mediterranean , of combating terrorism , even of achieving a breakthrough in the Middle East conflict .
If Europe is capable of becoming a key player in this area , it will be able to put the errors of its youth behind it .
Let me close with a quote from someone very familiar to you : John Paul II .
' Do not be afraid , ' Baroness Ashton .
We have made savings of EUR 4 billion in the European budget .
Please come up with some proposals for using that money , rather than returning it to the Member States .
( Applause )
Mr President , in a European Union where we are seeing moves towards renationalisation in all areas , the Treaty of Lisbon should be used as a tool for creating a new community policy : the common foreign , security and defence policy .
This is the first important general debate which we have held with Baroness Ashton and , if we look back to the early days , it was already clear then that there were certain governments which did not want the title of ' Foreign Minister of the European Union ' to be used and this has ultimately led to the name of ' High Representative ' being chosen .
This is understandable , because , alongside tax policy and domestic policy , an independent foreign policy is one of the key features , you might almost say an identifying feature , of national sovereignty .
Particularly in the field of foreign , security and defence policy , transferring this sovereignty to a supranational institution is a brave and also a difficult move .
However , we in the European Parliament , together with the High Representative , need to ask a quite different question .
This question is : What is the role of the Union as an independent body in international policy ?
Over the last few days , I have read articles about Baroness Ashton which have astonished me , because they criticise her absence and her lack of policies .
This criticism comes from people who think only about making their own national foreign policy and their own national interests the very top priority and who , without consulting with any of their partners , take unilateral decisions which will ultimately divide Europe rather than unifying it .
We only need to look at the mission in Libya .
There has rarely been a more obvious split in the European Union 's international policy and in its international involvement than over the question of how we behave towards Libya .
There is a tendency in the major capitals of the European Union to regard the EU 's foreign , security and defence policy as a continuation of each country 's own national policy financed with European money .
The larger the Auswärtige Amt , the Foreign Office or the Quai d 'Orsay , the more pronounced this tendency is .
Baroness Ashton , you will undoubtedly receive broad support from Parliament if you say to these people that , although you respect their unilateral interests , the common European foreign policy cannot take the same direction .
This policy will be defined by you , the High Representative , in all the areas of consensus .
I am in favour of opening an office of the kind you have described in Libya , because you as High Representative , the Union itself , and Parliament as an independent body , all have credibility in humanitarian and political terms .
We are more credible than the states which have taken military action in Libya out of necessity , but whose arms exporters also had the largest trade stands at Libya 's most important arms fair last autumn .
Germany , France , the United Kingdom , Italy and Belgium are the main suppliers of arms to Colonel Gaddafi 's army which is fighting the rebels in Libya .
That is not the sort of credibility which Europe needs .
( Applause )
The credibility which Europe needs is that of soft power , which helps to establish democracy , which opens an office to support developments in civil society and which does not define international cooperation with the European Union in terms of subjugating others to the unilateral diplomatic and economic interests of the Union , but instead encourages policies based on an equal partnership between different regions of the world .
That is my vision of the foreign , security and defence policy of the European Union .
You have mentioned the three Ms : money , mobility and market access .
In the next phase , you should add the three Cs : coherence , concreteness and the community method .
In my opinion , with the three Ms and the three Cs , you will find partners in the European Parliament .
We in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament know that we are still in the early stages of the cooperation between you and Parliament and there are certainly some areas for improvement .
This is why I am repeating my offer on behalf , I believe , of the majority of the Members of this House .
You will undoubtedly find more support for your vision of a common foreign and security policy here than among the 27 foreign ministers , all of whom I respect , but who all have one problem , which is that they are foreign ministers of individual countries .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
You , on the other hand , are the diplomatic representative of an entire continent .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , on Saturday , I had a long meeting in Cairo with the new Egyptian Prime Minister , Mr Sharaf .
The conclusion of this meeting , and my conclusion also after this meeting on my second trip to Cairo in the last two months , is - as you have indicated - that we need to give massive help to these revolutions in North Africa and especially to developments in Egypt .
We must stop making our little paternalistic adjustments that we have announced up to now .
I shall give a short comparison .
Do you know how much money was transferred under the US Marshall Plan ?
For years in a row ? 1 % of GDP every year .
USD 162 billion in actual money .
And what are we talking about and promising Egypt ?
One billion .
Not 162 billion , but one billion .
Not in 2011 , not in 2012 , but in 2013 , when we have the possibility to do so .
I think that is nothing at all .
What I expect from you and from the Commission - because it is apparently Commission money we are talking about - is not big plans about changing the Neighbourhood Policy .
We need to do that in the future , but what I expect is direct budget aid given to Egypt as fast as possible , because by the end of the year , they will have no money in their budget and that could be the beginning of a counter-revolution in Egypt .
Direct budget aid or cancelling the country 's debts - that is the way forward immediately .
An announcement today in that direction would certainly be helpful for Egypt and for the Egyptians .
My second message is about Syria .
Let us be honest , Baroness Ashton .
Syria is a huge disaster .
What is happening there - and I have no other words to describe it - is nothing less than an Arab Tiananmen .
An Arab Tiananmen .
People massacred by tanks and by snipers every day .
800 people killed to date .
8 000 people arrested to date .
People tortured in the most brutal way in order to release passwords on Facebook and the names of comrades working on Facebook .
Soldiers who do not want to shoot at their own people are themselves shot by the secret services of the army and of Bashar al-Assad .
From what is happening today in Syria , it is very clear that there is only one way to describe Bashar al-Assad , and that is as the most brutal dictator in the world at the moment .
That is the clear analysis we can make today .
( Applause )
So what can be done ? I see 800 people killed to date , 8 000 people imprisoned , some of them tortured every day , and we are freezing the assets of 13 people , but not Assad .
I say this is an unbalanced approach .
It is , in fact , ridiculous , and it is not helping to press the Assad regime to change its direction .
It is not enough to say 13 people and one of Assad 's brothers is there , and one of his nieces or nephews is on the list .
No , there are hundreds of people you have to put on the list immediately , as fast as possible , to apply real pressure .
I can understand your approach a little bit .
You are saying that if I leave Assad off the list , maybe it will help him change his attitude later on .
OK then , make that very clear here today in the debate .
I want you to declare that you give Assad a few days .
If , in these few days , he does not stop what is happening at the moment , then freeze all assets , not only of the 13 people but of the whole Assad family .
( Applause )
Impose a travel ban not on 13 people when 800 are killed , but on the whole Assad family and declare what is very important .
They are waiting for that .
Yesterday , we had a link directly with people in Syria who are saying that you have to strengthen the sanctions , otherwise he will not stop .
Declare that the Assad family will never be considered by the European Union as the real representatives of the Syrian people , and that they will be accountable for their crimes .
Do it right now .
That is what we expect today from you .
You can help to stop this Arab Tiananmen .
It is not true that we play no role : we play an essential role and the people of Syria are waiting for this clear message today .
Not tomorrow .
Today .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the major development in the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) this year has undoubtedly been the establishment of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
Baroness Ashton , as Vice-President / High Representative , you have recently come under pressure for its lacklustre performance .
However , you can only ever be as effective as the Member States will allow you to be and , of course , you are reluctant to use your own powers of initiative - an approach which I fully support .
On the one hand , the EU wants to carve out its global role as a diplomatic heavyweight but , on the other hand , the CFSP requires unanimity , which means compromising to preserve the interests of individual Member States , particularly the big ones .
This hybrid sui generis approach to EU foreign policy vindicates those of us who opposed the creation of the EEAS in the first place , believing then that the EU 's global ambitions would undermine national sovereignty .
Paradoxically , it now seems that national sovereignty is undermining the EU 's global ambitions , as we saw recently over what happened in Libya .
The ECR , my group , nevertheless remains constructively engaged with the EEAS .
We wish it well . We hope it will work .
It needs to bed down , and we want to see budget neutrality and more political accountability .
Although the Vice-President / High Representative has made excellent senior appointments - I have seen some of these before the Committee on Foreign Affairs - I must ask why she has been short-changed in a stitch-up by the Commission , which seems to have retained a disproportionate amount of resources for EU enlargement and the European Neighbourhood Policy .
This split does not provide value for money to EU taxpayers , nor does it serve our foreign policy interests .
Can I now make some specific requests , firstly on the imminent Gaza Flotilla Mark II ?
Can you , Madam Vice-President / High Representative , put pressure on Turkey to stop this dangerous provocation at a time when Israel is under enormous tension and pressure , with missile attacks from Gaza and the renewed passage of Iranian warships through the Suez Canal ?
And how will the EU engage with a new unitary Palestinian Authority that has Hamas , a terrorist organisation banned by the EU , as one of its components ?
Secondly , Madam Vice-President / High Representative , will you broker a solution for the closure of Camp Ashraf in Iraq ?
Next , will you condemn forthrightly and totally the passage of the Bahati bill in Uganda , which allows the execution of homosexuals ?


Lastly , I entirely agree with Mr Verhofstadt : I commend you in all your efforts to stabilise the Middle East and North African countries and , in particular , your condemnation of the killing of Christians in Egypt , but why , as Mr Verhofstadt has pointed out , has President Assad of Syria been left off the EU sanctions list after the brutal killing of innocent civilian protesters by his forces in recent days ?
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to put some questions to you today , Baroness Ashton .
Firstly , on the subject of Syria , like Mr Verhofstadt , I would like to know what is stopping Europe from placing President Assad on the EU sanctions list ?
Which country or countries are currently preventing the European Union from taking the only possible decision ?
Please tell us .
If Mr Westerwelle is the obstacle , then tell us that it is Mr Westerwelle : at least that way , we will know what is shaping different Member States ' policy .
Unlike the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs , we are not going to suggest that President Assad is the answer to President Assad 's dictatorship .
If that is what we are being asked to think , it really is unbelievable .
The only solution for Syria is for President Assad to relinquish power in Syria : that should be Europe 's position .
It is therefore obvious that President Assad and his whole family need to be included on the list - not tomorrow , not the day after tomorrow , but today .
If that is not feasible because a unanimous decision is required , then you need to say what is hindering progress .
It needs to be stated publicly so that we can have a proper debate in Europe .
Secondly , what is preventing Israel from paying the taxes due to the Palestinians and why ?
Of course we need to maintain security in Israel , but the Palestinians should not have to suffer in order to maintain security in Israel .
That cannot be the solution .
( Applause )
My last question : 600 people died on the Libyan coast a few days ago .
A vessel was in the area .
We have been told that it was not a NATO vessel , that it was not the Charles de Gaulle .
Apparently it was a Maltese vessel .
I would therefore like to know : what boat was it and what information is available ?
Who failed to rescue the 600 Libyan refugees ?
In the 21st century , surely no one is going to tell me that it is not possible to identify the ship in question .
The lack of action constitutes a crime : that of failing to provide assistance to persons in danger .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , during the course of this debate , you will hear not only praise , but also criticism .
To be honest , it is clear that EU foreign policy has failed in some areas , including in the Arab world , in Afghanistan , in finding a resolution to the Palestinian problem and in the conflicts among our eastern neighbours .
The question that I would like to ask is : What is the reason for this ?
With 27 different nations making decisions , how can we reach a consensus within the EU and within the common foreign and security policy ?
It is obvious that foreign policy is a policy of individual interests .
However , the time when the West could assert its own interests without taking into consideration its partner nations and their people is long since past .
The EU must show that it is open to adopting a policy of reconciling interests .
The main factors which contributed to the failure are double standards and a tendency to think in military terms .
The Members of this House almost cheered when the UN Security Council decided to take military intervention in Libya .
Today , I think all of us are at a loss when it comes to events there .
What are we doing for the people of Gaza or Darfur ?
How can we give the 1.4 billion people living on one dollar a day the right to a life of dignity ?
My group is particularly concerned with this question .
The revolutions in the Arab countries have one important demand in common .
They are all calling for justice and fairness , both in the distribution of wealth within society and in democratic participation in political decision making , including international relations .
The EU must respond to this demand .
In order to achieve this objective , we must work together to develop international law and not simply interpret and implement it unilaterally .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I have a number of burning questions on developments in the Israeli / Palestinian conflict .
What position will the European Union take , through its Member States the United Kingdom and France , in the United Nations Security Council in September in respect of the unilateral efforts of the Palestinian Authority to proclaim a Palestinian state , separately , it should be noted , from the peace process with Israel ?
This question , High Representative , is all the more pressing after Fatah and Hamas last week re-established Palestinian unity whilst completely ignoring the conditions of the parties , in other words , including the European Union , for a unified Palestinian Government , namely , recognition of the State of Israel , the renunciation of violence and terrorism and compliance with earlier commitments .
In the meantime , Hamas is making clear that it does belong on the European Union 's list of terrorist organisations .
Hence my pressing question : how , in this new situation , will the European Union apply its own Quartet principles ?
Conducting business as usual with Ramallah implies at any event letting go of these fundamental principles of peace .
All of this will cause serious damage to European-Israeli relations and it is of very little help to the peace process , on the contrary , in fact .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of European foreign and security policy is especially crucial at this particular historic juncture , which is marked by an extraordinary wave of protest that has taken hold in the Mediterranean and is also spreading across the Middle East .
In view of this serious crisis affecting the whole of the southern Mediterranean and now spreading into the Arabian Peninsula , the European Parliament must act as a sounding board for all these protests by ordinary people .
They are risking their lives , clamouring to improve conditions and to start the transition to democracy by toppling the current regimes .
This House wants to deal directly with the High Representative and Vice-President , Baroness Ashton , particularly because of our role in controlling the budgets of civilian and military missions under the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) and the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) .
The first part of the report particularly concerns the relationship between Parliament and the other institutions , primarily the Council and the Commission , driven by the post-Lisbon approach to European politics .
Another very important subject is the EU 's multilateralism , which benefits , above all , from the recent establishment of the European External Action Service , which has at last come into being .
In this regard , I have to welcome the recent resolution passed by the United Nations General Assembly granting the European Union observer status within the Security Council , thus acknowledging what the Treaty of Lisbon enshrines .
We have tried to produce an appraisal that corresponds to the current situation as far as possible .
The report rightly highlights the great wave of civil protest in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya , and also in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen , and points out events , contexts and expectations for each of these countries , as well as other subjects of particular interest , such as our strong transatlantic alliance and our hugely important relations with Russia .
Enlargement , support for civil rights and the establishment of the rule of law , diplomatic relations with the BRIC countries ( Brazil , Russia , India and China ) , the Arab-Palestinian conflict and condemnation of the bloodiest regimes are some of the subjects of the report that I am submitting to your vote .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) is going through an extremely difficult time .
Just when developments in the international system require the European Union to become a credible actor in security and defence ; just when the European approach to crisis management through supporting democracy rather than exporting it appears to be more suited to the challenges of our times ; just when the economic crisis makes the option of developing a common defence inevitable ; just when the Treaty of Lisbon provides new instruments to develop the CSDP within the framework of an integrated approach ; in short , just when a quality leap in the CSDP has become necessary and possible , the European edifice seems to be creaking dangerously and there is a real risk that the ambitions and possibilities of the CSDP will have to be drastically downsized .
The report I am presenting seeks to tackle this contradiction and suggests possible answers for the other institutions .
With regard to the Libyan crisis , we do not confine ourselves to expressing our disappointment either at the European Union 's inability to define its position and take joint action or at the restrictions placed on the EUFOR Libya mandate .
We believe the time has come for a European political initiative , in conjunction with our other partners , to bring about a ceasefire and to hold negotiations that will put an end to the Gaddafi regime and begin a transition to an inclusive democracy .
NATO 's military intervention is clearly unlikely to solve anything and it will do well to adhere scrupulously to the mandate of the UN resolution , avoiding any disproportionate use of force .
At the same time , we hope that CSDP assets will be used effectively to provide humanitarian assistance to the civilian population under attack and that future operations will be planned in such a way as to support the development of democracy in Libya .
The Libyan situation also calls for reflection on a wider scale , and I believe it reinforces the report 's suggestions .
Responsibility for the future of Europe and for security and defence , of course , lies primarily with the European Council , its members and also its President , who represents the Union in matters of foreign and security policy at that level .
We say to them clearly that bilateral cooperation and coalitions of the willing cannot replace the CSDP as the Union 's policy .
We do not find the idea of renationalising this policy convincing , not because we are Treaty purists , but because , if it were renationalised , this policy would not be equal to the challenges that lie ahead .
We propose that Parliament should enter into a strategic dialogue with the European Council , which we call on to discuss Parliament 's recommendations , to draw up a proper foreign policy strategy and to devote an extraordinary meeting to European security and defence .
We call on you , Baroness Ashton , to intensify your efforts to build a consensus among the Member States and to make use of your multiple functions to improve consistency between the CSDP , the common foreign and security policy and the other facets of the Union 's external action .
The European External Action Service is an instrument with enormous potential for this work .
The report puts forward several proposals for the role it should play , starting with that of being a crisis management board able to provide a genuinely integrated response to crises , and we are delighted to see that it is taking shape .
The Libyan situation also confirms the inadequacy of Europe 's military capability , which is well below the overall high level of national defence budgets .
It is quite obvious that strength only lies in unity .
This involves pooling , sharing , strengthening of the European Defence Agency , permanent structured cooperation , development of an efficient and competitive European defence market , strengthening of the industrial and technological base , and enhancement of joint command and control capabilities .
The inadequacy of these capabilities has been a factor preventing Europe from responding promptly to the Libyan crisis , starting with setting up a permanent operations general headquarters .
The report formulates a large number of concrete proposals on this and other issues , such as the integration of external and internal security policies in a way that respects the primacy of the Community method .
It is noteworthy that in this respect , the main pro-European political groups are united , and I thank the shadow rapporteurs and coordinators for this fruitful collaboration .
Parliament is ready to support the development of a CSDP that is fully integrated with the Union 's external action and is rooted in the values and principles of Europe .
Baroness Ashton , we hope you can respond convincingly to us both in words and , above all , in deeds .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Henry Kissinger defined the world of his time as militarily bipolar , economically unipolar and politically confused .
Today , international order is multipolar in all areas and , due to globalisation , is politically complex .
Globalisation implies , among other things , the dispersion of centres of power and the collective management of common problems and interests .
New international organisations and fora have emerged - an example is the summit diplomacy of the G20 , G8 , G7 , etc . - and there are proposals to reform the traditional international organisations .
In this context of change , and given the international legal personality of the European Union , it is vital that we urgently redefine the role that the European Union plays on this stage and that it takes its due place in the multilateral order so that it can fill the role of a relevant global player assigned to it by the Treaty and which this institution is requesting of it , along with European society at large , dare I say .
This process has already begun with the approval of the resolution of the United Nations General Assembly on 3 May , which will allow the European Union to participate in the General Assembly 's work .
This is an historic event and a diplomatic triumph that we need to recognise without equivocation and for which I congratulate you , Baroness Ashton .
However , given the complicated nature of the negotiations for the approval of Resolution 1973 , we can anticipate the arduous work that awaits you to update and rationalise the representation of the European Union , which is fragmented and dispersed and has an ad hoc status in each of the 249 multilateral agreements involving the European Union .
This does not only depend on you , clearly .
It also depends on the non-EU states that are members of the various multilateral organisations .
It depends also on organising the most effective form of representation within the European Union , and by organisation I mean an arrangement involving yourself - the European External Action Service - the President of the Commission , the President of the European Council and the now residual participation of the rotating presidencies of the Union .
It also depends on the Member States transferring the pre-eminence of representation to the European Union , particularly in the case of international organisations committed to policies for which the European Union has exclusive competence .
Baroness Ashton , we can all remember the Copenhagen climate change summit as an example of the useless cacophony that is brought about by over-representation of the European Union and its Member States .
We can also remember how well representation of the Union worked in the World Trade Organisation or in the Food and Agriculture Organisation .
Moreover , we can remember how disconcerting multiple representation of the various presidencies of the European Union can be in summit diplomacy , or the dysfunction that can arise through not implementing the provisions of Article 34 of the Treaty of Lisbon on the coordination of the European members of the United Nations Security Council when the common positions of the European Union are put forward .
Mr Schulz has referred to these flagrant dysfunctions in his speech .
I am referring , in this sense , more to the Member States than to yourself , in the call to construct the role of the European Union in a more structured multilateral world order and to draft a real EU foreign policy , setting aside any renationalising tendencies and temptations that are appearing in a number of our Member States .
However , while we are essentially appealing to the Member States to construct this role of the Union , we are also appealing to your commitment to put your capacity for political initiative and your services to work in order to raise the level of the European Union 's external representation and rationalise it .
We are at an historic moment for the world and you have the opportunity to lead the EU 's international role with , for example , initiatives such as the one you have announced of opening a Union office in Benghazi .
You can count on the support of this Parliament , and not only its support , in fact , but also its mandate to establish a rational , structured and coherent representation of the European Union on the international stage as soon as possible .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I would like to thank Members for their contributions .
One of the themes that came through very much in what all of the group leaders said - although Mr Tannock pointed out that his group had never been in favour of the EEAS - was the desire to see , if we have one , the unified approach .
I agree .
I do not lack any ambition for what Europe can be .
What I have to deal with is the reality of what we actually are .
We passed a Treaty , and I joked that when the Treaty was passed , I was handed it and given a pencil and those were the resources that I began with .
It is pretty much true , but we are not where we will be .
The challenge we have is how to make sure that , not just this House and the desire of honourable Members with the passion that I feel here , but also the Commission , the Council , the Foreign Affairs Council , the Development Council , the Defence Ministers - all things that I chair and am responsible for bringing together - move with that same ambition .
It does not surprise me at all , and I do not think it surprised honourable Members either , that on the way to this , particularly at a time when so many things are happening , we find that it does not necessarily work as effectively as you would like , or indeed sometimes as I would like .
What we need to do is continue that level of ambition for where we want to get to .
That applies in everything we do , whether it is the sanctions we impose - where we need the 27 because we need unanimity - or whether it is in the approach that we take on support for the countries of Egypt and Tunisia .
As Mr Verhofstadt said , we need the support of the Commission to really move and change and have a new strategy and a new ambition in the long and the short term .
Well , we support people right now .
All of these things require us to shift and make changes .
We are on that journey .
I am not complacent about it at all , but I am realistic about exactly where we are .
You can challenge me - and you should as often as you like - to try and make this move faster , and I will do so .
But do not accuse me of a lack of initiative , of not being ambitious for it , and of not saying this loud and clear in the Foreign Affairs Council , in the media and elsewhere , because that is not true .
I am really ambitious for this .
I am really determined that Europe can be so much more than it is , but it requires us to get on that journey and stay on it together .
It is difficult for individual Member States with individual constituencies to necessarily always be able to look at this through the lens of what is best for Europe in the world , and not what is best for the domestic situation .
I understand that too .
I agree with what Mr Daul said about neighbourhood terrorism and the Middle East peace process as being some of the key objectives that we have in terms of the work we do this year .
It is why we have been so engaged , for example in Libya , on bringing together the regional organisations - the African Union , the Arab League , the UN and the OIC .
This is really significant work in terms of thinking through how we are going to move forward in a process that it is currently extremely difficult .
How do we get to the point where Gaddafi has to go ?
We have the dialogue where people can see the future , and that work goes on all the time .
It is absolutely critical and it requires us to have a united front .
Mr Schulz said that there is a long way to go .
I agree .
We have much more that we need to do , and we need to make sure that the building of democracy is a big part of that journey , but we are on that journey as well in terms of what we can do .
I like the three ' C 's .
I think we can become much more coherent .
I think we can be better in cooperation and , of course , communautaire is the objective I know this Parliament has .
So please keep the pressure on me , but do so also in terms of Member States .
Regarding the Marshall Plan , I think what General George Marshall did with the initial USD 13 billion that he got from Congress in 1948 is an extremely good model .
It is a good model , too , because of the different things he did .
He got loans , services , advisers and the breadth of things that could make a difference , so I think that it is a good model .
It is not the plan we talk about for obvious reasons .
People want something that is new and for them , but it is significant .
I agree with you about the support and the issues of debt .
That is why we are in discussion with countries with whom those countries have that relationship , and it is also why we are in discussion with the Commission .
I agree about the terrible violence in Syria .
I am not in any way lacking in ambition for what we should do with Syria .
What we have got is again a journey on sanctions .
We started with the 13 people who were directly involved in the repression of the regime .
There was a lot of discussion , Mr Cohn-Bendit , about whether President Assad should be on and there were lots of different views .
I cannot just give you a list of Member States who said yes or no .
There were strong views about how we do this , bearing in mind some of the situations .
The decision was taken that for the first list , no , but we will look at it again this week .
I assure you that my determination is to put the maximum political pressure that we can on Syria and to try and make sure - as I did when I spoke to Foreign Minister Moallem yesterday - that they understand the significance of what they are doing and that they take this closing window to actually change course and make a difference .
Mr Tannock , you talked about many things to do with the support of the 27 , your desire to see us get the proper resources and being short-changed .
I do not think we are short-changed .
The institutions of Europe are all focused in the same direction .
We have got to make sure that the ambitions that you have for what we can achieve can actually be realised .
I have to find the resources for opening an office in Benghazi .
Supporting better our delegations in Iraq , which some honourable Members discussed with me this morning , requires resources .
We have to find them , both by being better and more efficient - I agree with that - but also by recognising what we have to do .
I have already talked about the flotilla , some of the issues concerning the Palestinian authority and the discussions that are going on - Mr Belder , you raised them too - between Fatah and Hamas .
I made it clear that our position on Hamas has not changed , but I made it clear that we support ways in which President Abbas can bring unity with Palestinians with his technocratic government and with elections , which is going to be so important .
We have not changed our position , and we are very clear that we are cautious in looking at this situation .
I also wanted to make some reference to what Mr Bisky said when he talked about the poorest in the world : ' support life with dignity ' was his expression .
I think what we do with the Millennium Development Goals and the work that we are doing in collaboration in bringing development together is going to be so important for that in the future .
Just quickly - because I do not want to take up too much time - I want to talk to Mr Albertini about his report and to quote from it .
He talks about coherence and says ' Coherence requires , first and foremost , the political will of the EU Member States to overcome their differing outlooks ' .
Absolutely .
We know that , if we are going to be successful in implementing Lisbon fully - and this is what the report says - we need that sustainable funding in the next framework as well .
I agree with the report in so many ways , but especially on the need to be proactive in promoting our values and in using all of the policy instruments that we have .
I am also keen to improve the dialogue that we have .
One of the greatest difficulties we have is time - how much time to spend - and I want to make sure that we are using the best possible time in discussions with you .
Mr Gualtieri , you and I had a good discussion yesterday .
I agree about the importance of moving forward , particularly on pooling and sharing which will be part of the discussion with the Defence Ministers next week .
We have got to make sure that we use the resources of Europe more effectively .
It is a very simple idea to pool and share , but it is very powerful .
We have big military potential , largely untapped , so decisions to use military assets and to support each other in pooling and sharing are something that we need to take forward .
We are also trying to improve the work of the European Defence Agency and to take up some of the challenges that we have clearly seen in the responses that we have had in recent weeks , especially in Libya .
Finally , I would like to thank Ms Muñiz De Urquiza for this report and for her support on the UN .
I think in the work that I did at the UN last week I have demonstrated my personal commitment to the power of multilateral action .
We have got to look at the EU in the UN system and in all of the other international organisations .
We have got to be clearer in our voice and more prominent and more creative in what we do .
That just leaves me to thank the first round of speakers and to say that I look forward to some final remarks at the end .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , in the discussion on European foreign policy and Europe 's position in the world , we are agreed that there is a need for improvement because of a variety of different circumstances .
However , we could follow the example of a similar area of policy which already functions extremely well , in other words , external trade policy .
The European Union has sole responsibility for external trade policy .
It is the only player and the only representative of the Member States .
It is not constantly being denounced on the basis of national vanity .
We may disagree in other areas , but here we are strong and united .
It is time for us to use our strength to ensure that the people living in our partner countries can benefit from the values that have helped us : human rights , social security , justice and freedom .
This new dimension of European foreign policy is something that we should and , indeed , must follow up to make the world a freer , fairer and more social place in future .

( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , permit me first to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gualtieri , for his hard work , and also to thank the other shadow rapporteurs with whom I had the pleasure of working .
I would like to say that , as a newcomer to this role , I had expected sharp altercations , particularly since the report has a certain military aspect to it , but as it turned out , the work progressed very peacefully .
In Mrs Ashton 's first speech , when she spoke about the conflicts which have broken out in North Africa , she said that we do not know where they will end and what that end will bring .
Of course , we cannot say that the common security and defence policy will be a wonder drug for all the world 's evils , but development of the CSDP would certainly mean we would know more about those conflicts and that we could perhaps prevent or resolve them .
I am thinking , here , about the conflicts which have broken out in North Africa and the Middle East , and also about the frozen conflicts which are still smouldering in Nagorno-Karabakh , Transnistria and the occupied territories of Georgia .
It is to be welcomed that Mr Gualtieri 's report covers many issues - it is a fairly lengthy report .
For reasons of time , I will not mention many of them , but I would like to touch on two things .
Firstly , the question of the operation of European Union missions .
In the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , we spoke many times about how we must learn from mistakes or from certain shortcomings so that these missions function better in future .
The question of the planning and management of European Union operations remains an open one .
The ministers of the Weimar initiative have raised this in a letter to you , Mrs Ashton .
We are hoping for specific action in this area .
Finally , I would like to mention EU-NATO relations .
I welcome the fact that you maintain permanent contacts with the Secretary-General of NATO and the Secretary of State of the United States .
We must continue these contacts , so as not to duplicate what we do - simply in order to save money .
We know revolution is not possible , Mrs Ashton , but we do expect you to take action which will aid evolution .
( FR ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , you have faced many criticisms over the last few days , Baroness Ashton .
Some are no more than cheap political moves and my group has condemned them .
Others , however , cannot be dismissed out of hand and I would like to share my concerns with you .
It is true that we do not always have a clear grasp of the EU 's external policy , particularly in terms of what it is aiming to achieve , in other words , its purpose .
Your communiqués are adopted but are often low-key , from which we can deduce that there are probably differences of opinion within the Union , which is , in itself , a message , albeit a negative one .
So , you set to work , you have your meetings , make your phone calls , you give it all you have got , there is no doubt about that , but the results of these efforts are , unfortunately , diluted in the media ruckus , and hence the Union 's foreign policy appears extremely weak in the face of the thunderous speeches delivered by some European Heads of State .
Yet here you have an extraordinary political space opening up in front of you with the Arab revolutions , and the role of European diplomacy in that space needs to be made very clear , because beyond the specific characteristics of each country , it is true that everything is connected .
For instance , the Fatah-Hamas reconciliation would have been inconceivable without the Arab revolution in Egypt and also without the recent bloody repression in Syria .
Indeed , it is because Bashar al-Assad has crossed the red line that Hamas suddenly no longer feels at ease in Damascus and is considering moves to Qatar and Cairo , and that it wanted to hold last-minute negotiations when it had been negotiating for ages .
These opportunities need to be seized !
So what is our current policy on Syria and the Middle East ? As I have said , it is unsatisfactory .
Furthermore , I share the anger of some of my fellow Members regarding the Syrian exception and now the exception for Bashar al-Assad , who has avoided sanctions .
This needs to be explained to us better , Baroness Ashton .
One more thing .
Unless an eleventh-hour candidacy is received from Kuwait or Nepal , at the instigation of the United States , we could well see Syria heading up the UN Human Rights Council on 20 May .
Can you really see Syria chairing the UN Human Rights Council ?
Baroness Ashton , sanctions are not enough .
Have you campaigned against Syria chairing the UN Human Rights Council ?
Have you pushed for an international inquiry into the massacres ?
Even if you do not manage to persuade the Heads of State - and I agree with Mr Cohn-Bendit here - say so , do not leave us guessing !
It is this ambiguity that weighs us down .
As for the Middle East , I am not exactly in agreement with you .
You have cautiously welcomed the Fatah-Hamas reconciliation , but will you engage in dialogue with Hamas ?
Are we to repeat the mistakes of 2007 ?
As we know , the situation is certainly very complicated .
However , I think we need to grasp this opportunity .
Hamas has supported the Arab peace initiative .
Both parties have made incredible concessions to form this government .
In the agreement governing the formation of this future government , which will take place in a month perhaps , there was acceptance of the concept of elections , of the Palestinian Authority , of the fact that Mahmoud Abbas could take part in negotiations , and of the concept of the 1967 borders , which are both an essential requirement and an implicit recognition of Israel .
So do not tell me that you still stand where you stood two years ago .
That would be unthinkable for us .
Baroness Ashton , the matter is urgent .
Caution in politics is no replacement for boldness : they must go hand in hand .
Parliament will always be behind you if you have the courage to provide a strong vision .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , we are still a long way from a common foreign policy which is really worthy of the name .
You are being criticised for this , but it sometimes seems to me that you have been made the scapegoat in a situation which is outside your control and which is caused by the fact that the Member States do not have the political will to agree on a common approach .
Let us take the example of Libya .
First of all , Italy blocked the imposition of sanctions , then France recognised the transitional council in Benghazi without any consultation and , finally , Germany abstained during the vote on the resolution in the UN Security Council .
There is nothing you can do to change this , but it gives Europe a negative image .
In Syria , we should have imposed stronger sanctions , but here , we also needed unanimity .
There are some Member States - Greece , Italy and Spain have been mentioned in the press and Germany may also be one of them - which are opposed to this .
In this case , you must stand up here and say : ' We have only been able to put 13 on the list ' .
The need for unanimity is paralysing us .
It no longer works with 27 Member States .
We must make the next quantum leap forward in our common foreign and security policy .
I would like to make this quite clear to Mr Tannock and his Tory friends .
What can you do ?
Make public the fact that European cooperation has failed and identify who is responsible .
Make use of the community instruments , in particular , to promote democracy .
I was surprised to hear you speaking here so openly about the European Endowment for Democracy .
We are in the process of drawing up a report on the subject with Mrs De Keyser as the rapporteur and we are evaluating what the requirements are .
I must make it quite clear that we do not want a second European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) , which is bureaucratic , slow , over-complex and unpolitical .
We need a solution that is unbureaucratic , fast , simple and political .
If you can bring this about , you will have our full support .
( PL ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , one of the most moving moments of my life was in December 2007 , when I was present at the symbolic opening of the border between Poland and Lithuania by President Kaczyński and President Adamkus , a ceremony held to mark the fact that Poland and Lithuania were joining the Schengen area .
I would like to say that for us - people who grew up behind the Iron Curtain - freedom of travel and a Europe without borders are tangible examples of the success of European integration .
I would like to make an appeal : under no circumstances should a return to borders in Europe become a political tool or an attempt at a populist response to what may perhaps even be real problems .
The Schengen area is a great achievement and we should protect it .
Thank you , Mrs Ashton , for saying that our position on Hamas has not changed .
The problem is , unfortunately , that the position of the Palestinians and of President Abbas on Hamas has changed .
I would like to appeal to you , Mrs Ashton , to ensure that the huge amount of aid which is going to the Palestinian Authority is not used by Israel 's enemies for attacks on what is , at present , the only democracy in the region .
I would like to remind everyone that Israel is the only country in the Middle East in which the Arab population can and does make use of the right to elect its representatives to parliament .
Madam President , I should like to make this point to the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative : Europe 's foreign policy currently lacks leadership , boldness and Community method , and this at a time when the Union has more foreign policy instruments at its disposal than ever .
You , as you often say yourself , are in listening mode : listening to national governments and waiting until they have pronounced themselves .
Then you present the lowest common denominator , and often at times when events have already moved on
On Syria , for example , what are you convinced of ?
Should Assad be included or not ?
What is your opinion ?
We would like to hear that .
Do you want to threaten sanctions or not ?
You ask us , you did that in your reply , to put pressure on governments , so tell us which ones .
Open the debate .
Sure , Member States often lack the political will to act in a unified and decisive way , and they do not want to see you strong , but believe me , Baroness Ashton , they will not support you and will not save your life as High Representative .
They are not a guarantee for you to stay in your job , I promise you .
And also this does not change the fact that the Lisbon Treaty envisaged a stronger role for you .
You are the rotating Presidency .
You are Vice-President of the Commission .
You can take initiatives .
You should set the agenda .
You should set out in front your opinions , your decisions , and then let Member States react .
If you do not take initiatives , at least do not kill those of others .
For example , the review of the Göteborg Programme on Conflict Prevention : ten years ago , it was initiated by Anna Lindh .
The Hungarian Presidency started a review and wanted you to take it over , but you stopped it .
I do not understand why .
I can only recommend you dare more , delegate more .
Follow Margaret Mead , whom you cited .
Be the agent of change that we need .
I promise you : only this will save your position , and nothing else .
( EL ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , I think that you are right to feel wronged by the criticism levelled against you .
How can you be to blame when you are bound by the decisions taken by the large states in the European Union .
However , I have one more question : will those levelling criticism here against their governments do any different from what they are denouncing when they are in power in their countries ?
I also agree with what Mr Schulz said : that until recently , European states were selling arms to those whom we have now discovered to be dictators .
However , policy means foresight , it means prompt diagnosis of problems ; otherwise , we are simply conducting a post mortem .
European states are bombing their recent partners ; at the same time , however , they are bombing and destroying the arms they themselves sold .
Obviously , you cannot sell new weapons without destroying the old ones .
For us , if the European Union is to progress , it needs to develop a policy based on principles of peace , detached from military means and interventions , and to promote the demilitarisation of international relations .
The Union needs to liberate itself from nuclear weapons and to help denuclearise the planet .
That will be a moment of glory for the European Union .
A word about a neighbouring country in the Middle East : Turkey .
Dozens of journalists are in gaol in Turkey and it still has 40 000 troops occupying half of Cyprus and violating the rights of Turkish and Greek Cypriots .
This is where I call on Baroness Ashton to see promptly in Cyprus what we saw too late in the Arabian Peninsula .
( IT ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the attacks on Coptic churches in Egypt and the killing of Christians are signs that religious intolerance is worsening , betraying the spirit of unity shown in Tahrir Square , where Copts and Muslims demonstrated together against the regime .
Coexistence and social stability are essential for an orderly transition to democracy , but they are made impossible by this lack of tolerance .
The authorities in Cairo must therefore make a greater commitment to protect minorities and to oppose Salafi extremism , which is a negation of the principles of modern democracy to which the Egyptian people aspire .
Economic development , with the resumption of foreign investment and , above all , tourism , is unthinkable without tolerance , order and stability .
It is therefore in the interests of Egypt and the world that Europe should grant generous aid , but this aid must be conditional upon an effective policy to protect minorities , in line with the ' more for more ' principle that you , Baroness Ashton , proposed together with Commissioner Füle .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , current events in Syria are once again making us aware of the dilemma that the European Union finds itself in with regard to the Middle East and what is happening in North Africa .
For many years , we have given our support to despotic regimes and dictatorships in the Arab world .
Now , when President Assad begins taking brutal measures against his own people , we are , of course , dutifully condemning his actions and imposing half-hearted sanctions .
This is not what is meant by credibility , in my opinion .
For the Arab world , democracy and human rights have obviously never been much more than empty words .
It is clear that attempts are being made to conceal the fact that Brussels or , in other words , the European Union , has primarily been acting in the geopolitical interests of the Americans in this region .
In particular , the helplessness of the European Union in the face of all the developments in the area of the southern Mediterranean gives cause for concern .
We welcomed the coming of democracy when the revolts and uprisings began .
What is happening now in Tunisia ?
At best , the situation can be described as chaotic , with the transitional government about to be overthrown again .
Egypt has what seems to be a permanent or temporary military dictatorship which is persecuting the Coptic Christians .
In Libya , there is a civil war in which the divided Europeans are intervening half-heartedly with half of their resources .
However , the Americans may find that Syria is a hard nut to crack .
President Assad does not even need to worry that the army will turn against him under external pressure .
There is also no protective power which could bring him down .
Nevertheless , regime change in Damascus would definitely have far-reaching consequences for the entire region .
The first Syrian refugees who are arriving in Turkey may be the vanguard of a major influx of people fleeing the conflict .
As a result of the current situation in Syria and Libya , we in Europe and in Brussels urgently need to develop an autonomous policy which is not dependent on or influenced by Washington .
Unlike the USA , Europe is directly affected by events in the region because of its geographical proximity .
However , we must not allow ourselves to be dragged further into the Libyan civil war or we risk becoming a target for terrorism and extremism .
Madam President , with regard to the report on the EU as a global actor , developments on the international scene show there is an urgent need for the EU to act more swiftly .
This means being ready to face global challenges .
The Lisbon Treaty has created the framework and necessary instruments for such action .
We should start by addressing global governance gaps .
Examples such as the Copenhagen climate change summit , the United Nations General Assembly resolution on enhancement of participation rights - congratulations to Baroness Ashton - or EU participation in the International Monetary Fund show the necessity not only of addressing these issues , but also of finding a common strategy .
The report shows where the effort should be intensified .
One of the most important fields is strengthening our role and coordination in the United Nations system .
The same applies to the international financial institutions and multilateral security organisations .
All this will not happen automatically .
It will take time and consistent and coordinated actions on our side .
What we urgently need is a long-term strategy clearly defining the steps and actions we need to take in order to consolidate our place on the global scene .
I hope that such a strategy will be proposed soon by Baroness Ashton and that we will have an opportunity to discuss it here in Parliament .
I have one further remark , which has more to do with the Albertini report .
This Sunday , there were local elections in Albania .
I was the head of the EP ad hoc delegation which participated in observing the elections , and I have a message to share with you .
The citizens of Albania - I am not speaking about the politicians but about the ordinary people - look at us - the EU - with trust and hope .
They hope we will help them to find a solution to the very difficult political situation into which politicians have led their country .
Compared to our global ambitions , what is needed here is a small step .
How good can we be in our home field ?
However , it is a test that we have to pass successfully and with dignity .

( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur , I would first of all like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Albertini , for his very positive cooperation on this report .
In this report and , of course , in this debate as well , we have rightly focused primarily on southern areas and on the Middle East .
I do not want to repeat what Mr Schulz , Mrs De Keyser and others have said .
I would just like to refer briefly to the situation in Palestine and Israel .
I believe that the reconciliation between Hamas and Fatah and their readiness to found a state represent a major opportunity , because founding a state involves commitment and responsibility .
We must definitely make that clear .
We need the recognition of Israel , we need peace in the region and we need a renunciation of the use of violence .
( Applause )
That is extremely important .
However , Israel must also recognise an independent Palestinian state in just the same way as Hamas must recognise the state of Israel .
Only when we have this two-state solution can we also bring about peace in the Middle East .
I want to look not only southwards but also eastwards , because , on the one hand , I headed a parliamentary delegation to Turkmenistan and , on the other , yesterday I was appointed as Parliament 's rapporteur for Russia .
Despite the understandable focus on the problems in the south , we must not forget how important our eastern neighbours are .
Turkey also plays a major role in this respect .
We should not simply regard Turkey from the perspective of an accession candidate .
Turkey must also be our partner , in particular , with regard to the situation in the Mediterranean .
However , it is also important for us to strengthen our contacts with Turkey when it comes to the Black Sea region and to include Turkey in our common European foreign and security policy .
This does not necessarily have anything to do with the question of accession .
Secondly , partnership with Russia is a very important factor .
We want to establish a partnership with Russia , but we need to negotiate from a position of strength and self-confidence .
This is something which we are sometimes lacking in .
While Russia has too much , we have too little .
Only when we are on an equal footing will we be able to reach an agreement .
Although I am very much in favour of this partnership , which must be a strategic partnership , I am very surprised by the pressure that Russia is now exerting , in particular , in Ukraine .
Previously , we would have described the members of the governments of Russia and of Ukraine as friends , but the way in which Russia is now behaving towards Ukraine is far from fair .
The same goes for its behaviour towards some energy suppliers and we have also seen this in Turkmenistan .
Therefore , we must make it clear to Russia that we want a partnership based on equality and on common interests .
Our objective must definitely be to establish a genuine and active partnership .
On the subject of Central Asia , Baroness Ashton , we want to become involved , but we have no representations there .
I know that there are financial problems , but we urgently need diplomatic representations in the area .
We want to buy energy from these countries .
We want them to move towards democracy and to respect human rights .
However , we are not really becoming sufficiently involved .
Mr Morel is an excellent man and he is doing a very good job , but it is not enough .
We need to establish more representations in these countries in Central Asia which are our neighbours .
Either these countries will look only to China or to Russia , or they will at least have a chance to look towards Europe .
I believe that this is important .
Finally , I would like to make it quite clear once again that we want to give you our full support .
What you have said today is absolutely right .
We in Parliament would perhaps like you to say it a little louder and more directly , even though that is not always your style , because then we would be able to give you even more support than we otherwise do .
Madam President , I should like to say this to Cathy Ashton : you spoke lucidly of the problems of getting agreement amongst 27 Foreign Ministers .
But the Treaty of Lisbon allows you not to do so : you can form coalitions of the willing and build up a systematic form of reinforced cooperation .
I think that if unanimity can only agree upon a list of 13 Syrians to sanction , then it is the imperative of unanimity which ought to be scrapped .
My advice is to find the avant-garde , to forge a core group of politically willing states and work with them to forge a common policy .
Madam President , Baroness Ashton will not be surprised if I express disappointment , not in the performance of the European common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) , but in the fact that she still insists on flogging this particular unnecessary and very expensive dead horse .
She may claim that the European Union has been engaged in some 25 missions with a CSDP label .
Well , it is all about the label : few of these missions stand up to scrutiny .
They are either missions better performed by NATO , straightforward civilian missions , or they are passive missions involving military personnel .
They have usually come about because the European Union has begged somebody to invite it to do something .
Currently , there are military operations being conducted by NATO in Libya .
Having failed to get a mandate to enforce the maritime embargo , the EU has been desperately trying to get the UN to invite it to carry out a humanitarian assistance programme .
The fact is that neither NATO nor the UN wants the EU pretending to get involved militarily .
Of course there is a great need for humanitarian assistance and the EU could play a useful role , but not in a way that merely seeks to promote a misplaced military ambition .
The trouble is that the very existence of the CSDP and all its duplicative structures is divisive and encourages allies to think twice about robust commitment to NATO operations .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , would my colleague agree with me that , with regard to the UN , if there was a single seat for the European Union on the UN Security Council - which is much mooted at the moment - that would constitute a significant transfer of sovereignty from the UK , and indeed France , to the European Union ?
Surely the current UK Government , of which he is a supporter , would definitely not support such a transfer of sovereignty ?
Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable Member for that question .
Of course , this is another of the baleful consequences of the Lisbon Treaty .
I find totally unacceptable the idea that the United Kingdom and France should indeed give over their United Nations Security Council seat in order to enable the EU to sit at the Security Council table .
I do not see that either Member State would be willing to do that .
Unfortunately the Lisbon Treaty encourages that , which is , as I say , one of the reasons why we so object to it .

Madam President , I should like to say this to the Vice-President / High Representative : I appreciate very much what you said in your first speech on your policy and what you have been doing with North Africa - Egypt , Tunisia , Libya - and especially the focus you put on the young people and women there , and your approach to deep democracy that has to be rooted .
I think that is essential , and all of us here in this House share that view with you , so I hope this will be successful .
On the other hand , I agree with many of my colleagues that Assad should have been included in the sanctions .
As my colleague , Danny Cohn-Bendit , asked you , who is the one - or who are the ones - who blocked it in the Council ?
Is it Mr Westerwelle or who ?
Tell us , and you will find support from us if you are transparent and open with us .
I think that will get support for you .
Explore your mandate .
You will have more support here from us if you tell us more about what is going on in the Council .
Go ahead and tell us .
I think that is true for coherence as well , as you and so many others here have said .
In the Albertini report that we will be voting on this week , we also call for the national policies to be supportive of the EU positions and of you , and I call on my colleagues here in the European Parliament , those of you who are from government parties in your own countries : tell your foreign ministers and your prime ministers to support the common European policy and not just look into your own domestic interests , including in foreign policy , otherwise we will never get a common European foreign policy for which we need you , Baroness Ashton , to lead , to be ambitious and to be bold in your commitments .
61 years after the Schuman Declaration , which we celebrated two days ago , we need more Europe than ever .
What we want is very concrete : conflict prevention and civilian crisis management , Lady Ashton .
We demand that in the External Action Service , we have independent impact assessments as a standard procedure for the qualitative evaluation of the security , human rights , gender , social and economic effects of each CSDP mission and we need more civilian personnel in these missions as well .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , for a start , I pay tribute to my colleague who has just spoken for her tireless work on human rights .
She talks about a common EU policy on foreign affairs , etc .
But does she share my dismay at the hypocrisy of the European Union ?
As she and I both know , the EU is opposed to the death penalty , and yet the joint statement by President Barroso and President von Rompuy on the death of Bin Laden says that it ' shows that such crimes do not remain unpunished ' .
Does that imply acceptance that the death penalty is a punishment ?
Madam President , with regard to my colleague 's remark , the death of Osama Bin Laden was not a death penalty .
What took place was a killing , and I personally would have preferred it if the United States had apprehended him and taken him to court .
However , that is not meant to be a criticism of her .
What she is saying that Mr Barroso stated was not hypocrisy .
It was a statement that was made .
I might be critical of it and , as I said , I would have been more in favour of having Osama Bin Laden tried in an international criminal court , for example , but that has not happened .
However , I do not attach any hypocrisy to this because we need a common European position .
On the death penalty , I think things are clear in this continent at least - although not in other parts of the world , unfortunately .
( FR ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the words that you used during your first speech about your desire for there to be a Palestinian State , after inter-Palestinian reconciliation , are very important .
This Palestinian agreement is a key political event , and contrary to what has just been said here , Hamas has , for the first time , agreed to the PLO and the Palestinian Authority acting as its negotiating partners .
It accepts the 1967 borders and the Quartet 's conditions , including the rejection of violence .
A transitional government in charge of preparing for elections is due to be put in place .
Therefore , conditions are ripe for the United Nations to recognise the Palestinian State within the 1967 borders , with East Jerusalem as the capital , next September .
Leaving aside what you said earlier , Baroness Ashton , what further steps will the European Union take to recognise the Palestinian State and champion this idea before the United Nations ?
Also , can you tell us what initiatives you and the EU intend to take to ensure that the Israeli Government hands over the tax revenues owed to the Palestinian Authority ?
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Le Hyaric , I see things in exactly the same way as you do .
The unity between Hamas and Fatah really is an historical step forward .
It may now perhaps be possible to make progress in the process of reconciliation between the Palestinians and the Israelis .
Baroness Ashton has made it very clear that the second flotilla will be a completely unnecessary provocation which could harm this process .
Would you and your group now distance yourself from your support for this flotilla in the same way as happened yesterday here in Parliament with the substantial involvement of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ?
( FR ) Madam President , no , that flotilla is European civil societies acting to lift a completely pointless blockade .
If the public authorities , States and ourselves had upheld international law , we would not be here and the Palestinians would not be living in the prison that is Gaza as they have for far too long now .

( EL ) Madam President , my congratulations to Mr Albertini on his report and for referring to the principles and priorities of the CFSP , the defence and security policy .
Of course , the world is changing ; the European Union is being called upon to face huge challenges and it needs to take serious action in order to do so .
Threats from ongoing poverty , the social exclusion of large swathes of the population , spiralling unemployment , geopolitical changes in the Arab world , take particular note of that , natural disasters and immigration are the basic problems at present and presage tensions for the future .
In particular , the question of immigration , which has become a sore point recently between Italy and France , has called the Schengen Agreement into question .
In my opinion , we cannot ignore the immigration problem , but we must handle it cautiously and decisively .
Yes to solidarity , but yes also to the maintenance of social structures .
Any debate on the Schengen Agreement must , in my opinion , be accompanied by amendments to Dublin II .

Madam President , I have words of sympathy and support for Baroness Ashton : I was watching a BBC programme recently on which you were being interviewed by Jeremy Paxman , who asked you some very pertinent questions and you felt very uncomfortable .
He asked you from whom you actually take your orders and which of the 27 nations you can actually speak about - and I think those questions have resonated in the Chamber today .
There is not one common policy , is there ?
We saw this with the UN resolution on the no-fly zone in Libya , when Germany voted against it .
How can we have a common policy when one of the major EU countries actually votes in opposition to two other major EU countries ?
You have an impossible task .
My words of support - and I was relieved to read in the Sunday papers that you denied you would be quitting your post - are these : as someone who is very critical of a common EU policy and of the EU taking sovereignty from my country , I wish you to stay in post for as long as possible because , while you are there , I do not think we are going to have much problem with loss of sovereignty .
After all , when you were the leader of the UK House of Lords , and you pushed through the Lisbon Treaty , which created your GBP 313 000-a-year job , you actually said , over and over again , that this was just a tidying-up exercise and not a significant transfer of sovereignty .
You said that repeatedly to the House of Lords .
So there is no point asking you questions , because can we get an honest answer ?
( ES ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the central factor in this overly broad debate should be the situation in North Africa and the Near East .
We must approach this debate without extolling virtues - Baroness Ashton has rightly highlighted some positive elements ; I would emphasise the good or , rather , the better provision of information between Parliament and the European External Action Service - yet also without concealing defects , and a voice as sensible as that of Giorgio Napolitano , our former fellow Member and President of the Italian Republic , has reminded us of this recently .
Among the negative aspects , and despite the efforts of Baroness Ashton , is the different yardsticks against which the cases of Libya and Syria are measured in the United Nations Security Council and also in the Council of Ministers of the European Union .
Also among the negative aspects , Baroness Ashton , is the situation of Camp Ashraf : you are aware of the positive , constructive and moderating role that my group is playing in the development of foreign policy , and believe me when I say that the importance and sensitivity of the Iranian dossier has not escaped me .
However , in spite of the warnings about the humanitarian aspect made to your services , to your collaborators , to your cabinet and to your Director-General , and despite the fact that I submitted a draft statement to you myself , you did not speak out until there had been 32 deaths and more than 300 wounded .
You can draw your own conclusions .
You yourself said this morning that we have to act and we have to be coherent , particularly in relation to the defence of human rights ; especially by taking risks , Baroness Ashton , when there are lives in danger .
My question to you is this : with regard to the Cuban dissident , Juan Wilfredo Soto García , who was arrested , beaten and finally killed , are you willing to call for an investigation to shed light on these tragic events ?
If this investigation shows that there is a cause-and-effect relationship between the beating received and his death , are you willing to condemn them ?
Madam President , words are tools , words are instruments and words can be weapons in foreign policy .
Therefore , they should be used sparingly and prudently , but there are occasions when they must be used decisively .
I would like to say to the High Representative that I sorely missed her voice during the very first few days of the horrors perpetrated by the Syrian authorities .
I believe that the courageous citizens who were - and still are - demonstrating in Syria at great personal risk have missed your voice even more .
There are rare occasions when one needs to speak up immediately .
This was one of them .
Let me now turn to the Middle East .
I believe that withholding of taxes collected in Palestine by the Israeli Government is an ill-inspired action , and what is more , it is inconsistent first to demand that the authorities of the West Bank and Gaza should find an arrangement - an agreement - and when the agreement comes , to take this decision then .
Moreover , this decision is extremely cynical as it is very likely that the European Union will have to make up for the financial shortfall in any case .
So I support all my colleagues who have called - and I call myself - for a new impetus to a peaceful solution of the Israel-Palestinian conflict , which , of course , must be based on the two-state solution .
( PL ) Madam President , despite the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which governs the common foreign and security policy , little has changed .
Existing diplomatic offices have been given new names , but the Union has not strengthened its position as an actor on the global stage .
One might wonder if it is possible to operate a common policy for the 27 Member States of the Union at all .
Conclusions like this flow directly from the Albertini report , which notes a lack of will on the part of Member States to conduct a common policy and the statements of some representatives of those Member States which have created the impression of disunity .
Similar conclusions are found in the Gualtieri report , which draws attention to the widespread overlapping of defence programmes and the consequent wasting of limited economic resources .
NATO , therefore , continues to be the only effective force , and the Left-wing voices in Parliament , expressed in writing in a minority opinion and demanding , among other things , the dissolution of NATO , are dangerous and frankly anarchistic .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , the excellent report by Mr Gualtieri concerning the common security and defence policy includes an important stocktake of the situation .
I would like to highlight four priorities for the security and defence policy which we should follow up over the course of the next year .
The first is that we must carry out a realistic assessment of the joint missions and , in particular , an external evaluation .
We must also incorporate them into our regional policy concepts .
This applies , in particular , to the Horn of Africa .
Secondly , we need to make progress in pooling and sharing military capacity .
We must ensure that the separate route which the French and British are following is brought back into a common European solution .
The European Defence Agency has ideas on this subject .
You should put these ideas on the table and ensure that there is a public debate , so that we can make progress .
Thirdly , we need a public discussion about a new European security strategy .
The paper produced by Mr Solana in 2003 was a positive contribution at the time .
However , the world has moved on and we need a public debate .
Fourthly , we urgently need to come to an agreement with the parliaments of the Member States about joint parliamentary supervision of the common security and defence policy .
If we , by which I mean you , Baroness Ashton , and this Parliament , can succeed in making progress with the common security and defence policy in these four areas , in a year 's time , we will be very happy with what we have achieved .
( FI ) Madam President , I would also like to greet Baroness Ashton , High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , who honours us today with her presence .
This is my first speech , and I would therefore like to greet all my fellow Members in the European Parliament .
I wish to comment briefly on the creation of the EU 's common foreign policy .
Having a common , stronger voice in our foreign policy is certainly a good thing , but it cannot diminish the importance of the foreign policy of the Member States themselves , or its flexibility or independence .
We have to ask : who does the EU represent if it is not the Member States ?
Again , we have to ask : who do the representatives of the Member States represent , if the EU represents them ?
It must be a basic principle that structures are not created twice over and that the Union 's structures do not swell needlessly .
That is so , especially because it is very questionable as to whether the citizens of the EU in general also desire integration in the area of foreign policy .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , you have our support for the ongoing development of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) and for ensuring that it functions effectively , Baroness Ashton .
This applies , in particular , to the process of establishing the representations , where considerable improvement is needed as a result of the funds and the limited time available .
In addition , it is a major problem that every European foreign minister currently feels the need to run once round Tahrir Square carrying his or her national flag .
However , despite this behaviour , we must ensure that our common strategy is made clear .
It is our job and also your job to achieve this .
We must make use of the positions , in actual fact , there are three of them , which have been brought together in the Treaty of Lisbon and which you represent , not to find and then to implement the lowest common denominator among the Member States , but instead to take over political leadership , so that the common position is given a greater role and is so convincing that we can carry the other countries along with us .
This is extremely important if we really want to make progress in this area .
Earlier , you agreed with Mr Gualtieri about pooling and sharing .
I would like to thank him , Mrs Muñiz De Urquiza and Mr Albertini .
However , we need a three-pronged approach involving leading , pooling and sharing .
Those are the three things that we should have .
There are many individual points which we could raise here and which require tasks to be shared .
What progress is being made in Ukraine ?
Will war break out between Azerbaijan and Armenia at the end of the summer ?
There are signs that this will be the case .
Of course , there are also the major questions relating to the Arab world , which many of my fellow Members have referred to .
How should we react to events such as the flotilla , which , in my opinion , is a provocative act ?
How should we deal with President Assad ?
How can we ensure that the People 's Mujahedin in Iran does not receive any support , because I am opposed to supporting it , but , at the same time , guarantee that Camp Ashraf is not attacked again and its occupants killed ?
We need to take a sensible approach in order to identify a common position .
We will help you to establish the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) . However , we also expect the type of leadership which will allow for policy making at a higher level and which will convince the Member States , despite the complex requirement for unanimity .
This will only be possible with convincing leadership .
We will continue to wait for the results that follow from the development of the EEAS .
Madam President , can I start by congratulating the Vice-President / High Representative on her personal success in negotiating the compromise in the United Nations on EU speaking rights , where others had failed .
Whatever people in this Chamber , or anyone else in the European Union , think about our common foreign and security policy , this is the most outstanding objective endorsement of the ambition that you and we have for the Lisbon Treaty , a foreign policy that has real trust and respect from our foreign partners .
As Socialist coordinator on human rights , I also want to congratulate the High Representative on her strategic review of human rights and on the commitment in her letter to foreign ministers to integrate human rights with trade development and other EU policies and to achieve ' specific deliverables ' .
In this Parliament , we called on her to create a human rights and democracy directorate and to consistently meet human rights defenders in all of her visits , and we thank her for doing so .
When she says that ending the death penalty is her personal priority , this Parliament must also give her our strong support .
Our group supports Ms Muñiz De Urquiza in calling for greater visibility for the EU in the Human Rights Council .
We back Mr Albertini in saying that the EU must act , as well as speak , in the face of human rights violations .
We emphasise Mr Gualtieri 's conclusion that respect for human rights can never be compromised .
On behalf of my group , I also want to record our support on the issue of returning tax revenues to the Palestinians .
This is our annual debate on foreign policy , and in the next year , we hope to see clear outcomes to the human rights review and significant steps to developing a human rights culture in everything that the European External Action Service does .
( FI ) Madam President , the events in North Africa have once again shown that the EU 's common foreign policy is behind the times and ineffective .
The EU 's calls for a respect for human rights and democracy mainly look like a delusional Don Quixote in rusty armour battling with windmills , when compared to the lucrative arms trade engaged in by the Member States of the EU .
Seven of the world 's ten biggest sellers of weapons are EU countries , EU Member States , and weapons have been sold to Libya , Egypt , Tunisia , Bahrain and Yemen .
Baroness Ashton , might it be time to make a ban on the export of weapons a priority for EU foreign policy ?
The coordination of 27 different foreign and security policies is not the easiest of tasks , and you cannot blame the captain alone for the shipwreck .
Member States have a right to their own foreign policy .
We could , however , expect one or two things from the skipper , namely , initiative and ideas , and we are still waiting .
Madam President , following the appalling massacre in Camp Ashraf on 8 April , the situation there remains critical .
Another bloody attack could take place at any moment .
I have just returned from Baghdad , where I led a small delegation of MEPs in high-level talks with the President of Iraq and senior government ministers .
I have now brokered a solution to the Ashraf crisis , which you have seen , Baroness Ashton .
It requires the involvement of the UN , the US and the EU and needs your active encouragement to achieve the resettlement of the 3 400 refugees from Ashraf to the US , Canada , Australia , Norway , Switzerland and the EU Member States , or wherever they have family or other connections .
This is the only option that can avoid another humanitarian catastrophe , and it has been agreed by the people of Ashraf themselves .
The European Parliament relies on you to seize this opportunity to save innocent lives and avoid further violence and bloodshed .
Madam President , Europe Day this week was supposed to be a celebration of European national identity .
It is not .
It marks the ongoing replacement of European nation states with an EU supranational government , meaning above nation states .
This is in contrast to intergovernmental , where nation states freely cooperate , but do not cede powers to a higher central authority .
The Libyan no-fly zone illustrates the difference .
The intergovernmental United Nations agreed a no-fly zone pioneered by nation states such as Britain , France and the United States , whilst nation states such as Germany and Russia abstained for their own valid reasons .
The intergovernmental NATO is now conducting that operation through voluntary participation .
In contrast , the supranational EU vigorously opposed David Cameron 's proposal for a no-fly zone .
It is ironic that the Red Baroness herself , Cathy Ashton , stood against this no-fly proposal , her aide reportedly calling it ' headline grabbing desperation ' .
The lesson of this is that principal nations act intergovernmentally while supranational bodies merely fiddle as Libya burns .
( IT ) Madam President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , your job , Baroness Ashton , is a very difficult one and you carry a heavy burden on your shoulders .
I hope you will take my questions not as provocation but as an aid to reflection .
Baroness Ashton , at the end of our joint debate , we shall vote on the report on the European Union 's role in multilateral organisations .
Two years ago , at the hearing that preceded your taking office , I asked you what your position was on the European Union having a single seat in the United Nations .
You replied on that occasion that you had not had time to think about it .
The Muñiz de Urquiza report contains the Millán Mon amendment defining Parliament 's position on the issue .
What is yours today ?
Have you had time to think about it over the last two years ?
Baroness Ashton , 17 May is Europe-Iraq Day in Baghdad .
The EU presence in Iraq consists of two officials and one ambassador .
These three people operate in the British compound .
You would rightly like to find the resources to resolve the situation .
To help you , I would point out that there are seven EU officials in the Bahamas .
What happens that is so infinitely more decisive for the fate of the European Union in the Bahamas compared with Baghdad ?
Would it not be better to have 17 officials in Baghdad , since we are close to signing the first EU-Iraq agreement in post-Saddam history ?
Might they perhaps even resolve the Camp Ashraf drama in situ , since I am sure that your personal intervention could easily lead to a positive solution to it ?
Baroness Ashton , you have already intervened on the subject of the Egyptian Copts ; however , not only has the persecution continued , but today , it is a worrying element in the so-called ' Arab Spring ' .
The communications from the European External Action Service still talk of it as being a conflict between extremists .
However , only Christians are dying and only churches are burning in Egypt .
What is preventing us from acknowledging the truth , calling it by its name and extricating the Copts from their awkward position as hostages to a fundamentalist political project ?
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the turbulent events laden with uncertainties and hopes that are changing the political geography of the southern shores of the Mediterranean are increasingly posing a challenge to Europe and its external policy .
In view of what is happening , it should be increasingly important for the European Union to be able to rely on a sound , consistent external policy capable of dealing with a difficult present and planning for a problematic future , in which international relations will be altered and the world will be profoundly changed .
In view of the strategic repositioning of countries such as the United States , China and Russia , and growing shortages of raw materials and energy resources , Europe should develop a crucial , decisive role , but it is quite clearly showing itself to be unprepared for such challenges .
For some time now , it has been moving too slowly towards coordination of the external and domestic policies of its Member States .
There has been no substantial progress .
Evidence of this is , on the one hand , the lacklustre action deriving from its external policy and , on the other , the obstinacy of certain countries that are nostalgic for a colonial period that can no longer return and insist on believing that they protect their interests better by doing things alone and not delegating anything to European authority .
We need to turn over a new leaf .
Baroness Ashton , you have an important role ; please fulfil it to the utmost , in the knowledge that the time available is quickly running out .
( SL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , you embody the political ambitions of the European Union through the common foreign and security policy .
I would ask that you pay a visit to Iraq , in person , as soon as possible .
You need to be seen in Baghdad , and indeed in Kurdistan .
The Americans will be leaving the place by the end of the year and there will be a great void after they have gone .
However , the European Union does not have a presence in Iraq or , to be precise , our diplomats there are so few that they are invisible or unable to make themselves visible .
What they want in Iraq is our and your personal presence , they want political cooperation , and they want economic cooperation .
I welcome your statement today on Bosnia and Herzegovina - that was a fine statement , but you have failed to appoint a head for the delegation in Sarajevo .
By failing to appoint a head for the delegation in Sarajevo , you are playing into the hands of many who are destabilising Bosnia and Herzegovina both internally and externally .
Appointing a head would put a stop to that .
( PL ) Mr President , Europe is today facing two problems .
The first is the need for a new vision of the Neighbourhood Policy .
I was in Tunisia recently , and I saw how much is being expected of the European Union .
We are in permanent contact with Ukraine , and I know that there , too , they are hoping for more - more opportunities for the development of social cooperation and more contacts , and they are hoping that we do not retreat into our European selfishness .
I know it is difficult for you to carry out your work , Mrs Ashton , because you are on your own and it was not you who decided this - this is how the EEAS was set up - but the impression is being given that in the autumn , we thought Belarus was the most important issue , while today - a little like children who have become interested in something else - we are looking at North Africa .
What is needed is a new vision of the Neighbourhood Policy , and that , today , is in your hands .
In recent months , you have shown you are a strong person and that you are up to this task .
Perhaps Europe should not , today , as in the days of ancient Rome , be defending itself along a Limes line , along the Rhine or some other place , but should be proposing a bold political vision , not just one concerning the problem of immigration , but a political vision .
One might say that the fate of Europe , today , at this historic moment , is in your hands , Mrs Ashton , and we are very much counting on this .
Mr President , atrocities are happening in Camp Ashraf - atrocities that we obviously condemn and about which we are profoundly concerned - but I would like to ask Lady Ashton what instruments we are using apart from words ?
Are we considering trade measures , aid measures , and other concrete and real measures , rather than persuasion , which is fruitless ?
Regarding Neighbourhood Policy towards the countries on the doorstep of the Union , I think this is the most important part of your portfolio , Lady Ashton .
It is the core of foreign policy , because if we fail there , we fail in overall foreign policy .
The naked truth is that we are in retreat and in defensive mode in the southern neighbourhood and the eastern neighbourhood .
We have been taken by surprise .
Lady Ashton says there are storms in the neighbourhood .
That is the word she used .
Where is our meteorological road map ?
Time is a key factor in this policy and a scarce resource .
In our Neighbourhood Policy , we are always lagging behind events .
Even Lady Ashton 's and Commissioner Füle 's review of the European Neighbourhood Policy is delayed for the third time - and delayed in her office .
Our sin is inaction .
Foreign policy is about acts that change the course of events , not about words , series of meetings , fruitless persuasion and floods of statements .
We should be using real and hard instruments to change things in Libya , Syria , Camp Ashraf and Belarus .
Following Member States and waiting for permission from Foreign Ministers to go ahead has become Lady Ashton 's doctrine and she treats it as virtue .
It is the wrong approach .
It condemns our foreign policy to the lowest common denominator and to always being late .
We want a High Representative to lead , not to follow .
Our debate has two weaknesses .
First , we very often content ourselves with condemnation and making ineffective visa bans , which are ridiculously weak instruments .
We also call for more money , to clear our conscience , but there is a lot of Arab money which is not invested in Arab democracy and Arab prosperity .
( CS ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , developments in North Africa and the Middle East are extremely important to security and stability in Europe .
The Arab and Muslim nations here are going through a process of political democratic emancipation which might be termed the ' Prague Arab Spring ' .
Young people from Tunisia to Egypt , Yemen , Syria and Bahrain are demanding more freedom , more democracy and more human rights .
It is not only in the political and security interests of the EU but , above all , also our moral duty to provide broad assistance to our Arab friends in their struggle for emancipation , because the values they are fighting for are also our values , and the successful fulfilment and application of these values is also a fundamental precondition for lasting peace , stability , development and prosperity .
Broad assistance should not mean interference , however , because the development of civil society , democracy and the rule of law must , in my opinion , remain in Arab and Muslim hands .
Only in this way can these nations and societies become long-term parts of the global ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin by congratulating the High Representative on the success she enjoyed in New York .
Strengthening Europe 's role at the United Nations is a good thing .
It does lead me to a number of questions , however .
What is our and your message to the General Assembly ?
How can you get a single common position from the Member States without falling back on the lowest common denominator ?
What specific action - Mr Daul asked the same thing - will we subsequently undertake in order to realise our message ?
Mr President , we are all facing mammoth challenges to which we need to find an answer .
These challenges are not only to be found in Bahrain , Yemen , Iran and Armenia .
They are also to be found in our immediate neighbourhood : Belarus , Syria , Egypt and Libya .
These challenges are very real .
There is suppression , war and violence against religious minorities , refugees are flooding towards us and too slow a start has been made in establishing the rule of law and democracy .
Baroness Ashton , you are our figurehead , the figurehead of the European Union .
We cannot allow ourselves , the European Union , to be left behind in discord and indecision .
You have a crucial role to play , both formally and informally , not just behind the scenes , but also in the meeting rooms and , in particular , beyond them .
I am aware , I do realise , that you have to tread on eggshells , but you should know that we , the European Parliament , support you as you push on to convince the Member States that a joint European approach is worthwhile , push on to achieve an effective , coherent and common foreign policy and to be the face of that policy , push on in order to get the best people in the best positions in the External Action Service and push on in order to strengthen Europe 's position and that of its citizens , who are the important thing .
Do more , therefore .
Do more in Syria and do not lend your support to half-baked solutions .
( EL ) Mr President , Lady Ashton , today , we are debating the key issues in the field of the Union 's foreign policy and three important European Parliament texts on the role of the European Union in the world .
However , the question that we are all asking in today 's debate is if , in fact , there is a common foreign policy .
With Europe delaying in finding its feet and appearing to be cowardly , weak and , for a long time , to have no voice in the historically important event of the last decade , by which I mean the uprisings in the Arab world , with the Member States failing to take a united stand on the critical UN Security Council Resolution 1973 on Libya , and with the Union hesitating on Syria , I wonder whether perhaps the question has already been answered in practice .
We had high hopes following the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , if the Council is not up to the job , when national selfishness and personal strategies prevail in decision making , then Europe and the European ideal have lost yet another battle .
( DE ) Mr President , I share the opinion of my fellow Members with regard to the unfortunate and inconsistent approach taken by individual governments to the challenges currently facing us .
I also join with Baroness Ashton in calling for the debate to be extended to include the national governments .
I would specifically like to ask what benefit government A or government B hopes to gain from pressing ahead unilaterally or from blocking a decision .
What is the benefit ?
It must be greater than the impact that we can have by taking united action in the Union .
I believe that some governments would find it difficult to explain their actions .
However , I am confident that we are in the painful process of learning from our mistakes .
The financial crisis and the debt crisis have , to a certain extent , had a beneficial impact by creating a greater sense of cooperation , in particular , as far as the common foreign and security policy is concerned .
Other speakers have referred to pooling and sharing .
On 8 April , the EU Military Staff submitted 300 projects from the Member States in this area .
I would like to know what you now plan to do with these projects .
Are there plans to use this initiative to launch the permanent structured cooperation which has not yet been put into operation ?
Will you ensure that the European Defence Agency and the EU Military Staff have central responsibility for implementing this initiative ?
Mr Bütikofer listed four priorities for the next year which I largely support .
On several occasions , the European Parliament has called for a White Paper to be drawn up on the security and defence policy .
What is your opinion on this ?
Are you prepared to bring together the existing units within your service that are working on these questions to make one department which could be called the operational headquarters ?
( ES ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to congratulate you on your work , Baroness Ashton .
If you do not mind me saying , you are like a hard-working ant , who achieves results little by little while the grasshoppers chirrup and laze around in the Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will forgive me for not going any further , because colleagues from my group and fellow Members from other groups have expressed the same opinions .
I just want to make four points , which could be seen as levers to help you act , elements to support you in making the common foreign and security policy ever more worthy of this name .
Firstly , unlike the situation on other issues , European public opinion is 65-70 % in favour of a common foreign and security policy .
Secondly , this very Parliament , except for a small eurosceptic minority , supports federal European action , above all , in foreign and security policy .
Thirdly , the most pro-European , most pro-federal Member States , which do exist : form an alliance with them ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to start with two initial observations .
I prefer individual debates to a joint debate .
We are dealing with separate issues , which deserve independent and in-depth discussion .
Meanwhile , I would like to echo the words of Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra about the death of the Cuban dissident , Mr Soto .
Please allow me to make three additional comments .
Unfortunately , when all of us were hoping we could focus on the European Union 's external role these years , the serious economic and financial crisis has been taking up all our efforts .
However , a great number of external challenges , particularly in our Mediterranean neighbourhood , mean we cannot afford to wait .
The European Union must have a political and economic presence in the processes of change taking place in the Arab world .
I am also celebrating , Baroness Ashton , the fact that the European Union 's voice in the United Nations General Assembly was finally strengthened in New York last week as the result of a vote that received widespread support .
I congratulate you on that , given that last year 's disaster raised worrying questions about the future role of the Union in the world and in international organisations .
However , the divergent European votes on Resolution 1973 of the United Nations Security Council highlight the enormous difficulties - I stress , enormous difficulties - involved in achieving an effective common security and defence policy .
To summarise , Baroness Ashton , you and Mr Van Rompuy , who also has many responsibilities in foreign matters , have the huge task of convincing the Member States of the need for unified and coherent external action .
The two of you will have to work hard to push , drag and lead , at a moment in history that we had intended to tackle with the new instruments of the Treaty of Lisbon .
( PL ) Mr President , let us stop moaning that we do not have a common European policy .
In some areas , we do have a common policy , while in other areas , we do not .
In fact , as far as the Neighbourhood Policy is concerned , a common policy is in operation .
The new Member States are able to support the West in North Africa in a unique way because the West does not have the necessary credibility .
That credibility is provided by those who carried out the revolutions in the countries of Eastern Europe .
In the East , we all have interests in these matters - in the East just as in the West .
However , the old Member States have the money , they have the means .
We need that money to pursue a common Neighbourhood Policy in both the East and the South and to build our credibility .
While we are talking about policy in the area of defence - what kind of a defence policy is it in which Europe does not have an army ?
Sixty European aircraft are operating over Libya - 60 deaf and blind aircraft .
There is no intelligence service , and these aircraft are not in a position to carry out their mission effectively .
If the Americans had not joined the mission at the beginning , the mission would not have achieved anything .
There would be no effect at all .
So let us stop moaning that we do not have a common policy .
As long as we do not have a common army , we will not have a common policy on security and defence .
( FR ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the Libyan crisis has , unfortunately , once again illustrated the European Union 's difficulties in existing diplomatically and militarily .
However , it would be most unfair to blame you solely for the lack of political will displayed by the Union , even if many of us believe that more decisive action could have been and should have been taken .
It is also true that the Member States bear a great deal of responsibility for this inability to come up with a coherent , effective and visible policy on this matter , while our US friends relied heavily on Europe to act .
The Libyan crisis aside , however , we must be mindful of the major strategic developments that mean that we must not give up on the ambition of a common security and defence policy , as enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , and which you , Baroness Ashton , must continue to inspire , support and speak up for .
Taken together , the unprecedented fiscal constraints on defence budgets , the many international crises and the United States ' strategic redeployment are significant factors that leave us no choice but to take our destiny into our own hands .
Faced with these many crises and threats , we cannot just hand over the keys to our US friends and allies or to NATO .
Neither the United States nor NATO was able to end the 2008 conflict between Georgia and Russia , for example , and nor can the United States or NATO observe the current ceasefire there .
It is the European mission that has full legitimacy .
We can clearly see in Libya that the United States did not want to be in the front line and that NATO 's minimum undertaking is insufficient .
Baroness Ashton , the common security and defence policy is not just something achieved over 10 years or just an ambition enshrined in the Treaties .
It is also a strategic requirement , and you must be at the forefront taking the necessary initiatives .
( Applause )
( SL ) Mr President , in the future , we can only expect ever more challenges in the area of foreign policy and security , which makes the emphasis on credibility even more important .
Without credibility , we cannot be effective .
Credibility means , first of all , adherence to our values and principles .
Madam Ashton , I agree with you that we must not forget the origins from which the European Union was born .
Many years ago , it put the human being centre-stage .
Let us honour human dignity and all cultural identities and let us make a greater contribution to the inter-cultural dialogue .
The world expects the European Union to play a stronger role , not to have 27 individual foreign policies .
Greater unity does not mean that we have to lose diversity .
To conclude , I would emphasise three matters :
first : we urgently need to break the deadlock in Bosnia and Herzegovina , as a new outbreak of violence is possible ;
second : we urgently need to find a way to a unified and strategic relationship with Turkey , of which there has hardly been any mention today ;
third : I am pleased to see your determination with regard to Camp Ashraf ; our voice in opposition to violence against civilians must be clear and decisive there and everywhere else in the world .
( ES ) Mr President , on 29 July 2009 , Iraqi troops violently stormed the Iranian refugee camp in Ashraf and shot or beat to death 11 people living there .
The attack was repeated on 8 April this year , when 35 were killed , either by bullet wounds or by being crushed by armoured vehicles .
Baroness Ashton , you were warned months ago by Members of Parliament that this latest massacre was going to occur , and we repeatedly asked you to act on this .
You ignored our warnings for months and only reacted after the catastrophe .
Although better late than never , the next aggression could be a bloodbath of horrendous proportions if you fail to make this humanitarian crisis one of the top priorities on your agenda right now .
There is a solution , as Mr Stevenson explained to you .
We hope you will take immediate and firm action to make it possible , and we welcome the commitment you made this morning .
Three thousand four hundred defenceless men and women , surrounded by tanks , are looking to us , trusting that our actions will match up to our values .
Parliament has done , is doing and will do everything in its power .
We are asking you to have the same interest in saving these lives .
If you act as we hope , you will have us at your side .
If not , your conscience and this Chamber will hold you to account .
( FR ) Mr President , the European Union has finally imposed sanctions on Syria .
Unfortunately , however , it appears to have done so with some trepidation , taking care to avoid calling the head of the Syrian regime into question .
This lack of determination and clarity is obviously interpreted by the demonstrators as a form of abandonment and by the authorities as an indulgence enabling them to step up their repression , a repression so cruel that it is unimaginable that Syria may be elected to sit on the UN 's Human Rights Council when the country 's authorities are right now refusing UN observers access to the city of Deraa , the scene of terrible violence against unarmed civilians .
Having Syria on the Human Rights Council would be an insult to the victims and their families , and an encouragement for that regime to use brute force against its own people , with complete disregard for the values that the Human Rights Council is supposed to uphold .
So , Baroness Ashton , what diplomatic options do you have in mind in order to avoid such a disaster ?
( SV ) Mr President , as I only have one minute , I will be very brief .
Two of my fellow Members have already mentioned the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh and the fact that the situation there is getting more complicated .
All of the reports also indicate that the situation has changed dramatically over the last few weeks .
In light of the fact that certain military movements can be observed in the areas of Azerbaijan occupied by Armenia , in other words Nagorno-Karabakh , my question is whether you , Baroness Ashton , are aware of the developments in the situation and whether you are doing anything to prevent a possible escalation , not only in this conflict , but also in the occupied territories of Georgia ?
I would merely like to bring this matter up with you as a starting point and I will also send you a written question later . Thank you .
Mr President , how can the EU be a force for law and human security without identifying and trying the criminals who let refugees die in the Mediterranean .
Baroness Ashton , Bashar al-Assad should not just top the list of those subject to EU sanctions but should be put on the list of criminals to be tried by the ICC or European courts for the brutal repression of the Syrian people .
In Libya , besides the office in Benghazi , the EU should have already employed EUFOR , not just to support humanitarian assistance to the people under attack as in Misrata , but to implement the arms embargo via sea or land borders as recommended by this Parliament .
For that , we do not need any other UN resolution or request ; all we need is political will from Member States .
If you take the initiative , Lady Ashton , and confront EU governments with their responsibilities , this Parliament will strongly back you .
Finally , as Palestinian reconciliation is a major step ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , while unrest in the Middle East and North Africa requires the European Union to play a greater role in the Mediterranean region , I would like to raise the point of the second flotilla to Gaza .
We all remember the outcome of the first flotilla and its consequences for talks and attempts to resume the peace process in the Middle East .
As you mentioned , Madam Vice-President / High Representative , you doubt that a new initiative of this kind would end in a more positive way .
I would like to ask if you can update us on actual humanitarian needs in Gaza , as well as on the goods and support currently channelled through the existing crossing points from Israel and Egypt .
Did you , or do you intend to , engage with Member States and with the Israeli authorities to discuss the development of this initiative and maybe to propose a positive contribution by the European Union that could lead to a more responsible outcome ?
Mr President , my comments are for Baroness Ashton .
Vice-President / High Representative Ashton , you have very clearly heard this morning that Parliament will fully support your leadership role and is demanding that you take the initiative in our common foreign and security policy .
You have also heard the many questions by colleagues about who and which Member States are blocking our common efforts .
My suggestion to you would be that , now that the European External Action Service is putting in place its rules on access to information and access to documents , please make this a modern organisation which is accessible to citizens and which does not deal with foreign policy as if it were only the domain of some secretive diplomats .
I am sure this would be the best way to boost our common efforts for a truly common foreign and security policy .
( NL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , there is a major threat in the Middle East .
There is discrimination , including structural discrimination , against Christians in various Islamic countries .
The Christian community in Iraq has already been more than halved .
We are now seeing the same thing happening in Egypt .
There are attacks on the ancient Coptic community , there are innumerable cases of daily harassment , forced marriages , and it is pretty much impossible to build a church .
Last February , I received 60 Copts here and they called out for help .
I therefore have two requests of you , Baroness Ashton .
Make the Copts a top priority in your policy .
A stop must be put to the systematic discrimination against them .
Secondly , on 20 January , we asked , in this House , for an EU strategy for freedom of religion and the permanent monitoring of such a policy .
Will you make that a reality , please .
I would appreciate your reaction .
Thank you for your patience .
( PT ) Mr President , the foreign , security and defence policies of the European Union are principally policies in defence of the economic and geostrategic interests of the European powers .
Increasingly , they are aligned with the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) , and relegate cooperation and development aid to second place .
The results of this are largely catastrophic , as is clear from the cases of Afghanistan , Palestine , Iraq , Libya and other countries .
In general , there is a policy of double standards protecting the economic interests of European arms manufacturers , which have made millions by selling arms to dictators who have subsequently used them to massacre their own people and those of neighbouring states .
Consequently , some of the key questions arising from this debate are whether policies on the arms trade will finally be changed , and what exactly is going to be done to put an end to the expansionist and warmongering policies of Israel ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , it is clear to us all that we cannot expect you to set up extensive security operations in crisis areas throughout the world in the short time that has elapsed since the creation of your office .
On the other hand , your office already provides you with extensive scope for negotiating in any place where the EU can play a useful role through its opinions and political influence .
One of the problems directly affecting the EU and where there is a need to look for a solution through sensitive round-table negotiations is the occupation of EU territory by the Turkish army in Cyprus .
Turkey is a privileged partner of the EU and , on the outside , declares a definite interest in becoming a full member of our European group .
I therefore firmly believe that you should make full use of the potential that is already available to you through your role in solving this thorny issue , in which the EU is directly involved .
Mr President , it is self-evident that foreign and security policy is the defining role of a sovereign state .
To make it the role of a supranational authority ignores or devalues the vital question of relations between Member States , or is , in fact , an admission that they are no longer sovereign states .
There is nothing wrong with an EU policy of avoiding all European wars , but I would reject the supposition that a surrender of sovereignty is necessary to achieve that .
It should also be the function of every European state to defend Europe 's great achievements from distraction or dilution .
Aggressive wars in which European nations have no legitimate interest must be avoided at all costs .
Equally , we must not engage in behind-the-scenes agitation in a hypocritical attempt to plant so-called ' European values ' in inhospitable soil .
We must avoid Europe being the repository of migrating Third-Worlders .
Their cultures are the product of distinctive peoples .
Bring the population of the Third World to Europe ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank Baroness Ashton for the report she has put before us today .
However , I should like to point out to her that public opinion in Europe is unfortunately not aware of the European Union 's presence .
As many of my fellow Members have also mentioned , our external policy is still in a rudimentary state , as can be seen from certain events that have happened in recent days .
Europe cannot remain absent from Camp Ashraf : it is a camp where not only international policy is measured but also human rights protection .
It is our duty to intervene in that part of the world , just as it is in Syria .
This country is in a really very serious situation , in which human rights and the chance to oppose a dictatorial government must get the European Union interested ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , only one remark : I think Ankara 's increasingly active foreign policy poses new challenges and opportunities for European foreign policy .
Madam High Representative , I think that it is necessary to establish an institutionalised dialogue on key strategic issues such as energy policy , stability in the Western Balkans and the Caucasus regions , Iran 's nuclear dossier or the democratic awakening under way in the Middle East .
Turkey , in particular , can play a constructive role in helping the EU consolidate the gains of the recent democratic awakening in the Middle East .
However , such dialogue should not substitute but complement and reinforce Turkey 's accession track .
Mr Albertini now has the floor to speak for the two minutes he has remaining as rapporteur .
Mr President , in my first speech I had four minutes available and I only used up two .
Now that I have two minutes , I would like to ask to be allowed to use four minutes for my final speech .
You are quite right that you have four minutes .
You say you have used two , so you have two left , if that is the case .
You have four minutes for your speech .
( IT ) No , Mr President , in my first speech , I spoke for two minutes and I had four minutes available ...
Mr Albertini , you have four minutes for your two speeches .
You have used two .
Please take the floor and we will be flexible , but I obviously do not want to get to a point where nobody will hear you .
I want you to be heard , and if we waste another five minutes , nobody is going to listen to what you have to say .
( IT ) Mr President , since I will not manage to say what I had to say in two minutes , I will give up my speech .
Many thanks , Mr Albertini .
We are all grateful to you and it is a pity we cannot listen to you .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe Mr Albertini was right because as rapporteur , he had four minutes for his speech and two for his reply .
I therefore take the liberty of pointing out that he should have his four minutes .
For my part , I think this has been a useful and important debate , which shows how united Parliament is and how ready it is to offer its support for consistent and effective external action by Europe .
We have not only heard recriminations for the obvious limitations shown by Europe in recent events , but we have also heard proposals offering a kind of strategic partnership between Parliament and the other institutions in order to make Europe a credible actor in security and defence matters .
I believe this partnership would be not only an opportunity but a necessity as well because , if what we have been saying is true , which is that Europe 's integrated approach is its main potential , achieving that integrated approach will require the support of a body endowed with clear legislative and budgetary powers .
For that reason as well , I think we should find a balanced solution to the matter of interparliamentary cooperation .
It has become clear from the discussion how we must act .
We must first of all assess the possibilities offered by the Treaty : by permanent structured cooperation and by Article 44 , which makes it possible to delegate the task of carrying out a mission to particular Member States , but within an EU procedural framework , which is not the same thing as renationalisation .
We need to make use of existing structures - starting with the European External Action Service - and set ourselves ambitious tasks in the field of capabilities .
Of course , we also need to know how to offer leadership ability .
We would like to thank Baroness Ashton for her commitment and for the important statements she has made .
It is an attractive thought , as she said , that a small group can do great things , but Europe is a great civilised power which cannot shirk its responsibilities .
Mr Albertini , please accept my apologies .
I have found out exactly what the situation was .
You had four minutes plus two .
You spoke for three minutes in your first speech .
Therefore , you have three minutes left and we will proceed with all the flexibility required .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during a hearing in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , a Member asked the High Representative / Vice-President a loaded question .
He said that , when Henry Kissinger was criticised for the United States ' isolationist stance , particularly in relation to the European Union , he replied ' There is no fellow foreign minister nor a phone number I can call to speak to Europe ' .
The Member then asked Baroness Ashton , ' Is there a foreign minister and a phone number he can call now ? '
Her very British answer was : ' Yes , I do that job , although I am called High Representative / Vice-President and not foreign minister .
There is also a phone number , but it is answered by a machine saying to press 1 for the British position , 2 for the French , 3 for the German , and so on ' .
Baroness Ashton , you have heard the speeches by many of my fellow Members , and this message is also in my report .
You have a number of voices in the world , but you listen to ours - Parliament 's - more because we always support a European policy , and not just that of the Member States , to which you reply in the Council , or that of the Commission , to which you reply in the appropriate places .
I would like there to be a third place in which you could express your third loyalty .
This place is in the middle of this Chamber , behind the podium , because you are the Council , the Commission and also Parliament .
I believe this dialogue needs to be developed and strengthened in order to achieve democratic legitimacy for our external policy , directed and controlled by Europe 's citizens .
We will help you carry out this role .
Mr President , with regard to Camp Ashraf , we can do nothing less than join in the condemnation of the human rights violations that have taken place there .
However , this condemnation of human rights abuses must never be confused with political support for the movement in Camp Ashraf .
There is a democratic opposition in Iran , represented by the Green Movement , by various political groups within the Green Movement , and the condemnation of human rights violations should in no way be confused with political support for this group .
In addition , I ask the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative that , when she launches or opens this investigation into the situation in Camp Ashraf , that she also investigate the human rights abuses being committed against the population by the Mujahedin , which have been witnessed and documented by organisations such as Human Rights Watch .
In relation to my report , Baroness Ashton , I would particularly like you to take note of paragraph 6 , which calls for the drafting of a White Paper with a strategic focus on the European Union 's role in international organisations through to 2020 .
I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their help in preparing and drafting this report , and I would also like to decry the fact that some infinitely small-minded political forces in Parliament prevented my report from mentioning an academic organisation that contributed a study to serve as its basis .
This was the Fundación Alternativas , which provided a good foundation for me , as well as the shadow rapporteurs and the secretariat , in our work to produce this report .
I hope the report will prove useful in politically determining and stimulating the redefinition of the European Union 's role in international organisations .
I would like to say to Mr Stevenson that a decision was made before I took the chair not to use the blue card procedure in this debate , precisely in order to be able to give the floor to all Members who asked to speak .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I should like to thank honourable Members for what has been a full-ranging debate .
Mr Albertini , I am happy to stand anywhere as long as it is actually in the room - I suspect there may be a few people who would prefer it if I was not - and I am very happy to speak from the podium ; it is the obvious place between the two .
I do appreciate very much the work that you , Mr Albertini , and the other rapporteurs have done in producing what I think are really useful and helpful reports in terms of addressing the breadth of European action .
But I want to say , too , that there is greater coherence than perhaps anyone listening to this debate might imagine .
We do have strong united foreign policy positions on a whole range of issues , from the breadth of our concerns on human rights to the specific work that we are doing on the Middle East , in our neighbourhood , on Serbia / Kosovo , on Bosnia , or in our approach in Africa , where we now look at the situation hopefully beginning to be resolved in Cote d 'Ivoire but worrying today in Uganda .
All of these positions are worked out with the 27 Foreign Affairs Council ministers and I have to pay tribute to them .
I think that we are moving inexorably to a greater sense of coherence .
There is a lot more to do - I do not dispute that - and there is a lot more that you would wish us to do ; but do not let us underestimate what we have already managed to achieve and the journey that we are on to do that .
So I want to pay tribute to them and the fact that they often speak on behalf of all of us too ; we cannot be everywhere in the world all at once .
Today , we have Foreign Ministers in different parts of the world carrying messages on behalf of myself , on behalf of the European Union .
That is an important aspect of what we do as well .
Can I say , too , that we are almost always the first to produce statements , the first to come out and say what we think should happen .
It was my office that produced the non-paper on sanctions on Syria ; we are in the driving seat .
Not always reported , may I say , not always put forward in the press across the European Union , but we are the first to actually put out our statements and we produce hundreds of them to make the point consistently of the importance of what we do ; and consistency is a critical factor in what is being discussed today .
In the course of our debate , we focused on certain parts of the world , but in the course of further speeches , honourable Members have raised a whole range of different issues which we still must continue to deal with .
Mr Salafranca talked about what has been happening in Cuba over the weekend with Mr Soto and we are looking carefully at that .
We have asked for more information on that case because clearly that is an area of enormous importance .
Some honourable Members have asked about Gaza , about making sure that the aid is getting through , that we continue to support the people of Gaza - which we do , but we are engaged in a dialogue to increase and improve that .
Then there are the events in Nagorno-Karabakh between Azerbaijan and Armenia , where we have been in discussion with both , and where we are looking to support what France is doing in terms of trying to drive forward the process there .
In Albania , we have been in discussions with the Prime Minister and with the opposition to try to get the dialogue moving .
And , of course , across Africa , I mentioned two countries , but we could talk about many more , not least as regards what is happening again today in Sudan and the importance of ensuring that South Sudan is created with the best possible chances of success
And then there is Ukraine , an important neighbourhood country which was mentioned I think by Mr Saryusz-Wolski and others too .
We have a breadth of things to do and we must continue to do all of them .
So , honourable Members , I would just say to you it is important to recognise that .
Let me just , in the final minutes I have got , kill off a few of the myths which have grown up .
I am not looking for a Security Council seat .
I looked for proper status for the EU on the UN General Assembly , and we got that with nobody opposed to it , and honourable Members will know that took a lot of work , and I pay tribute to all of those involved , but we now have that stronger voice .
I think it is important too that we look at what we are really doing on CSDP ; let us not mess around with descriptions that are not true .
In Libya alone , we managed to support through our aid 55 000 people being able to get home .
I did not oppose a no-fly zone in the European Council and Prime Minister Cameron will back that up ; that is not at all what I said .
What I said was that for it to be effective and to be done quickly , it was important that those who could act quickly should do so .
On our delegations , I support trying to strengthen what we have in our delegations opening in Benghazi , and what we do in Iraq .
But let us not play this off against what happens in other countries like the Bahamas .
The staff in the Bahamas are development staff from the Commission working on rural programmes , on agriculture , for some of the poorest people , and we should not , in my view , see this as being an ' either / or ' situation .
Honourable Members , we have to do as much as we can to support countries across the world .
So I end as I began by saying that we do not lack ambition , we need the resources to do the job properly , we need to be able to be consistent , we need to develop and strengthen what we do , and that is what we will do , but we will do it by taking the 27 Members of the European Union on that journey with us , leading sometimes , pushing sometimes , working alongside sometimes , and your support will be invaluable to that .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote on the three reports will take place today at 12 : 30 .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Albertini , for drafting this thorough report .
It touches again on subjects where more active involvement is required from the EU .
I can mention here the Eastern Partnership and Black Sea Synergy .
These two initiatives play a vital role both in strengthening relations with the states in the immediate vicinity and in terms of energy security .
Organising the Eastern Partnership summit for this autumn and setting up the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly are promising signs indicating that these guidelines are being implemented .
Strengthening relations with the Republic of Moldova is also included among the common foreign policy priorities , in view of signing the association agreement with the EU .
Mentioning this point will ensure positive progress in the negotiations between both sides .
I would like to emphasise in this Chamber the importance attached to settling unresolved conflicts , particularly the one in Transnistria .
I welcome this step , especially in the wake of the failure of the Vienna dialogue conducted last month .
I support continuing the negotiations in the 5 + 2 format .
in writing . - Europe must not fail the Palestinian people yet again .
Now , following the unexpected reconciliation agreement between Fatah and Hamas , which commits to establishing a technical , non-party interim government and early elections , Europe must grab this opportunity to play a positive role in the region .
It can do so by working with the interim government which is to be formed in the next few days ; by supporting early elections ; and , most importantly , undertaking to fully respect the outcome of elections and working with the new administration that emerges from those elections .
Europe cannot , on the one hand , work with democratic movements in Libya , Syria , Tunisia and Egypt , and refuse to work with a government democratically elected by the Palestinian people .
Israel 's initial response to the reconciliation , withholding Palestinian Authority ( P.A. ) taxes , is illegal and potentially catastrophic for peace , putting at risk the state-building efforts of Prime Minister Salem Fayyad .
The EU must step in to fully cover the loss of this income while making it clear that we will recover that money from Israel by freezing all money due to Israel from the EU to the same value , until it stops this further breach of international law .
, in writing . - In 2010 , I submitted a written question to Commissioner Malmström to see what action the Commission had taken to uncover the role of non-governmental organisations in financing terrorism .
The fact that the organisers of last year 's flotilla are planning to repeat their action on the anniversary of the incident and MEPs from the GUE and Greens / EFA political groups organised a hearing at the EP on 10 May put the issue yet again in the spotlight .
If we Europeans consider peace , democratisation in the Middle East , the eradication of extreme poverty and the development of living conditions in Gaza as our ultimate goal , the appropriate means for the facilitation of this noble cause is not the flotilla , as VP / HR Ashton pointed out earlier today .
We cannot refer to something as humanitarian action that is not necessarily what it seems .
Judge Bruguière , the respected and recognised counter-terrorism expert , proved that the organiser of the flotilla , IHH , had maintained contact with al-Qaeda .
The umbrella organisation of IHH , Union of Good , supports the activity of extremist radicals through selling weapons to them .
I ask fellow MEPs to refrain from exploiting the Middle East crisis for their own political goals , which do not have anything to do with the peace process and from a biased attitude which very much sounds like the language and mechanism of the Communist and Soviet attitude towards Israel .
The motion for a resolution shows clearly that there are still serious shortcomings over fulfilment of the relevant provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It does not look good to Member States when the European Parliament ( EP ) ' urgently requests ' the European Council to develop a ' European foreign policy strategy ' , or when it calls on the European Council ' to go about this task on the basis of political dialogue with the EP ' .
If there was a European foreign policy strategy already today , the equilibrium of the EU in that regard would be much better , for example , concerning the movements in the Arab world and the double or even triple standards applied towards the countries from this region .
The positions taken by the EU towards the increasingly turbulent developments in the Balkans represent another problem .
The EU has not yet found the ' key ' to this region and lacks a systematic approach .
The result of this , among other things , is that the prestige of the EU and the attractions of EU membership go into free fall in the Western Balkan countries .
The ideas of Valentin Inzko , High Representative of the international community and EU Special Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina , regarding the approach towards Serbia will not resolve the situation , but will rather do the opposite .
Last week , a particularly significant event took place .
After lengthy negotiations , we finally managed to convince our partners from the United Nations to grant the EU a new status in the organisation .
This is a definite success , especially in view of the General Assembly 's initial resistance .
However , we must not fall into the trap of triumphalism and think that from now on , the EU will present a uniform standpoint in the forum of the United Nations .
The fact that we will now be represented by the President of the European Council or the High Representative does not mean that Member States will present a common standpoint on particularly controversial topics .
The example of Libya shows how deep the divisions between us are even in matters which would seem obvious , such as the protection of the civilian population .
So we need to say clearly that without the political will from Member States , this decision will be meaningless .
This is why I cannot agree with Mrs Ashton that the world will hear one , clear voice from the EU .
Instead , I am afraid that for a long period of time , we will have to deal with many voices , as the uniform views of the EU will be weakened not only by the permanent members of the Security Council , but also by the Presidency , which is searching for its niche after the Treaty of Lisbon .
How does Mrs Ashton intend to establish a uniform voice for the EU at the United Nations , and how does she intend to build a good image for the EU in this organisation ?
, in writing . - I am encouraged by the approach of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy : realising that what counts , in addition to statements , are actions .
I would like to remind you , Baroness Ashton , of Joseph Daul 's advice : do not be afraid , and you will have the support of this Parliament .
It is our joint responsibility to make authoritarian rulers believe that we take our basic values seriously .
This means , first of all , conditionality : readiness not only to suggest and implore , but also to cause pain , i.e. to apply real sanctions to regimes which do not respect even the lives of their subjects .
I agree that sanctions against Syria have to include hundreds of people , not just a dozen .
I thank you for your condemnation of the massacre in Camp Ashraf on 8 April 2011 .
I strongly suggest that , in this case , you follow the clear message of the European Parliament from April 2009 : we need a clear and convincing message that the EU really cares about the lives of 34 unarmed members of the Iranian opposition and will no longer tolerate the brutal crushing of their liberties and dignity .
I ask the Commission to take the lead in the proposed resettlement issue .
The common foreign and security policy is always a major problem in the EU .
On the one hand , the large states are traditionally used to relying on their own forces , with France and Great Britain in particular still feeling they are great powers .
This can be seen in their approach to solving foreign policy problems .
In recent times , this has been oriented rather towards a military solution to any sort of dispute , as they neglect peaceful solutions in favour of intervention .
I think there is reason to believe that today 's world is heading towards multi-polarity , and it is a peaceful foreign policy that is in accordance with international law and the UN Charter .
Instead of military ventures , the latest of which is unfolding before us in Libya , what today 's world needs is to put all of its efforts into fighting poverty and illiteracy , and into solving other serious problems .
In order to do this , it is absolutely essential to have arms control and disarmament , including general agreements on the dismantling of nuclear weapons .
Assistance in mitigating the consequences of disasters should be an important element in EU foreign policy .
These operations should not be linked to military deployments .
Police deployment is possible only in extreme cases , on the basis of a UN resolution , and in order to protect workers in the social , health and public service sectors , and to train the police .
The common foreign and security policy must be rigorously separated from NATO .
For these reasons , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left refuses to back this report .
A week ago , the UN General Assembly authorised the EU to speak with one voice at its meetings .
From now on , high-level representatives will be able to convey the Union 's message in the highest international body .
This provision is a significant step forward in the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon , but it is not enough .
The EU needs a real strategy so that it can actually apply the powers conferred on it by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Be it in the Security Council , the Human Rights Council , NATO , the WTO or the G20 , the EU should no longer have to hide in the shadows .
What is more , we should take the lead in establishing a global parliamentary system .
High-level diplomacy is obviously needed , but it must be carried out in consultation with the people .
And how better to achieve that than to enable citizens from the world over to be represented at the UN ?
There is the European Parliament , but there are also regional parliaments , such as the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
What we need today is a world parliament .
Baroness Ashton , the European Union must be ambitious .
I hope that this proposal will appear in your White Paper .
, in writing . - First of all , I would like express my sincerest gratitude to Baroness Ashton for the EU 's full support to Estonia in trying to resolve the hostage crisis in Lebanon .
The kidnapped Estonians are , however , still at the mercy of their abductors .
Therefore , we would be grateful for your further involvement and assistance in the resolution of the situation .
Coming to the future of the common foreign and security policy , I would like to call for more coherence and consistency when dealing with non-democratic regimes .
We have applied sanctions on Belarus , but we have not done so with regard to the Magnitski case in Russia , although this had been pointed out by the European Parliament in the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2009 and in the European Union 's policy on the matter .
We are still committed to the one-China policy , while Beijing has recently become more suppressive and violent both in Tibet and the Uyghur region .
Instead of flirting with Beijing , we also ought to pursue a free trade agreement with Taiwan , which is a prosperous democracy .
The one-China policy is outdated and morally undermining to the image of the European Union .
Let us align our policies with our values .
, in writing . - The Lisbon Treaty provided us with a major opportunity to move forward in the field of defence and security .
But , as evidence indicates , this is not enough .
In spite of the relatively numerous operations , there is still an evident divorce between the instruments we are equipping us with - see the battle-groups , for instance - and the improvised collection of national means we actually employ , when the EU is required to intervene .
Take Libya , for instance : because of the absence of political consensus and proper military assets , a ' coalition of the willing ' - a concept we were so adamantly opposed when others have used it before - had to be formed and NATO had to be called in to take command !
Practically , Libya completely sidelined our CSDP , exactly at a time it was needed and , therefore , had the chance to demonstrate itself in practice !
In consequence , my opinion is that we have to look again at our CSDP , to see what it really needs to become a functional concept , both politically and militarily , so next time we would need to appeal to it , it will not let us down like this time .
Our common foreign and security policy is at a crossroads .
The Treaty of Lisbon has made it possible for the Union 's foreign relations to develop in a way which was formerly impossible .
The progress so far , however , has been quite slow .
Our common European values nevertheless allow us to build a European foreign policy that relies on sustainable development and human rights .
We need a clear European external agenda in order for the EU to be able purposefully to promote a global policy based on multilateralism .
Crucial elements in that policy would be support for the work of the UN and a clarification of the EU 's policy with regard to the UN .
The situation in Syria is deeply concerning .
We do not have complete , reliable information as the foreign press has been refused access .
However , the repressive measures carried out by the Assad regime are intensifying and have already resulted , based on the figures supplied by the NGOs , in the murder of 600-700 civilians and the arrest or disappearance of another 8 000 people .
Syria 's citizens have been demonstrating for nearly two months and they must not be left on their own to fight for democracy .
Brutal repression is unacceptable and must be stopped .
The EU must take a leading role in the quest for a speedy solution .
This is why I would like to welcome the restrictive measures adopted by the Council against the Syrian regime at the start of the week .
However , we need to do more , in cooperation with the Union 's partners , to urge the Syrian authorities to halt the repression .
Assad is isolated .
Only the Gaddafi regime is condemning at the moment ' the international conspiracy attacking Syria 's national security ' , a statement which says a great deal about the situation in Syria .
Finally , I would like to stress that , in the current circumstances , Syria 's application for a seat on the UN 's Human Rights Council is unacceptable .
, in writing . - The protracted violent actions against the Coptic Church in Egypt and largely against Christians in the Middle East require an immediate response from the European Union .
An essential part of the Christian-European heritage is under threat .
People are persecuted in their hundreds of thousands because of their religious beliefs .
The new Egyptian authorities benefited from widespread sympathy and direct EU financial and political support .
But now , after churches were burned and Christians killed in a renewed wave of attacks , the time has come for the EU to make it abundantly clear to the Egyptian authorities that they are responsible for the internal security of the country and for the protection of the rights and livelihood of all Egyptian citizens .
Suspicions that the Egyptian authorities turned a blind eye to or even encouraged religious violence should be dispersed by a firm undertaking that the Christian community will be safe in Egypt .
The EU should ask for explanations from the Egyptian authorities and make it clear that further violence will be followed by the cessation of European financial and humanitarian assistance .
This unequivocal warning should condition all present agreements and should be included in all future agreements with Middle East governments .
During the January debate on the situation in Tunisia and Egypt and the freedom of religious expression , I mentioned the tragic situation of Christians in Arab countries , particularly the Egyptian Coptic Christians , who are being persecuted .
I pointed out the radicalisation of Islam , which is directing its aggression against the followers of Christ .
It can be seen , today , that my misgivings were justified .
Clashes in the vicinity of the Church of St. Menas are only the tip of the iceberg with regard to the tragedy of Egyptian Christians and the silence from international organisations .
In this context , it would be worth recalling the attacks on the St. Bishoy monastery in March of this year , which were ignored by Parliament and Mrs Ashton , when the Egyptian army fired at a monastery full of refugees from Cairo , and the actions of the Salafist Islamic community which holds extreme views .
In April , they carried out a series of attacks on Christian buildings in Beni Ahmad , Bashtil and Kamadir .
As we can see , the European Union still cannot work out a cohesive reactive strategy towards human rights violations in Asia and North Africa and how to prevent them in the future .
We should put more pressure on the Egyptian authorities to defend the Coptic Christians .
It is essential to strengthen the section for the prevention of religious intolerance of the Subcommittee on Political Affairs of the European External Action Service , with particular regard to persecuted Christians
1 .
Indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs (
2 .
Approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement (
3 .
Permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles (
4 .
Narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors (
5 .
Controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors (
6 .
Braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors (
7 .
Driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors (
8 .
Rear-mounted roll-over protection structures of narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors (
9 .
Excise duty applied to manufactured tobacco (
10 .
Denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation (
11 .
Textile names and related labelling of textile products (
Mr President , we have agreed a joint statement with the Council .
The minister , Mrs Györi , who was able to speak here last night , has asked me to read it out , as she has lost her voice .
It contains four lines :
A joint statement by the European Parliament and the Council .
' The European Parliament and the Council are mindful of the importance of providing accurate information to consumers , in particular , when products are marketed with an indication of origin so as to protect them against fraudulent , inaccurate or misleading claims .
The use of new technologies such as electronic labelling , including radio frequency identification , may be a useful tool to provide such information while keeping pace with technical development .
The European Parliament and the Council invite the Commission , when drawing up the report pursuant to Article 24a of the regulation , to consider their impact on possible new labelling requirements including with a view to improving the traceability of textile products ' .
That is all and now the Minister will nod I hope .
12 .
Exceptional trade measures for countries and territories participating in or linked to the EU 's Stabilisation and Association process (
rapporteur . - Mr President , I have an oral amendment to my own written amendment .
In Amendment 14 , I propose to replace ' countries ' by the expression ' countries and territories ' .
The purpose of this amendment is quite straightforward .
It is meant to align the wording of this paragraph with the title of the regulation itself .
The title reads as follows : ' exceptional trade measures for countries and territories participating in or linked to the European Union 's Stabilisation and Association process ' .
Without this correction , there would be a discrepancy between the regulation itself and its title .
That is why I ask for your support and the adoption of this amendment .
on behalf of the Committee on International Trade . - Mr President , I have a mandate to ask for the postponement of the vote on the legislative resolution .
Does the Commission have something to say on this ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the Member 's proposal .
It will leave time for more examination of the amendments that were adopted , and will allow Parliament and the Council time before the first-reading vote .
The report is referred back to the Committee on International Trade .
13 .
Radio spectrum policy (
14 .
Amendment of the Rules following the establishment of a common Transparency Register (
Dear colleagues , I have a statement to read .
The Casini report on the interinstitutional agreement on a common transparency register between the European Parliament and the Commission represents an important step forward in regulating relations of MEPs with outside interests .
Before we proceed to the vote on the report , I would like to underline that the ongoing activities of the working group on the code of conduct for MEPs and outside interests do not intend to put into question the substance of the agreement reached with the Commission and the content of the Casini report .
They rather aim at complementing the framework by adding new aspects and , in particular , at strengthening the applicable rules as regards access of interest groups to the European Parliament premises .
( Interjection from the floor : ' Amen ! '
Laughter )
15 .
Interinstitutional agreement on a common Transparency Register (
16 .
Corporate governance in financial institutions (
17 .
Free trade agreement with India ( vote )
18 .
EU-Japan trade relations ( vote )
( PL ) Mr President , in this amendment , the PPE Group would like the word ' strongly ' to be removed from paragraph 2 .
I hope there are no objections .
19 .
Preparing forests for climate change (
rapporteur . - Mr President , I cannot imagine anyone in this room voting against a ban on construction in places where land was burned by intentional forest fires with illegal purposes .
This is very important for countries across Europe , and what is said in the second part of paragraph 36 and paragraph 37 is an attempt to ensure legality and combat criminal activity against forests in Europe .
I would like to ask for a roll-call vote on these two texts : the second part of paragraph 36 and paragraph 37 .
Paragraph 36 , Part 2 , and paragraph 37 shall be put to the vote by roll call .
20 .
Annual report from the Council to Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2009 (
Mr President , while you are enjoying yourself with your jokey and unorthodox approach to dealing with requests from the floor for check votes , may I humbly submit that , if you were to go a little slower , the interpretation could keep up with your announcements , and we could then vote in a more timely fashion .
You are going a little fast and there is a little delay .
Mr Chichester , what I will retain from this intervention is what I assume is your approval of my unorthodox ways .
Before the vote on paragraph 33 , initial text :
Mr President , it is pointless for me to quote it .
It is included in the explanation of vote : it begins with ' welcomes ' and ends with ' manner ' .
You can read it in the text .
Mr President , in this case , too , the text is included in the voting list .
I would just like to make one comment : the subject is the protest against the condemnation of demonstrators in Bahrain and criticism of that conduct .
Mr Albertini , no , it is the oral amendment to Amendment 7 after paragraph 45 .
Mr President , I made a mistake when reading the text .
We deleted the name ' Macedonia ' in order to avoid trampling on some people 's sensibilities , including those , I believe , of the President .
Therefore , only the expression ' former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' was used .
We deleted the name ' Macedonia ' .
Mr President , I have to echo Mr Chichester 's earlier intervention .
We are being given by our interpreters the choice to vote ' no ' after you have said ' Εγκρίνεται ' [ ' Adopted ' ] .
I am not aware that the ability to speak Greek is required of MEPs .
If it is going to be , please tell us .
If not , please slow down slightly .
The answer to this question is that the ability to speak Greek is required by MEPs .
( Applause and laughter )
Listen .
I can do this extremely slowly but this is how this goes , dear colleagues , I have not changed the way I do the votes every time .
As you know , all the interpreters have a voting list in front of them .
If they do not , they should .
It does not depend on how fast or how slowly a President announces in whatever language the numbers ; the interpreters have the list in front of them .
At any rate , I will try to be a little slower if that would make it better .
Is that OK ?
Mr President , you speak very good English , as you have amply demonstrated .
Why , therefore , do you persist in this charade - pantomime - of speaking this unnecessary Greek ?
( Prolonged noise )
Mr President , please excuse me .
I may be wrong , but I do not remember voting on the oral amendment to paragraph 68 .
Unless I am mistaken , we have skipped the oral amendment I mentioned earlier concerning condemnation of the attitude of the Bahraini Government .
We should therefore proceed to the vote .
Mr Albertini , the answer to that is that we adopted Amendments 13 and 18 and so the original paragraph on which you had the oral amendment fell .
Before the final vote :
Mr President , I wanted to support Mr Albertini .
I think we could vote his oral amendment as an addition to the paragraph we voted on because it would be positive if this House were to condemn what is happening in Bahrain , especially the death sentences .
( Applause )
Mr President , I want to support that because it must have been a mistake , either in our voting lists or in our voting procedure , but there was such unanimity in supporting it that it would be very strange if it were not included .

I think the House would agree with the proposal by Mr Goebbels and Mr Albertini to vote on it as an addition or as a separate paragraph .
21 .
Development of the common security and defence policy following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty (
( PL ) Mr President , I have tabled an oral amendment .
I apologise for this procedure , but the dramatic events in Libya have caused us to consider it important to add a few words .
On the third line , after the words ' deployment on the ground ' , we would like to ask for support for the following words , which are ...
( The Member continued in English )
' appeals to the Council to provide immediate humanitarian support to Misrata and other population centres , specifically by naval means ; is profoundly concerned about the increasing number of victims of the conflict in Libya and the Gaddafi regime 's reported use of cluster munitions and other arms against the civilian population ' .
Mr Lisek , excuse me but the oral amendment has fallen because we have adopted amendments to paragraph 71 , so I am sorry to say that we cannot vote on this .
The paragraph has changed according to the amendment we have filed .
rapporteur . - Mr President , the oral amendment reads as follows .
The original text recognised that ' NATO constitutes the foundation of collective defence for those Member States which belong to it ' and here is the addition , ' and reaches beyond its Member States ' .
22 .
The EU as a global actor : its role in multilateral organisations (
Before the vote :
Mr President , on a point of order , on the next report , which is the Muñiz De Urquiza report , I am applying to speak under Rule 167 on roll-call votes .
Going back to the Arsenis report , on Amendment 25 , one of my colleagues over there requested a roll-call vote because he felt it was important .
You granted it to him .
There is no provision for this in the Rules of Procedure and you did not ask Parliament for approval .
We have all enjoyed the unorthodox powers that you have granted yourself today , so I would like to ask for the same provision .
Because this is important to me personally , I should like you to grant me a roll-call vote on every amendment on this report under the same Rule whereby you granted it to the gentleman over there .
Colleagues , under our rules and our practice , granting roll-call votes or not is in the hands of the President every time .
The President may grant a roll-call vote if he feels it does not disrupt the session or , for example , if there are many requests , he may ask the House .
There is no particular rule one way or another .
I just want to make this clear to everyone so that we do not set any precedent here that was not intended to be set .
Under the circumstances , nevertheless , I have no objection to granting the request in this particular case , but I would very much like to ask Members not to abuse this potential because , if they do , then the President will ask the House every time and there will be contentiousness where there should be none .
If you insist on your request , I will take every one of these as a roll-call vote .
End of voting time
Voting time
Τhe next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on the labelling of textile products because I think that Europe could and should do more to support enterprises in the industry .
The proposal made by the Commission was purely technical and aimed to simplify the current provisions regarding labelling .
Yet Parliament achieved two significant results .
Firstly , textile products comprising non-textile parts of animal origin - fur and leather - must show this information on the labels in order to allow consumers to make informed choices .
Secondly , by 2013 , the European Commission must present an impact study on the introduction of labelling , clearly showing which garments have been produced in Europe , and which outside of Europe .
The latter objective is an important milestone for the competitiveness of European textiles in Europe and the world .
( DA ) Mr President , congratulations to Mr Manders for having succeeded in drawing up this proposal .
It has proven to be more complicated than it looked at the start .
I am pleased that we succeeded in reaching agreement on this Textile Labelling Regulation , which will strengthen the textile industry 's competitiveness and benefit consumers by providing a greater choice of new and innovative products .
It is a good compromise that I believe the Council will be able to live with , too .
During this process , I have not disguised my own scepticism regarding the introduction of origin labelling .
I am therefore also pleased that we agreed on a text that merely requires the Commission to analyse the need for origin labelling .
Thus , the agreement will not lead to the introduction of mandatory origin labelling .
I will be unable to vote in favour of a regulation that makes it mandatory for businesses to provide this country of origin label .
I know that the Council is of the same opinion .
Unfortunately , yesterday 's debate highlighted the fact that Commissioner Tajani does not share this view .
If we do not succeed in avoiding this , I will then take up the fight against it .
( IT ) Mr President , the proposal for a regulation on which we are being called to vote undoubtedly has the merit of bringing together in a single text all the existing legislation relating to textile products .
This regulation will make it possible to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework on the development and use of new fibres , as well as supporting the development of innovative products and encouraging innovation in the textile and clothing sector .
I welcomed the fact that Mr Manders considered other aspects too , such as the reduced administrative burden for Member States resulting from the transposition into national law of the technical adaptations required by the addition of the names of new textile fibres to the harmonised list .
While I consider that we could have gone further by introducing a specific article regulating the indication of origin of textile products , I voted in favour of the proposal for a regulation .
( IT ) Mr President , this regulation is vital for the European textile industry because it guarantees a free market in compliance with rules that prevent the irregularities and illegal practices of the past .
We wish to favourably highlight the institutions ' decision to welcome the proposal and to explore the problem of the traceability and origin of products in order to ensure that European consumers are correctly informed , even though the timescales established are too lengthy .
Ultimately , the objective is to safeguard consumers .
I would point out that last October , Parliament , by a large majority , voted in favour of the proposal for a regulation on the indication of the country of origin of certain products - including textile products - imported from third countries , and that to date , the Council has not opened negotiations or discussions with Parliament , even on an informal level .
I would like to thank the Hungarian Presidency for having included the issue among its priorities , but I would also ask for the debate to be accelerated , or else we run the risk , for example , of providing safeguards for European consumers with regard to foodstuffs but not with regard to manufacturing products .
( IT ) Mr President , the report on the labelling of textile products which we endorsed today marks an important step towards simplifying legislation for the benefit of consumers and all the European manufacturers working in the industry .
With this regulation , we are laying down new rules on labelling in the textile industry ; we are focusing increasingly on innovation in the sector and on speeding up the integration of European legislation , in order to benefit from innovative products safely .
The text proposes , in fact , to combine the three directives on the labelling of textile composition into a single European regulation , simplifying the existing regulatory framework and improving the transparency of procedures .
Therefore , we cannot help but applaud the positive result achieved today in safeguarding European production .
At the same time , however , we cannot fail to mention the indication of the country of origin issue .
We hope that a further step forward can be taken soon with the approval of legislation regulating indications of origin in this sector as well .
( DE ) Mr President , in my opinion , this report is attempting to solve two major problems .
Firstly , the aim is to promote innovation .
This means that the process of including new fibre names in the standard list of names must be made more transparent and must involve less red tape .
Secondly , origin labelling must be improved .
Here , we can honestly say that this point has not yet been finally and satisfactorily resolved .
I would like to make it very clear that this is not the fault of the rapporteur .
This was simply due to the widely differing opinions held by members of the Council which the Commission could not reconcile .
I hope that we will continue to work on this issue , because origin labelling is becoming increasingly important .
It is one of the rights of consumers .
I would like to see a discussion on this point in the near future in the European Parliament and I would like the Commission to submit a proposal .

( IT ) Mr President , quality , labelling and traceability : these are the consumer protection tools that guarantee product excellence .
Until today , Europe was the only market in the world without legislation on this issue , which put it at a disadvantage relative to its main trading partners .
Today , the European Parliament has made its voice heard , by adopting a regulation capable of safeguarding the excellence of the European textile industry .
Our production and manufacturing needs protecting , particularly at a time of economic crisis such as the one we are currently experiencing .
Until now , we have managed to achieve recognition through research and innovation , which guaranteed the production of innovative textile fibres .
Consumers will no longer run the risk of buying textile products that are potentially harmful to their health perhaps because they have been treated with chemical agents .
Adoption of this regulation finally guarantees due protection of the rights of over 500 million European citizens .
From now on , it will no longer be possible to deceive them with incorrect labelling .
Mr President , today , we have voted on the addition of new textiles and fibres and labelling-related matters .
From the outset of this textile report , I have been of the opinion that Parliament should keep to the scope of the proposal as it was originally designated and that the extension of this scope was not compatible with the aim of simplification for putting a new fibre on the market .
I have concerns about the provision of a review clause which will ask the Commission to investigate the possible introduction of a number of labelling requirements which have little added value and would place unacceptable burdens on businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
This includes the harmonisation of size labelling , social economic labelling and , most worryingly , a radio frequency identification tag which would increase costs for business and prices for the consumer .
Nonetheless , from this report , I feel that some of the provisions in this regulation will make a difference , will improve the application process for business and enhance consumer protection , especially on the labelling of animal-derived products .
But we need to be mindful that we are legislating for the real world , not making a wish list for an ideal world , and that Parliament should stick to its areas of competence in future .
Mr President , may I begin by saying that I hope you will continue to address this Chamber in your native tongue , which matches any language in the world for its accomplishment , its diversity and its antiquity .
There are times when reading the voting list is a more eloquent comment on the behaviour and nature of this Parliament than almost anything else I could say .
Let us just look at the subjects of some of these reports : indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs ; approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement ; permissible sound level and exhaust system of motor vehicles ; narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors ; controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ; braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ; driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ; rear-mounted roll-over protection structures ; excise duty applied to manufactured tobacco ; denominations and technical specifications of euro coins ; textile names and related labelling of textile products ... and I could go on .
There is almost no nook or cranny of our national life so remote that Brussels has not curled its tendrils thither , choking out the natural light and blocking out the native growth .
If Brussels confined itself to cross-border issues , then no one would have a problem .
( DA ) Mr President , during the debate , a great deal was said about Mr Hökmark 's report on our radio spectrum policy programme - something that does not sound very glamorous , I have to admit .
However , it is actually a question of whether we can secure broadband connections and cheap data transmission for our citizens in future .
I will very briefly say that , when we are trying to look into the future , it is quite impressive that the negotiators , and our rapporteur in particular , have succeeded in achieving such a broad majority in favour of the report that we voted on today .
That was the result of very fine political skill and all credit to our rapporteur , Mr Hökmark .
( DE ) Mr President , radio frequencies are a very scarce and valuable resource in our modern society .
Therefore , it makes sense to coordinate the use of these frequencies efficiently throughout Europe .
Broader access to the radio spectrum is important not only for businesses , but also for the citizens of the European Union .
For this reason , we should take particular care to ensure that this policy is developed in line with economic , social and cultural interests .
In particular , we must not allow this regulation to put at risk the direct wireless transmission used in Germany in regional theatres , at rock concerts and in churches .
I would also like to ask the Commission to sit down with the Member States and work closely with them in this area and not to interfere in their national powers .
( DA ) Mr President , following today 's vote on the lobbyists register , I think it is important to state that lobbyism is essentially a good thing .
It is actually an indispensable part of the democratic process .
Without lobbyism , politicians ' knowledge , facts and opinions with regard to all aspects of society would be far too limited .
Therefore , all of us in this House and the press have a responsibility to ensure that , behind what we do , there is a critical , but also true , picture of what the issue is all about .
Secondly , I would like to say that , as we know , the best is the greatest enemy of the good .
The fully legitimate demand for transparency , as reflected in the debate and the vote today , must , of necessity , be balanced so that we do not , with the best of intentions , destroy a well-functioning system .
The demand for total transparency , mandatory individual registration of everything under the sun , an ethical control committee and so on , are , in the best case , expressions of something naive and , in the worst case , part of a populist political agenda that will do more harm than good .
In practice , this is about trust .
If deemed necessary , control must be in line with what is feasible in practice in respect of the work process .
I would also like to contest the vote on paragraph 9 .
During the very quick vote , I got the impression that we did not actually obtain the right result .
( DA ) Mr President , I am in complete agreement with Mr Løkkegaard .
I am not sure that we obtained quite the right result in the vote on paragraph 9 , but if we did , there is something not quite right with the perception of reality in this House .
It is absolutely right that we should have as much transparency as possible .
However , to demand that we all publish the names of everyone we hold meetings with is , of course , absolutely absurd .
It is absolutely absurd because when is a meeting a meeting ?
This has to be defined .
Does it include when we meet in the corridor or on the bus or somewhere else ?
Does it include telephone meetings and Internet meetings ?
When is it classed as a meeting ?
What about many of those people we are having meetings with today from rebel movements in North Africa ?
Are they to see their names in the newspapers ?
Surely not ?
In this regard , it should be logical for it always to be possible to guarantee that people can come to us in confidence .
In any case , I will never be involved in breaking this confidence .
( IT ) Mr President , making it easy for citizens to scrutinise how decisions are made , together with the processes , elements and resources that influenced them , helps both to ensure greater transparency and to close the gap between the European institutions and citizens , which is often discussed in relation to legitimacy and to the so-called democratic deficit in the European Union .
Great progress has been made in the last few years .
One need only think of the register of interest representatives adopted by the European Parliament in 1996 , or of the Commission 's 2006 proposal to the European Parliament for a ' one-stop shop ' register for lobbyists .
The approval of the Stubb-Friedrich report by this House led to the creation of a joint working group .
We can safely say that the results achieved by that group with regard to the objectives set by Parliament are more than satisfactory .
I fully agree with Mr Casini 's report , as the transparency of political institutions is a fundamental condition of their legitimacy .
This is why I have supported the proposal .
( IT ) Mr President , there is no doubt that this regulation marks an important step in the process aimed at focusing attention on the European institutions .
There needs to be more transparency , more publicity , more clarity of conduct and accessibility of information , and finally , a common transparency register .
If we think that in the United States , the law governing lobby groups was introduced as long ago as 1948 , we realise that they undoubtedly have a role to play , and while they essentially represent predominantly selfish interests , they must be duly taken into account .
This is a forward-looking draft report , and while it is not the finished article , it is undoubtedly a way of safeguarding the legitimacy of the activities and decisions of the European institutions .
For this reason , I voted in favour , as I am absolutely convinced that this is the path we must take .
Mr President , I think we owe a debt of gratitude to the Sunday Times for exposing the ' amendments for money ' scandal .
As a result , as you know yourself , a working group has been established by the Bureau to introduce binding codes of conduct for all MEPs .
Part two of cleaning up the act is what we did today by voting for this report in huge numbers .
I believe that the register of lobbyists is long overdue , but I have a number of reservations .
First of all , I think that it should be mandatory .
However , it is a step in the right direction and it is worth noting that the lobbyists themselves , the reputable lobbyists , actually are in touch and are in favour of compulsory registration .
I am disappointed , however , that the Council has not signed up to the proposal .
It is worth noting that the three MEPs who were exposed in terms of the ' amendments for money ' scandal are all former government ministers .
The registration of lobbyists is a big issue and lobbying is a big issue , and we need to push on , use this as an experiment and hopefully , in the future , make it compulsory and mandatory .
Mr President , the moment the lobbyist arrives in Brussels , he perceives immediately that this was a system designed by , and for , people like him .
He is usually a man , although his female equivalent can increasingly be found stalking our corridors in her sharp trouser suit .
This is a system where decisions are taken - I would say in smoke-filled rooms , but these days in smoke-free rooms - behind closed doors with the voters frozen out .
You had a perfect example of that with the new restrictions and bans on herbal and alternative medicines which came in a couple of weeks ago .
Such a ban would never have passed a national parliament , all of them being subjected as they were to real anger from their constituents .
However , the big pharmaceutical corporations understood that they could push through in this system what they could never get through the national legislatures , precisely because this system is much more invulnerable to public opinion .
So , yes , let us have this register - I voted for it and my group supported it - but the real solution is to disperse the power away from these unaccountable Brussels and Strasbourg institutions back to genuinely answerable national , democratic parliaments .
Mr President , the government of Singapore and the authorities in Hong Kong and Shanghai are scouring London and the other financial centres of Europe looking to recruit the people who have been driven abroad by the excessive regulatory burden being imposed by the European Union .
Our generation is witnessing an epical shift in wealth and enterprise from Europe to Asia .
It is our tragedy to live at a time where , just as Asia has discovered the secrets of decentralisation , diffusion of power , enterprise and personal responsibility , we in this part of the world are going in the opposite direction , copying the old Asian empires - the Mings , the Moguls and the Ottomans - in regulating , uniformising , standardising and taxing .
Of course , it is my own country , my own capital city of London , which will be most adversely affected by these new restrictions , but the EU as a whole has an interest in preventing this haemorrhage of wealth , of jobs and of enterprise from Europe to younger and more virile economies .
Again , the solution is to push powers down back to national authorities which have genuine affinity and allegiance from their voters .
( DA ) Mr President , India is the largest democracy in the world , it is one of the world 's fastest growing markets , and it is well on the way to becoming a knowledge-based economy .
In light of this , it does , of course , make perfect sense for us to conclude a free trade agreement .
It is also in our own interests .
The question therefore arises as to how on earth the Left can be against this free trade agreement .
How can anyone be against lifting millions of Indian people out of poverty , and how can the Left be against fighting for an open market for European enterprises ?
I find it incomprehensible .
I simply cannot understand why it is so difficult to learn from history .
Free trade is good !
Free trade is good !
Free trade is good !
Free trade creates growth , freedom for people and , therefore , also peace .
Mr President , I voted against the motion for a resolution that deals with the negotiations for a free trade agreement with India .
In my opinion , the conclusion of any such agreement negotiated by the European Commission would only serve big multinational corporations , both in India and in Europe .
In contrast to the last speaker , in my opinion , the trade negotiations are not driven by the interests of raising people out of poverty and improving people 's living standards ; they are driven by those big business agendas to get more market access and increase profits .
I stand with the poor farmers , trade unionists and workers of India who oppose the FTA as it will mean a further undermining of living standards and working conditions for large parts of the Indian working class , in particular , those that work in the large informal sector .
Furthermore , this FTA agenda and its drive to enforce intellectual property rights and data exclusivity endangers access to cheap generic medicines that are produced in India .
Today , these generics are of vital importance to people across the world suffering from the likes of HIV and AIDS .
Because of the profiteering of the private major pharmaceutical companies , they simply cannot afford the branded equivalents .
( FI ) Mr President , the free trade agreement to be signed with India is the most remarkable of the EU 's free trade agreements negotiated so far .
The European Union must emphasise the importance of social responsibility .
We know very well what India 's biggest problems are : child labour , poverty and inequality .
We are now to conclude a trade agreement , the real beneficiaries of which are industry and big companies in Europe .
The European consumer , of course , certainly benefits from India 's cheap labour force , as reflected , for example , in lower prices for products , but that should not be allowed if India 's primary producers are going to suffer .
It is hypocritical to claim that Europe is a pioneer in the area of social responsibility .
In offering free trade benefits , the EU must insist that the problems are addressed , and must oversee the process .
It is important that the Commission incorporates into the free trade agreement legally binding clauses relating to human rights , social and environmental standards and the social responsibility of companies , and that it ensures , moreover , that these demands are met .
( DA ) Mr President , it is , of course , interesting , and in its way charming , that there can always be Members of this Parliament that are against free trade .
In a way , I think this is fantastic .
However , I would like to say that I fully support it .
I believe that free trade is the way forward , and it is also free trade that should show us the way forward with regard to India .
The reason it has been so long coming , of course , is that there are problems with various details - major details we could say - namely , the question of generic medicines , which the previous speaker also mentioned .
I would call on both parties in this matter , in other words , both the EU and India , to try to find a solution to this problem that both respects copyright , because that is absolutely essential , and , at the same time , ensures that practical means are provided to enable the many poor people in India to obtain cheap medicines .
Finally , there are some critics who believe that we should not follow the bilateral path in the negotiations and enter into bilateral agreements .
They believe that this goes against the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) negotiations .
I think that this is completely in line with the WTO .
We need to do something to make sure that we do not founder any more than we are already doing in the WTO .
It is quite simply necessary to have these bilateral agreements , and therefore I welcome them .
( DA ) Mr President , it is amazing every time we discuss free trade in this Parliament .
A few old radio signals from Radio Tirana always turn up in the debate .
At any rate , that is the impression you can get when you listen to the thoughts of the Left on free trade .
They thereby make it clear that they have not learnt anything at all from history .
We are now talking about the region of Japan .
The EU and Japan are two of the world 's largest economies .
Together , we account for a fifth of global trade .
We invest significant sums in each other 's economies , we have common interests at global level and yet the negotiations are only progressing slowly .
Therefore , let us say from our side that the barriers must be removed .
We have to accept that concessions are needed from both sides , because together our economies can complement each other and create innovation , growth and jobs .
( DA ) Mr President , I merely wish to add to what has already been said .
There is no doubt that one of the barriers for the Japanese is the extremely high technical barriers that exist and have always existed in Japanese society .
Europe should make a strong appeal to Japan to get out of the bunker and ensure that something is done about these technical barriers .
The background issue of the disaster that Japan is experiencing is , of course , tragic .
However , if nothing else , we could say that something positive has come out of it in that they will have the opportunity to think again and realise that there really is a need now for outside help .
There is a considerable need for enterprises from other regions to come in and help .
That might cause Japan to look forward , to see the situation with fresh eyes , and to remove these numerous technical barriers .

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to remind our fellow Member on the left , Mr Murphy , that Karl Marx was in favour of free trade with India .
I would also like to remind our liberal fellow Members , and , in particular , Mr Rohde , that the reason he was in favour of free trade was because of its devastating effects , since he maintained that the fact that the British bourgeoisie was driven by dishonourable interests was of little consequence : Indian society needed to be destroyed in order to precipitate the dawn of the global revolution .
As far as I am concerned , I do not think we should be dogmatic on this matter .
Systematic free trade is not necessarily beneficial .
It can be a good thing when there is a level playing field .
That is pretty much the case in many areas with Japan , but I recognise Japan 's right , for instance , to protect its rice market , to protects its rice farmers , to pay its farmers higher prices than those on world markets and to say no to massive imports which would obliterate its peasant farmer population , in the same way that I recognise our economies ' rights to protect certain sectors of their activity .
That is why I did not vote for the majority resolution .
I would have preferred other resolutions that , in my opinion , seemed more appropriate .
There must be a level playing field , but only in clearly defined sectors .
( DA ) Mr President , I would actually have been surprised if I had not heard the French Members intimate that protectionism is a good thing .
Well , enough of dogmatics .
We must move on to the forests and , in this regard , we are today debating our report on the Commission Green Paper on forest protection and information in the EU .
European forests have many social , economic and environmental functions , and they are , without a doubt , making an important contribution to solving the climate crisis - it is actually a very effective way of solving this crisis - and to the attainment of the EU 's 2020 target .
We in the Danish Liberal Party are therefore very pleased that today 's vote has ensured that the forests will receive more consistent and long-term protection while , at the same time , we have retained our ambitions with regard to ensuring the global competitiveness of European forest-based industries .
However , we were a little surprised that the proposal for a 30-year ban on building on land where there has been a forest fire was successfully voted through .
This is a typical leftist method of solving crime problems - by banning everything and everyone and , what is more , for 30 years . We obviously do not support this .

( IT ) Mr President , as shadow rapporteur of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I am completely satisfied with the outcome of today 's vote .
The report by Mr Arsenis on the protection of forests is a policy report ; it is a basis for confirming how the European Parliament intends to tackle the protection of our forest heritage and the adaptation of forests to climate change .
Today , the European Parliament clearly expressed its point of view , in the light of which we expect the Commission to make the necessary proposals and so enable even more detailed policies to be drafted for the sector .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Arsenis for his expert and professional work , which involved a long and difficult debate , because - as we are well aware - the forest situation is not the same in all the Member States .
Despite this , we found common ground and also achieved some specific objectives , for example , the protection of certain parts from land speculation , greater protection of forests which are prized for their biodiversity , such as the northern Boreal and Mediterranean forests , and a ban on building on land cleared by arson .
Mr President , as I have said , this is very important for many Mediterranean countries , including your own country , Greece .
( DE ) Mr President , the forests are our future and our cultural landscape .
They are carefully managed to provide services for us and for the environment , including producing oxygen , storing carbon and offering a habitat for plants and animals .
The people who manage our woodlands are paid little or nothing for providing these hidden functions which many people take for granted .
This makes it all the more important for us to take into consideration the economic aspects of our forests .
These include the timber industry and , increasingly , the production of biomass , not only for heating , but also for electricity generation .
In future , we must strengthen and make greater use of the economic aspects of woodlands and we must take national and personal responsibility for this .
We are expecting the Commission to produce a White Paper which reflects this comprehensive approach and puts the focus on it to ensure that our forests have a future and that we are all prepared to invest in this future .
If I plant a grain of corn , I am thinking only of today , but if I plant a tree , I am looking to the future .
( SV ) Mr President , the requirements for forests are very different in different parts of Europe .
Forest legislation is therefore best dealt with at national level .
Moreover , the Treaty of Lisbon does not provide support for a common European forestry policy .
The biggest problem with the proposed regulations relating to climate and forests is that forests are key to the EU being able to achieve the climate targets that have been set .
Forests are necessary for conversion to a green economy , for example , through production of biofuels from forestry by-products .
Therefore , forestry must not be subjected to unnecessary , complicated regulations that make its products less competitive compared with fossil fuels .
For example , it is very strange to propose binding sustainability criteria for a renewable resource like forests , but to not have similar criteria for fossil fuels like coal .
I will continue to oppose a European common forestry policy in future , too .
I would instead like to put resources into research , education , information and innovation with regard to how to prevent the effects that climate change will have on our forests . Thank you .
Mr President , I voted against the report on the EU 's common foreign and security policy .
I am in complete disagreement with the views and ideas it expresses about Europe 's current and future role in the world .
In a nutshell , this report stands for a militarised and imperialist Europe .
It defends an aggressive raw materials strategy and asks for , and I quote , ' a less rigid distinction between military and civilian crisis management operations ' .
This is disguised language for a further militarisation of foreign policy .
It welcomes the trade agreement with Colombia , despite the fact that hundreds of trade unionists have been killed in recent years , guilty simply of being trade unionists .
This report hypocritically names social unrest as one element of a new generation of security challenges and risks .
What hypocrisy !
The capitalist system has created poverty and misery across the world and is incapable of dealing with the consequences .
It is the right of people to defend their legitimate interests and struggle for a better future without any interference from the mighty political , economic and military powers .
( IT ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say - and I hope this will not be deducted from my speaking time - that , on the subject of hypocrisy , there are very few of us who believe in certain things .
We each take the floor to explain our vote after we have cast it .
There are around five or six of us , and we listen to each other and are sometimes filmed for television .
However , the whole thing is rather depressing .
Therefore , I would like to make a suggestion , and I will certainly do so at the next meeting of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
I suggest that from now on , the explanations of vote should precede the vote itself , so that perhaps by talking and listening to each another , we may even convince each other about which way to vote , rather than playing a sort of team game that has all been decided beforehand .
Having said this , I stated in my explanation of vote that I voted in favour .
I continue to believe in Europe , just as I continue to believe in the effectiveness of the presence of a High Commissioner .
However , I continue to believe that the Member States believe in it much less than we ourselves do .
Therefore perhaps it should be pointed out - as was reiterated to Baroness Ashton this morning and on other occasions , too - that , unless Europe stops being partly economic and becomes more political instead , our role probably cannot be carried out as well as it could be , either .
( PL ) Mr President , I agree that European foreign policy must take account of the external dimension of the European area of freedom , security and justice .
That is why I welcome any action which contributes to the promotion of peace , stability and the rule of law in countries and regions in crisis .
I support commitment to the transatlantic partnership as one of the main pillars of the EU 's foreign policy , aiming to create a free market with the United States .
Eastern European politics are especially important from Poland 's point of view .
The report acknowledges that there should be political and economic integration with the EU 's neighbours and also calls for a cohesive approach in negotiations on a new agreement with Russia , paying attention to the rule of law and protection of human rights there .
It also acknowledges that negotiations for the accession of Turkey should be intensified and that there should be a continuous commitment to the accession process for the Balkan countries .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report for its moderate approach to the most pressing issues in the common foreign and security policy .
Thanks to the Socialist Group 's amendments , a more constructive language for the dialogue on Russia and Iran has been achieved .
The amendments on the EU strategy on Afghanistan also contributed to improving the structure of the report .
The Albertini report is a step forward towards a better EU security policy .
While I support the efforts and the commitment of the rapporteur , I should also stress that the EU is still far from having a coherent long-term strategy in this area .
The EU contribution to global peace and stability is still quite small and still depends too much on the USA 's vision of international security and on the ' needle approach ' to the same issue .
Let us work for a more autonomous , EU-centred foreign and security strategy , because that is what European citizens expect from us and that is what we should deliver to them .
( GA ) Mr President , I found the number of Members who spoke in support of Lady Ashton and her ongoing work in the foreign services , and also the number of Members who proposed that we speak with one voice , interesting and satisfying this morning .
If we speak with one voice , we will be effective and listened to ; if we do not , we will not be listened to or effective .
I was also reminded of the words of the great Irish poet , William Butler Yeats , who said ' peace comes dropping slow ' .
That was certainly the case in Northern Ireland , where the European Union played a crucial part through its support for the International Fund for Ireland , and that peace was copper-fastened last weekend with successful elections .
( GA ) The work which the European Union did in Northern Ireland can be repeated on the world stage for the benefit of peace and of the poor provided we speak with one voice and if Lady Ashton does her work diligently .
( PL ) .
Mr President , I supported the report on the European common security and defence policy .
However , I would like to point out that the report not only evaluates the policy , but focuses principally on the future , on development .
In my view , this requires not only the various justified and accurate assessments and clever words , of which there are many in the report ; the common security and defence policy needs to be looked at seriously and from a different angle .
I think that three things are needed .
Firstly , the EU should define its common strategic interests , for example , concerning energy security and Neighbourhood Policy .
Secondly , the EU should increase its own capability regarding the planning and coordination of civil and military operations and crisis management .
Finally , thirdly , within the EU budget , there should be a joint budget for joint action .
( PL ) Mr President , the increasingly significant interdependency of international organisations in the face of economic , environmental and energy problems requires constant adjustments to the foreign relations of individual states .
Security issues form an element of policy requiring particular care by every country , and they need constant readjustment in a changing world .
The report 's main theme is a call to protect the strategic autonomy of the EU in the field of security and defence .
However , it does not take the EU 's lack of military experience into account , but , at the same time , calls for further efforts to expand the EU 's operational options .
For countries such as Poland , the basis of its defence policy remains the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation .
Tightening the strategic partnership between the EU and NATO and the proposal to strengthen mutual support for action could considerably slow down the procedures involved in taking operational decisions .
In my view , the report seems too radical , and this is why I voted to reject it .
Mr President , the most significant document on the EU security strategy was delivered by Xavier Solana .
It is entitled ' A secure Europe in a better world ' and was adopted by the European Council on 12 December 2003 .
Since then , little progress has been made in this field .
The Union still lacks an effective strategy for its foreign security and , on most relevant issues , still follows the lead of the United States .
This report tries to introduce some positive changes on tactical topics like crisis management , the fragmentation of the EU defence technological industrial base , and the ineffectiveness of the 24 EU security and defence missions around the world .
I voted in favour of it , and I hope this Parliament will continue to make a contribution towards the goal of enhancing EU strategic autonomy in security affairs .
In particular , what we need is a redefinition of the major threats to our security after the collapse of the so-called Islamic terrorist threat and the emergence of new dangers like the financial crisis .
( FI ) Mr President , I supported the report , but I wonder if the European Union has the ability to work to promote peace and stability in our neighbouring countries , by which I now mainly mean Syria , Libya and Egypt .
Our actions in Libya will show the actual state of our security and defence policy .
The EU 's main objective in Libya is to protect the civilian population and to support the attempts by the Libyan people to establish a democratic society .
Memories of the Balkan countries in the 1990s are still fresh in our minds .
Then , Europe had to rely on help from the United States of America .
Libya has , in any case , shown that the EU is not a military power : our actions have been dependent on the independent initiatives of the Member States .
The examples in North Africa make us realise now that the EU 's need for military preparedness and capability at the gates of Europe remains a fact .
The External Action Service has been in operation for more than a year : we can now expect some results from it .
Mr President , there are two words that spring to mind to describe where we find ourselves today with regard to the common foreign and security policy .
Unfortunately , they are not very nice words .
The ones I think of are ' mess ' and ' a bit of a joke ' .
Unfortunately , it is rather a sick joke .
In the last 15 months - a period that has presented ample opportunities throughout the world to prove its credentials - our so-called common policy has failed to make any positive impact .
I say that not as a great aficionado of foreign affairs , but I have to answer my constituents as to what does Europe add in value to us ?
It is of real concern to them that the cost of delivering this common policy is not being carefully allocated and not being carefully accounted for .
I have to answer my citizens about what service this is giving them , and I still , after the lengthy debates on these reports , struggle to come up with an answer .
( SK ) Mr President , the submitted report talks about human rights as a priority agenda of the EU in international organisations , while particularly emphasising the rights of women and children , and freedom of expression .
At the same time , the report calls on Member States to support the position of the EU in these organisations .
However , so-called reproductive rights , which is just another name for the right to abortion , are a priority component of the European human rights agenda .
On the other hand , European diplomacy is still not consistent in promoting religious freedom in all of its aspects , with an emphasis on respecting the rights of Christians worldwide .
I would therefore prefer to see myself and my constituents represented by Slovak diplomats .
I believe they will promote a fundamentally different viewpoint to that of the EU in these matters , many of which fall within the competence of nation states .
The EU is still a very limited global actor ; its role in the UN system and in all multilateral organisations does not match its democratic , economic and cultural weight .
This report addressed this deficit and calls for removing some obstacles to the full participation of our Union to the global context .
This is the reason why I voted in favour of it .
The EU can make a powerful contribution to the peace and prosperity of our planet .
Let us allow its civilian power to expand its influence everywhere .
Mr President , as I may be the last speaker , let me take this opportunity to thank your staff and the interpreters for your patience .
Please do not think it goes unnoticed or unappreciated .
The European Union is hungry and eager in its acquisition of all of the attributes and trappings of statehood .
It has its own Parliament , its own currency , its own president , its own foreign minister , its own external borders , its own flag , anthem , passport and driving licence .
It was only a matter of time before it would apply for formal recognition as a state in the United Nations , which , of course , is what has now happened , with - rather disgracefully and to me bafflingly - the support of my own government .
This is a legal regularisation of something that has been happening de facto for some time : the pushing of the powers that we regard as definitive of statehood from national to Brussels level .
But the other Member States of the European Union should be wary of what they agree .
One of the consequences of giving the EU full recognition of statehood is that they now can be addressed at length by Baroness Ashton and by Mr Van Rompuy as , respectively , the foreign minister and the head of state of the new entity .
And , as Members of this House I am sure will privately be able to let them know , that is not an unmixed blessing .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 89 / 396 / EEC of 14 June 1989 on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
Therefore , bearing in mind the importance of trade in foodstuffs , I am voting for this proposal for a directive on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs .
This system will contribute to better information on the identity of the products , and will also help to develop international trade .
I totally agree that the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission should be taken into consideration as I think that the proposal in question is simply limited to a straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
This proposal concerns the straightforward codification of the rules already in force on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs , without making changes to their substance on which Parliament might need to give an opinion .
Nonetheless , I would highlight the increasing importance , in my opinion , of providing consumers with factual and complete information , especially on the lots , dates of manufacture and other information enabling them to trace the movement of a product from its source .
This report relates to the proposal for a directive of Parliament and of the Council on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs , in a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of European citizens is one of the EU 's concerns .
Many legislative changes have been carried out by the Commission and by Parliament in order to achieve this objective .
One of the things which really complicates the life of the ordinary EU citizen is reading and interpreting information about the indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs .
The proliferation of such information makes this more difficult and contributes to decreasing the public 's quality of life .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of codified acts .
I am happy to finally be able to adopt a directive that , in consolidating Directive 89 / 396 / EEC , makes the public 's lives easier by simplifying and clarifying EU law .
in writing . - Trade in foodstuffs occupies a very important place in the internal market . Indication of the lot to which a foodstuff belongs meets the need for better information on the identity of products .
It is therefore a useful source of information when foodstuffs are the subject of dispute or constitute a health hazard for consumers .
In view of the variety of identification methods used , it should be up to the trader to determine the lot and to affix the corresponding indication or mark .
At international level , there is a general obligation to provide a reference to the manufacturing or packaging lot of pre-packaged foodstuffs .
It should be the duty of the Union to contribute to the development of international trade by also applying those rules .
Taking into consideration the good of society and consumers in the European market , we try to simplify as many rules and regulations as possible so that they are transparent and able to be understood by every citizen .
A case in point is the common agricultural policy .
The overriding principle in work on its future form is simplification of a policy whose main aim is to ensure food security for Europe .
Codification of the directive on marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs aims to achieve this approach and to simplify consumers ' understanding of the legislation .
At the same time , by retaining the wording of the original texts , the codification is being carried out in full compliance with the procedures involved in adopting acts in the EU .
in writing . - I voted for this report on a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs .
The aim of this proposal is the codification of existing legislative texts on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs .
Increasing importance should , however , be given to ensuring that consumers are given accurate and comprehensive information , especially with regard to lots , dates of manufacture and other information which enables them to track the progress of the product from its point of origin .
in writing . - The report of MEP Sajjad Karim contains a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs ( codified text ) .
The purpose of this proposal is to undertake the codification of Council Directive 89 / 396 / EEC of 14 June 1989 on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs .
I totally support the new directive because it will supersede the various acts incorporated in it ; this proposal fully preserves the content of the acts being codified and hence does no more than bring them together with only such formal amendments as are required by the codification exercise itself .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which takes over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
We are in favour of this directive on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs , not least because criminals all too often falsify codes for illegal purposes .
Grouping together and simplifying all the existing legislation on indications or marks will facilitate controls and the identification of any illegal practice .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 80 / 181 / EEC of 20 December 1979 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement and the repeal of Directive 71 / 354 / EEC .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
In view of this , and taking into account the importance of measuring instruments for most areas of human activity , I am voting for this proposal for a directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement .
This system will contribute to better performance in the areas of public health and safety , as well as administrative operations .
With due regard for the opinions of the legal services of Parliament , the Council and the Commission , which have concluded that the Commission proposal was confined to straightforward codification of the existing texts , without any change in their substance , I welcome the adoption of this proposal at the first reading .
This report relates to the proposal for a directive of Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurements , as a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of Europeans is one of the EU 's concerns .
in writing . - Units of measurement are essential in the use of all measuring instruments to express measurements or any indication of quantity .
They are used in almost all fields of human activity and it is therefore necessary to ensure the greatest possible clarity in their use and set rules for their use within the European Union for economic , public health , public safety or administrative purposes .
Member States should be able to require that measuring devices on their territory bear indications of quantity in a single legal unit of measurement .
This directive supports the smooth functioning of the internal market through the degree of harmonisation of units of measurement .
In this context , it is appropriate for the Commission to monitor market developments relating to this directive and its implementation , particularly with regard to possible barriers to the internal market and further harmonisation needed to overcome these obstacles .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement .
This proposal is confined to codification of the existing texts relating to units of measurement , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
in writing . - As I understand , the report contains a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement .
The purpose of this proposal is to undertake a codification of Council Directive 80 / 181 / EEC of 20 December 1979 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement and on the repeal of Directive 71 / 354 / EEC .
It is very good that the new directive will supersede the various acts incorporated in it ; this proposal fully preserves the content of the acts being codified and hence does no more than bring them together with only such formal amendments as are required by the codification exercise itself .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which takes over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 70 / 157 / EEC of 6 February 1970 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a directive on the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles , as I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
This proposal relates to the straightforward codification of the existing laws on the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles .
No changes have been made to their substance on which Parliament , in particular , would be required to express an opinion .
This report relates to the proposal for a directive of Parliament and of the Council on the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles , in a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of Europeans is one of the EU 's concerns .
Many legislative changes have been undertaken by the Commission and Parliament in order to achieve this objective .
One of the areas that make the lives of the EU public difficult is the constant amendments to legislation .
These sometimes arise due to a need to update them , but this hinders and diminishes the quality of life of the individual .
In 1987 , the Commission recommended that all acts that had up to 10 amendments be codified , so that Community legislation would be easier to understand .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of codified acts .
I am pleased , therefore , that we can finally adopt a directive codifying Council Directive 70 / 157 / EEC of 6 February 1970 , which approximates the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles .
in writing . - Directive 70 / 157 / EEC is one of the separate directives of the EC type-approval system provided for in Directive 2007 / 46 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers , and of systems , components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles , and lays down technical prescriptions concerning the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles .
Those technical prescriptions concern the approximation of the laws of the Member States to enable the EC type-approval procedure provided for in Directive 2007 / 46 / EC to be applied in respect of each type of vehicle .
Consequently , the provisions laid down in Directive 2007 / 46 / EC relating to systems , components and separate technical units for vehicles apply to this directive .
It is desirable to take into account the technical requirements adopted by the UN Economic Commission for Europe ( UN / ECE ) in its corresponding regulations annexed to the Agreement of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe concerning the adoption of uniform technical prescriptions for wheeled vehicles , equipment and parts which can be fitted and / or be used on wheeled vehicles and the conditions for reciprocal recognition of approvals granted on the basis of these prescriptions .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
in writing . - The European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles will help to achieve the main purpose of the proposal - to undertake a codification of Council Directive 70 / 157 / EEC of 6 February 1970 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles .
I agree with the initiative of Mr Sajjad Karim and I voted ' in favour ' .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which takes over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The importance of the transport sector to the European economy is reflected in the employment that it directly provides for more than 10 million people and in the 5 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) that it represents .
Its development is vital for the EU 's economic growth , and in order to bridge physical and psychological gaps .
Moreover , as outlined in the White Paper entitled ' Roadmap to a Single European Transport Area ' , it is essential that the goal of a 60 % cut in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 be met .
This report is thus intended to simplify and clarify EU law , which is spread over numerous pieces of legislation that have already been amended several times , making them difficult to understand .
One of the EU 's objectives is the transparency of the Community acquis as a way of bringing Europe closer to its citizens , so that they can benefit from the specific rights that are given to them .
The codification of the existing legislative texts is the result of approximating the legislation of the Member States to the establishment of technical rules on the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles , which promote environmental sustainability at European level .
I voted for document 2010 / 0261 on the codification of the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles .
This is another example of the European Commission attempting to simplify and regulate the acquis communautaire so that it becomes more transparent and accessible to EU citizens .
The legislative proposal codifies the existing texts and creates a legislative act which is easier to understand and more accessible .
In standardising technical norms , the regulation brings together Member States and establishes a procedure for official EU certification , defined in Directive 2007 / 46 / EC with regard to every type of vehicle .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 87 / 402 / EEC of 25 June 1987 on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a directive on protection structures for narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
This report concerns the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors , as a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of EU citizens is one of the EU 's concerns .
One of the areas that make the lives of the EU public difficult is the constant amendments to legislation .
These sometimes arise due to a need to update them , but this hinders and diminishes the quality of life of the individual .
In 1987 , the Commission recommended that all acts that had up to 10 amendments be codified , so that Community legislation would be easier to understand .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of codified acts .
I am pleased , therefore , that we can finally adopt a directive codifying Council Directive 87 / 402 / EEC of 25 June 1987 on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
in writing . - Council Directive 87 / 402 / EEC of 25 June 1987 on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors has been substantially amended several times .
In the interests of clarity and rationality , the said directive should be codified .
The directive mentioned above is one of the separate directives of the EC type-approval system provided for in Council Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , as replaced by Directive 2003 / 37 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May 2003 on type-approval of agricultural or forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , and repealing Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , and lays down technical prescriptions concerning the design and construction of agricultural or forestry tractors as regards the roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat .
Those technical prescriptions concern the approximation of the laws of the Member States to enable the EC type-approval procedure provided for in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC to be applied in respect of each type of tractor .
Consequently , the provisions laid down in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC relating to agricultural and forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , apply to this directive .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
in writing . - The European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors is very timely .
The purpose of this proposal is to undertake a codification of Council Directive 87 / 402 / EEC of 25 June 1987 on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
I supported this initiative by voting ' in favour ' .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which adopts the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
We are in favour of this directive on roll-over protection structures on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
Grouping together and simplifying all the existing legislation on the subject is an important step and will help protect those who use agricultural machinery on a daily basis .
This report , which I voted for today , relates to specific Union legislation on the EU approval system for narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors , establishing technical rules on roll-over protection structures mounted in front of the driver 's seat on tractors .
The codification of Community legal texts is an essential procedure in order to simplify and facilitate the European public 's understanding of them , thus contributing to the actual implementation of EU directives .
In this particular case , the technical rules imposed on the Member States allow the EU approval system , established in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC , to be applied to every model of tractor .
There are two important issues in this report : the simplification and the transparency of EU law .
We are living in times when the European public feels excluded from the Union project .
I therefore believe that it is essential to find solutions in order to narrow this gap , thereby demonstrating that the main purpose of the EU is the well-being of its people .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 86 / 415 / EEC of 24 July 1986 on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a directive on the installation , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
This report relates to the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors , in a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of European citizens is one of the EU 's concerns .
One of the areas that make the lives of the EU public difficult is the constant amendments to legislation .
These sometimes arise due to a need to update them , but this hinders and diminishes the quality of life of the individual .
On 1 April 1987 , the Commission recommended that all acts that had up to 10 amendments be codified , so that Community legislation would be easier to understand .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of codified acts .
I am pleased , therefore , that we can finally adopt a directive codifying Council Directive 86 / 415 / EEC of 24 July 1986 on the approximation of the legislation of the Member States on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
in writing . - Council Directive 86 / 415 / EEC of 24 July 1986 on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors has been substantially amended several times .
In the interests of clarity and rationality , the said directive should be codified .
Directive 86 / 415 / EEC is one of the separate directives of the EC type-approval system provided for in Council Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , as replaced by Directive 2003 / 37 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May 2003 on type-approval of agricultural or forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , and repealing Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , and lays down technical prescriptions concerning the installation , location , operation and identification of controls .
Those technical prescriptions concern the approximation of the laws of the Member States to enable the EC type-approval procedure provided for in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC to be applied in respect of each type of tractor .
Consequently , the provisions laid down in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC relating to agricultural and forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , apply to this directive .
in writing . - I voted for this report for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to the controls on wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
in writing . - The report considers the European Parliament resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
The purpose of this proposal is to undertake a codification of Council Directive 86 / 415 / EEC of 24 July 1986 on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the installation , location , operation and identification of the controls of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which takes over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I am in favour of the report because it aims to protect operators of agricultural machinery , as the controls must be easily accessible and not represent a hazard .
They must be designed and located , or protected , so as to prevent any involuntary movement or other manoeuvre that could endanger the machinery operator .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 76 / 432 / EEC of 6 April 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a directive on the braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
in writing . - Council Directive 76 / 432 / EEC of 6 April 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors has been substantially amended several times .
In the interests of clarity and rationality , the said directive should be codified .
Directive 76 / 432 / EEC is one of the separate directives of the EC type-approval system provided for in Council Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , as replaced by Directive 2003 / 37 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May 2003 on type-approval of agricultural or forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , and repealing Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , and lays down technical prescriptions concerning braking devices .
Those technical prescriptions concern the approximation of the laws of the Member States to enable the EC type-approval procedure provided for in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC to be applied in respect of each type of tractor .
Consequently , the provisions laid down in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC relating to agricultural and forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , apply to this directive .
in writing . - I voted for this report endorsing the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to braking devices on wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which takes over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I am in favour of the report as it aims to regulate and simplify legislation on braking devices of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
In order to safeguard and protect agricultural or forestry tractor operators , machinery should have EC type-approval .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 80 / 720 / EEC of 24 June 1980 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a directive on the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
This report relates to the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors , in a codified text .
One of the areas that make the lives of the EU public difficult is the constant amendments to legislation .
On 1 April 1987 , the Commission recommended that all acts that had up to 10 amendments be codified , so that Community legislation would be easier to understand .
This would go on to form part of the conclusions of the Presidency of the Edinburgh European Council , which took place in December 1992 .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of codified acts .
I am pleased , therefore , that we can finally adopt a directive codifying Council Directive 80 / 720 / EEC of 24 June 1980 , and which approximates the legislation of the Member States on the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
in writing . - Council Directive 80 / 720 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the States relating to the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors has been substantially amended .
In the interests of clarity , the directive should be codified .
Directive 80 / 720 / EEC is one of the separate directives on the EC type-approval system provided for in Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , as replaced by Directive 2003 / 37 / EC and of the Council of 26 May 2003 on type-approval of agricultural or forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , and repealing Directive 74 / 150 / EEC , and lays down technical prescriptions concerning the design and construction of agricultural or forestry tractors as regards the operating space , access to the driving position as well as the doors and windows .
Those technical prescriptions concern the approximation of the laws of the States to enable the EC type-approval procedure provided for in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC to be applied in respect of each type of tractor .
Consequently , the provisions laid down in Directive 2003 / 37 / EC relating to agricultural or forestry tractors , their trailers and interchangeable towed machinery , together with their systems , components and separate technical units , apply to this directive .
in writing . - I voted for this report for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which adopts the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
In the interests of safety , it is essential for the rules on the operating space , driving position and door and window sizes of agricultural tractors to be codified in a manner that is comprehensible and accessible to citizens .
I therefore voted in favour .
This report , like those concerning the rules applied to tractors , is aimed at undertaking the codification of Directive 80 / 720 / EEC of 24 June 1980 , which concerns the harmonisation of Member State legislation on the operating space , access to the driving position and the doors and windows of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
The amendments tabled do not affect the content itself , merely making the changes to the form required by the codification process , presented in the 22 official languages .
Once again , I would like to reiterate the importance of this legal process in order to allow easier comprehension and greater clarity of EU legal texts , whose main beneficiaries are the European public and its bodies .
A Europe that is clear and simple for the entire public is the key factor in developing a sense of belonging , which is vital to the European project .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 86 / 298 / EEC of 26 May 1986 on rear-mounted roll-over protection structures of narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a directive on roll-over protection structures for narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
This proposal confines itself to merely codifying the existing texts , without any change in their substance .
Therefore , there is no reason for me to vote against .
This report relates to the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on rear-mounted roll-over protection structures of narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors , in a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of Europeans is one of the EU 's concerns .
One of the areas that make the lives of the EU public difficult is the constant amendments to legislation .
On 1 April 1987 , the Commission recommended that all acts that had up to 10 amendments be codified , so that Community legislation would be easier to understand .
This would go on to form part of the conclusions of the Presidency of the Edinburgh European Council , which took place in December 1992 .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of codified acts .
I am pleased , therefore , that we can finally adopt a directive codifying Council Directive 86 / 298 / EEC of 26 May 1986 , and which approximates the legislation of the Member States on rear-mounted roll-over protection structures of narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on rear-mounted roll-over protection structures of narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to rear-mounted roll-over protection structures of narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on rear-mounted roll-over protection structures of narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which takes over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
This report is aimed at clarifying and simplifying Council Directive 86 / 298 / EEC of 1986 , along with various amendments already made to it , on the subject of rear-mounted roll-over protection structures on narrow-track wheeled agricultural and forestry tractors .
The clear purpose of this process of codification is to make EU law more accessible and comprehensible for the European public .
This directive and the corresponding changes set out technical rules on the design and manufacture of agricultural and forestry tractors , and on their respective approval system , which requires EU-level harmonisation with a view to creating the conditions necessary for road safety .
This European harmonisation also ensures that if the protection of workers is at risk when they are using tractors , the Member States can implement the necessary and required measures , bearing in mind compliance with the Treaty and technical regulations on the protection structures specified in this directive .
I am voting for the amended Commission proposal having regard to the interinstitutional agreement of 20 December 1994 on an accelerated working method for the official codification of legislative texts and , in particular , to point 4 thereof .
The Consultative Working Party , consisting of the respective legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , met on 23 November 2010 for the purpose of examining the aforementioned proposal submitted by the Commission .
An examination of the proposal for a Council directive codifying Council Directive 92 / 79 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes , Council Directive 92 / 80 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes , and Council Directive 95 / 59 / EC of 27 November 1995 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco , resulted in the Consultative Working Party 's concluding , without dissent , that the proposal is a straightforward codification of existing texts , without any change in their substance .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Directive 92 / 79 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes , Council Directive 92 / 80 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes and Council Directive 95 / 59 / EC of 27 November 1995 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a directive on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to manufactured tobacco .
I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
With due regard for the opinions of the legal services of Parliament , the Council and the Commission , which have concluded that the Commission proposal was confined to a straightforward codification of the existing texts , without any change in their substance , I welcome the adoption of this proposal .
This report concerns an amended proposal for a Council directive on the structure and specific rates of excise duty applied to the consumption of manufactured tobacco , in a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of Europeans is one of the EU 's concerns .
One of the areas that make the lives of the EU public difficult is the constant amendments to legislation .
On 1 April 1987 , the Commission recommended that all acts that had up to 10 amendments be codified , so that Community legislation would be easier to understand .
This would go on to form part of the conclusions of the Presidency of the Edinburgh European Council , which took place in December 1992 .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of the codification , which should be carried out in complete compliance with the EU legislative process .
I therefore voted in favour of this proposal , codifying Council Directive 92 / 79 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the structure and specific rates of excise duty applied to the consumption of manufactured tobacco .
in writing . - The Treaty aims to maintain an economic union with healthy competition and properties that are similar to those on the domestic market . As regards manufactured tobacco , the achievement of this aim presupposes that the application in the Member States of taxes affecting the consumption of products in this sector does not distort conditions of competition and does not impede their free movement within the European Union .
As far as excise duties are concerned , the harmonisation of structures must , in particular , result in competition in the different categories of manufactured tobacco belonging to the same group not being distorted by the effects of charging the tax and , consequently , in the opening of the Member States ' national markets . The imperative needs of competition imply a system of freely formed prices for all groups of manufactured tobacco and implementation of this policy needs to guarantee a high level of human health .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the amended proposal for a Council directive on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to manufactured tobacco ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to the structure and rates of excise duty applied to the consumption of manufactured tobacco , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
in writing . - The report of Sajjad Karim contains the European Parliament legislative resolution on the amended proposal for a Council directive on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to manufactured tobacco .
It is known that the purpose of this proposal is to undertake a codification of Council Directive 92 / 79 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes , Council Directive 92 / 80 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes and Council Directive 95 / 59 / EC of 27 November 1995 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco .
This initiative is very important and timely .
I voted ' in favour ' .
The Consultative Working Party with authority on this issue has considered the proposal for a Council directive codifying Council Directive 92 / 79 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes , Council Directive 92 / 80 / EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of taxes on manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes , and Council Directive 95 / 59 / EC of 27 November 1995 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco .
The Consultative Working Party concluded that the proposal is a straightforward codification of existing texts , without any change in their substance .
I therefore voted in favour .
This report - like the many others we have examined up to now - promotes the simplification and clear formulation of European legislation , not least because , as in the case of excise , there are many different provisions that have been amended several times .
Unifying them and making them comprehensible can only help operators and users alike .
We voted in favour .
I voted in favour of this document , codifying Council Regulation ( EC ) No 975 / 98 of 3 May 1998 on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation .
Codification is an effective means of consolidating the rules governing a certain area in a single legislative act .
It provides more clarity , because various provisions regulating the same issue are often spread over different legal texts .
As they are amended , it becomes difficult to understand which provision is currently in force .
Codification is also a suitable means of developing European Union law which is simpler , clearer and more understandable to citizens .
I welcome the efforts that have been made towards clarifying Union law in order to make it more accessible to all EU citizens .
I am therefore voting for this proposal for a regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation .
I believe that the proposed system of codification drafted using a data processing system is more efficient .
With due regard for the opinions of the legal services of Parliament , the Council and the Commission , which have concluded that the Commission proposal was confined to a straightforward codification of the existing texts , without any change in their substance , I welcome the adoption of this proposal .
This report concerns a proposal for a Council regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation , in a codified text .
Simplifying the lives of Europeans is one of the EU 's concerns .
One of the areas that make the lives of the EU public difficult is the constant amendments to legislation .
On 1 April 1987 , the Commission recommended that all acts that had up to 10 amendments be codified , so that Community legislation would be easier to understand .
This would go on to form part of the conclusions of the Presidency of the Edinburgh European Council , which took place in December 1992 .
To address this issue , since 1994 , there has been an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Commission and the Council on an accelerated working method for the adoption of codification , which should be carried out in complete compliance with the EU legislative process .
I am therefore voting in favour of this report , codifying Council Regulation ( EC ) No 975 / 98 of 3 May 1998 on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation .
in writing . - The European single coinage system should inspire public confidence and include technological innovations to ensure that it is secure , reliable and effective .
Public confidence in the system depends on the physical properties of coins , which should be as user-friendly as possible .
After consultations with consumer associations , European Blind Union representatives and the vending machines industry , research was carried out to take into account the specific requirements of important categories of coin users .
In order to ensure a smooth changeover to the euro and to facilitate acceptance of the coinage systems by users , easy distinction between coins through visual and tactile characteristics needed to be guaranteed .
The coins need to be covered with some special security features to limit the scope for fraud .
The fact that they have one European and one national side is an appropriate expression of the idea of European Monetary Union between the Member States .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the proposal for a Council regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation ( codified text ) .
This proposal is confined to the codification of the existing texts relating to denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation , without any change in their substance , so I am voting in favour .
in writing . - The report of Sajjad Karim contains a legislative resolution of the European Parliament on the proposal for a Council regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation .
Taking into account the likelihood of the accession of new states to the euro area , this initiative provides a new opportunity to prevent the activity of money counterfeiters .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Based on the opinion of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , this report on the proposal for a Council regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins intended for circulation concludes that the proposal in question is restricted to the straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Parliament 's proposal , which adopts the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Since , according to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , the proposal in question contains a straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance , I am adopting its position at first reading , taking over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I support this report because this proposal involves no more than a straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance .
in writing . - With this ' whereas , according to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , the proposal in question contains a straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance , the EP adopts its position at first reading , taking over the Commission proposal as adapted to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission ' .
I voted in favour of Mr Karim 's reports .
The 10 reports from the Committee on Legal Affairs focus solely on the codification of various acts , as established by common accord by the Legal Service .
As a result , there will be no changes to the content .
The resolution adopted today fully supports the Commission 's position , which is in line with the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the Legal Services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
According to the Consultative Working Party , the proposal in question is a straightforward codification of existing texts , without any change in their substance .
Given that the purpose of this directive is the codification of previously disparate pieces of legislation , with benefits in terms of the accessibility and comprehensibility of the legislation , without any changes in their substance , I voted in favour of this report .
I support this proposal for the committee to continue its work on this important document on the basis of the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading , and I hope that the Council will also take a favourable approach towards promoting access to information about textile products .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this important resolution on textile fibre names and related labelling and marking of fibre composition of textile products .
With the adoption of this resolution , Europe has achieved a unanimous commitment to protect consumers through the indication of the country of origin and the adoption of a new mechanism for traceability of textile products .
We , Members of the European Parliament , today adopted a joint declaration , which aims to protect European consumers from false or misleading claims on the origin of the products .
I strongly believe that the resolution and declaration will give a major impetus towards the creation of a mechanism of providing accurate information to consumers , particularly with regard to the exact origin of the products purchased .
EU citizens must have the right to know the place of origin and quality level of products and textiles that they purchase .
I voted in favour of this report because it is important that consumers be fully informed when buying textiles .
Thanks to the report , clear labelling of textiles that have any animal content will be mandatory in future .
This will help people with allergies as well .
New fibres and innovative products could be brought to market without delay because of the changes proposed in the report , and consumers will have better choice as a result .
I particularly welcome what the report says about doing two studies : on the possibility of a link between allergies and the chemicals used in textiles , and on the feasibility of implementing a scheme of labelling by place of origin to ensure full traceability of textile products .
I am in agreement with the rapporteur in that a balance should be struck between implementing a high level of protection for consumers and the need to simplify the regulatory framework for textile products .
I voted in favour of this report .
It aims to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products , encourage innovation in the clothing and textile sector , and the development and uptake of new fibres .
I agree that the right balance should be struck between a high level of consumer protection and the simplification of the regulatory framework for textile products .
Extending compulsory labelling should not impose a disproportionate burden on enterprises without bringing real added-value for consumers , who may even be confused by an excess of information on the label of textile products .
I believe that it would be useful for the Commission to submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council regarding possible new labelling requirements to be introduced at Union level .
This should examine , in particular , consumer views with regard to the amount of information that should be supplied on the label of textile products , and investigate which means other than labelling may be used to provide additional information to consumers .
The proposal for a regulation adopted by the Commission on 30 January 2010 is aimed at simplifying the existing regulatory framework , bringing the three existing directives on naming and labelling textile products together in a single regulation .
At first reading , on 18 May 2010 , Parliament approved 63 amendments with a large majority .
Most of these were technical amendments aimed at aligning the text with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
It also adopted a number of substantive amendments , including rules on origin marking , indication of animal-derived materials , multi-fibre textile products , and so on .
In its assessment , the Council rejected all substantive amendments proposed by Parliament .
I voted for this report , the recommendation for second reading , because it restores the vast majority of Parliament 's amendments at first reading , including those relating to origin marking , indication of animal-derived materials and multi-fibre textile products .
These changes will contribute to the promotion and innovation of European industry , and will increase the level of information provided to consumers .
Equally important will be the study that the Commission will have to submit by September 2013 to determine whether there is a causal link between allergic reactions and the chemicals or mixtures used in textile products .
In January 2009 , the Commission adopted the proposal for a new regulation on textile names and related labelling of textile products .
The aim of the proposal is to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products with a view to encouraging the development and uptake of new fibres .
By transforming the three existing directives into a single regulation , the proposal facilitates the process to adapt legislation to technical progress whilst allowing fibre users to benefit more readily from innovative products on the market .
I welcome this proposal , and I consider it particularly significant that the new regulation contains a specific reference to ' Made in ' labelling .
It is crucial , in fact , to continue along this path in order to furnish the European Union with the tools to compete with and face its main trade partners , such as the United States , Canada , China and Japan , on the globalised market .
Furthermore I wish to emphasise here what is , in my view , the most important aspect of the agreement reached with the Council , namely , the commitment by the European Commission to present , by 30 September 2013 , after it has carried out a suitable impact assessment , a report accompanied by legislative proposals regarding indication of origin labelling , traceability and the use of new technologies .
I voted in favour of this report because it aims to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products and thus encourage the development and uptake of new fibres and better consumer protection .
As the final text is still being negotiated with the Council , the European Parliament 's report proposes to identify issues such as the origin marking of textile products imported to the EU , according to which it would be compulsory for the label to indicate not only the manufacturer of the end product , but the country of origin of the imported textile products used to manufacture it , as is already done in Canada , the US , China and Japan .
In general , the report proposes that labels should show as much information as possible about the composition of the product and that we should call on the Commission to investigate whether imported products are damaging to human health due to their composition , in order to improve consumer protection .
However , at the same time , the report proposes rejecting any unnecessary administrative burden for goods manufacturers .
For example , it proposes replacing markings on labels with language-independent symbols to avoid translation of fibre names into several EU languages .
It is also proposed that self-employed tailors should be exempt from this future regulation .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which has the merit of simplifying the existing system concerning the labelling of textile products , as well as encouraging the development and uptake of new fibres and shortening the time between the submission of an application and the adoption of a new fibre name .
These new rules would allow consumers to benefit more readily from innovative products .
Furthermore , the document we approved today also encourages the introduction of origin marking , which would facilitate consumer choice and contribute to reducing fraudulent or misleading claims of origin .
In this regard , I support the amendment laying down the requirement for manufacturers to indicate the presence of non-textile parts of animal origin on the labelling .
This will protect consumers from the risk of inadvertently purchasing real fur products , for example , and will provide greater protection for those suffering from allergies .
I believe in the positive impact of simplifying and improving the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products , particularly encouraging the development and uptake of new fibres .
In view of this , I am voting for the adoption of the regulation tabled by Parliament and the Commission .
However , I believe that the amendments tabled by the rapporteur are important .
In order to prevent consumers from inadvertently purchasing products made from animal-derived materials ( fur and leather ) , I supported this report , which provides for mandatory labelling containing the phrase ' non-textile parts of animal origin ' .
The label will also guard against certain problems that might affect some consumers who suffer from allergies .
This regulation is aimed at establishing rules on the use of textile fibre names and related labelling of textile products , as well as rules on the quantitative analysis of binary and ternary textile fibres mixtures .
This entails transforming Directive 96 / 74 / EC into a regulation and repealing Directives 96 / 73 / EC and 73 / 44 / EEC .
The aim is to make the process of adding new fibres to the harmonised list of textile fibre names more transparent , and to adapt the legislation to technological developments in the textile industry .
The amendments reintroduced by the rapporteur cover the issues of identifying the origin of the textile , non-textile parts of animal origin , a review clause , a request for a study on hazardous substances , language-independent symbols or codes for fibres , requirements for the technical file to be attached to the application for the authorisation of a new textile fibre name , multi-fibre textile products , self-employed tailors , laboratories testing textile mixtures , and the mandatory indication of the fibre composition for felts and felt hats .
I voted in favour .
This recommendation for second reading concerns the Council position on the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on textile fibre names and related labelling and marking of fibre composition of textile products .
The textile sector is very complex and represents a significant share of economic activity in the Member States .
The rapporteur has managed to reach an agreement on issues as controversial as origin marking , non-textile parts of animal origin , hazardous substances and others .
Furthermore , he has managed to include a review clause which allows obstacles to the proper functioning of the Internal Market to be eliminated .
Despite some initial difficulties , it was possible for the three European institutions to come to an understanding , which amounts to a very satisfactory result .
The Council can therefore quickly adopt this legislation with a view to its entry into force in January 2012 , which would greatly benefit consumers .
I am therefore pleased with the consensus that has been reached , and I am voting in favour of this regulation repealing Council Directive 73 / 44 / EEC , Parliament Directive 96 / 73 / EC and Directive 2008 / 121 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council .
The aim of this proposal for a regulation is to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products , with a view to protecting and encouraging the development and uptake of new fibres .
The proposal facilitates the process of adapting legislation to technical progress by transforming the three existing directives into a single regulation , thereby avoiding the transposition of merely technical updates and shortening the time between the submission of an application and the adoption of a new fibre name .
The long-standing wishes of producers are focused on naming and labelling .
The simplification of the existing regulatory framework has the potential to encourage innovation in the textile and clothing sector , whilst allowing consumers to benefit more quickly from innovative products .
At first reading , in 2010 , Parliament approved amendments to rules on origin marking , indication of animal-derived materials , use of language-independent symbols and a review clause , but the Council did not accept everything .
It is vital that it now accept the different proposals , especially those on origin marking .
For these reasons , we voted for most of the positions adopted here .
The initial aim of this proposal was to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products .
During its negotiations with the EU Council of Ministers , Parliament included new provisions in the regulation , such as those requiring the indication of animal-derived materials in textile products and conducting a study to determine whether there is a causal link between allergic reactions and the chemicals used in textile products .
The presence of animal-derived materials should be clearly indicated , so as to prevent consumers or individuals who suffer allergies from running the risk of inadvertently purchasing real fur products when they would prefer not to do so .
The Commission will have to prepare a study by 30 September 2013 to determine whether there is a causal link between allergic reactions , and the chemicals or mixtures used in textile products .
On the basis of this study , the Commission will table legislative proposals , where appropriate .
This regulation should soon be adopted by the EU Council of Ministers and enter into force on the 20th day following its publication .
There will be a transitional period of two and a half years for the rules on labelling requirements , and for those on the indication of ' non-textile parts of animal origin ' .
in writing . - The current absence of harmonised rules on origin marking puts the EU at a disadvantage and also deprives European producers of origin-sensitive consumer goods of the opportunity to reap the benefits associated with producing within the Union , while consumers miss the opportunity to have access to information on the origin of products .
Origin marking would facilitate consumer choice and contribute to reducing fraudulent , inaccurate or misleading claims of origin .
This amendment introduces a requirement to indicate the presence of non-textile parts of animal origin in textile products .
It should be highlighted that fur is often used as trimming in relatively inexpensive garments , which are often imported from Asia .
In order to eliminate potential obstacles to the proper functioning of the internal market caused by diverging provisions or practices by Member States , and in order to keep pace with the development of electronic commerce and future challenges in the market for textile products , it is necessary to examine the harmonisation and standardisation of other aspects of textile labelling with a view to facilitating the free movement of textile products in the internal market and achieving a uniform and high level of consumer protection throughout the EU .
The process within the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection was a turning point for Mr Manders 's proposal , as that was where it was decided that it should be made compulsory to include the full composition of a product rather than just some of its parts .
Subsequently , however , our group mentioned the need to safeguard the textile industry and the ' Made in ' label , but no response to this position was given in the negotiations with the Council .
Nevertheless , there are elements which are worthy of support , such as streamlining the registration of materials .
As I consider safeguarding the ' Made in ' label to be a priority issue , I cannot vote in favour , and have therefore chosen to abstain .
I voted for the Manders report on regulations covering the labelling of textile products .
I am very happy that Parliament , on the occasion of this vote at second reading , has reintroduced a series of amendments , despite opposition from the Council .
It is important for consumers to be able to make their purchases in full knowledge of the facts , and for them not to purchase leather or fur inadvertently as is the case , in particular , when fur is used as trimming on cheap clothing .
Furthermore , the text highlights the need for traceability of textile products and a study will be commissioned by the Commission on the potential health hazards of products such as synthetic fibres or dyes .
The resolution on textile fibre names and related labelling and marking of textile products which has been adopted by the European Parliament is particularly important for the textile sector in the European Union .
It will enable the more rapid introduction to the market of new fibres which will help innovative textile firms in particular in the practical application of their research and development .
The resolution was the subject of a long debate between the European Parliament and the Council .
Parliament called for new elements to extend the regulation , in particular : indication of the country of origin , indication of fibres of animal origin , and more rigorous requirements concerning the use of harmful substances in the production of textiles .
Parliament managed to convince the Council that it was essential to clearly label fibres of animal origin .
This provision is very useful , in particular , for those consumers who have an allergy to leather goods , and to consumers who , for ideological reasons , do not want to buy textiles containing elements of animal origin .
I hope that in the near future , we will also be successful in achieving an understanding on indicating the origin of goods .
This issue has remained unresolved for too long .
I think that European firms and consumers will benefit from clearly formulated principles .
I endorsed this document because it proposes laying down rules on the presence of non-textile parts of animal origin in certain products , as well as indicating products ' origins precisely .
Above all , this regulation should provide for requirements to indicate non-textile parts of animal origin when labelling or marking textile products , so that consumers can make a choice on the basis of the information in their possession .
Labelling or marking should not be misleading and should be provided in such a way that the consumer can easily understand to which part of the product the particulars refer .
I am pleased that , at last , we in Parliament have reached a decision on an act relating to textile labelling involving some very substantial proposals for improvements , which the Council is also prepared to endorse and implement .
Working on the regulation in committee sometimes involved some very ambitious notions , which , luckily , we abandoned .
It is an obvious improvement that products must henceforth be clearly marked if they contain matter of animal origin , for reasons of public health , since fur , for example , is a health risk for many people who suffer from allergies .
Although some of the manufacturers of products opposed this initiative , referring to existing laws on the requirements for labelling parts of animal origin , an improvement has now been made , and it is a very real indication of the EU 's consumer oriented thinking .
However , the compulsory marking of the origin of products from third countries would have been ineffective and expensive in itself to accomplish .
It is difficult to make an impromptu estimate of the added value to the consumer that such a requirement might bring , especially as , in the global world , products are rarely manufactured or originate in just one country .
For that reason , it is important that the Commission should now investigate the matter and that the practical aspects of going ahead should be weighed carefully .
In the same connection , it is natural that the reform and harmonisation of product labelling should be assessed overall , as has now been agreed .
in writing . - I welcome the Commission 's proposal , as it simplifies the existing regulatory framework and has the potential to encourage innovation in the textile and clothing sector , whilst allowing fibre users and consumers to benefit more readily from innovative products .
The new rules on labelling of textile products are crucial for preventing the problems that arise if consumers are poorly informed .
The presence of animal-derived materials must be clearly indicated , so as to prevent consumers or individuals who suffer allergies from running the risk of inadvertently purchasing real fur products when they would prefer not to do so .
The initial aim of this proposal is to simplify and improve the existing regulatory framework for the labelling of textile products .
During the negotiations with the EU Council of Ministers , the inclusion of new provisions in the regulation was very important , such as those requiring the indication of animal-derived materials in textile products and conducting a study to determine whether there is a causal link between allergic reactions and chemicals or mixtures used in textile products .
in writing . - The report of Toine Manders is aimed at helping the buyers of textile products .
New rules on textile labelling are proposed which will help customers avoid the risk of buying textile products which contain natural fur or leather .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Consumers ' awareness of the goods they buy is constantly growing .
For the majority of people , the origin of the products plays a very important role in their decisions about what they want to spend their money on .
In the textile sector , there is a need for a great deal more information in this area so that consumers know where the jumpers , jackets and trousers , etc. that they are buying come from and which materials they are made of .
As things currently stand , the labelling requirements are highly inadequate .
We need clearer labels to indicate where animal products are used to make a garment , in particular , in the case of fur and fur trim .
I voted in favour of the report because it deals with providing detailed information that is urgently needed by citizens , who have the right to know where their textiles come from and what materials they are made of .
The text being examined today is , unfortunately , very different from the one approved by this House at first reading .
The substantive difference lies in the fact that this report makes no reference to the origin marking to be included on textile product labels .
The Council has strongly opposed the idea , and it is difficult to understand why .
Is it not right for consumers to know where the clothes they wear come from ?
The presence of origin marking would surely have provided a guarantee of product quality and protection .
I am really puzzled by the fact that only two Member States , Italy and Lithuania , insisted in the Council on including origin marking , and I wonder what interest the other European countries have in not protecting their own businesses in this way , since they are thus left more exposed to problems of unfair competition and counterfeiting .
Parliament has unfortunately bowed to the Council 's short-sighted decision not to endorse the much-needed origin marking , and I therefore feel I must vote against today 's report .
This report is a recommendation for second reading on the Council position at first reading on the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on textile fibre names and related labelling and marking of fibre composition of textile products .
The Council rejected all substantive amendments proposed by Parliament at first reading , as it believes that these would not be compatible with the intended simplification .
The main amendments proposed by Parliament and reintroduced in the report , which I voted for , relate to issues that I believe to be of the utmost importance for the European market .
Of these , I would like to highlight origin marking and the inclusion of a requirement to indicate the country of origin of textile products imported from third countries .
The current absence of harmonised rules on origin marking puts the EU at a disadvantage as regards its main trade partners , such as Canada , China , Japan and the US , which require origin marking for imported goods .
Origin marking would facilitate consumer choice and contribute to reducing fraudulent , inaccurate or misleading claims of origin .
At first reading , Parliament approved 63 amendments to the Commission proposal on a regulation on textile fibre names and related labelling of textile products .
Some of these amendments were of a technical nature while others were related to the substance , including rules on origin marking , indication of animal-derived materials , the use of language-independent symbols and a review clause .
The technical amendments were largely accepted by the Council , but it rejected all substantive amendments proposed by Parliament .
Most of these amendments have now been restored , as it is considered important that the Council recognise their expediency and give them due consideration .
in writing . - In its position at first reading , adopted on 18 May 2010 , the European Parliament approved , by a very large majority , 63 amendments .
The vast majority were technical amendments aimed at aligning the text with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and with the new legislative framework for the marketing of goods .
Parliament also adopted a number of substantive amendments , including rules on origin marking , the indication of animal-derived materials , the use of language-independent symbols and a review clause .
I supported the report because it is a step towards better consumer protection and stresses the quality of textiles products .
It is nonetheless a pity that we have failed to push through the demands for country of origin labelling , as this is one item of information which adds to the possibilities for consumer choice and can help to reduce the occurrence of various inaccurate and misleading statements regarding origin .
The absence of harmonised rules in this area also deprives European producers of advantages relating to production in the EU .
I believe the Commission will continue its efforts to find an acceptable solution in this matter .
The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is voting against this recommendation of the European Parliament .
The original Commission proposal envisaged a simplification of formalities in order to make it easier to introduce new textile fibres .
The European Parliament has added a requirement that , in future , businesses will be obliged to state where a textile product comes from via what is known as country of origin labelling .
We do not support Parliament 's position in this regard .
Consumers benefit where labels contain information about materials that pose a health hazard or that cause allergic reactions .
Stating the country of origin on the label is pointless European nitpicking .
Obviously , the origin of a product tells us nothing about the production process or the quality of the product , nor does it increase consumer protection .
Even if the so-called country of origin is specified , other parts of the production process can take place elsewhere .
All the ' made in x ' label does is create a false sense of clarity for the consumer , while in reality bringing about extra costs and bureaucracy .
Businesses have to face additional administrative hassle , the checking of labels requires additional customs formalities and , ultimately , it becomes more expensive to import products .
The PVV will thus also be voting against this recommendation .
in writing . - I voted in favour of labelling country of origin and fur and welcome this piece of legislation .
I welcome the agreement that has been concluded between the European Parliament and the Council on the extremely complex issue of textile names and related labelling of textile products .
Consumers must be provided with accurate information on the presence of non-textile animal-derived products , such as fur , so that they can make informed choices .
I would also insist on the need for the Commission to examine , with the greatest attention , the issue of social labelling .
I believe that consumers should be informed about the social conditions under which a textile product has been manufactured in order to give them greater responsibility for the working conditions of workers in the textile industry .
We must obviously not overload the labels with information , but social labelling could enable working conditions in the European Union and worldwide to undergo lasting change thanks to a citizen-based approach by consumers when they make purchases .
The agreement that was approved today after two years of intensive negotiations will simplify the placing on the market of new fibres and improve consumer protection on the internal market thanks to clear , visible and legible textile labels .
In addition , the European Parliament was able to put its clear stamp on this regulation .
Textile products which comprise non-textile parts of animal origin , such as fur or leather , should , in future , state this clearly on the label .
It also proved possible to honour Parliament 's explicit requests for further investigation into the use of language-independent symbols on clothing labels and into possible links between allergic reactions and chemical substances used in textiles .
The commitment that Parliament sought and obtained from the Commission that it would , where necessary , and after having a thorough study carried out , bring forward legislative proposals in 2013 in relation to the traceability of textile products , is an important step forwards .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of the agreement that Parliament was able to reach with the Council at second reading .
As regards the Manders recommendation on textile names and related labelling of textile products , I voted in favour of the compromise proposal by the political groups because I am in favour of a compulsory system of labelling of the country of origin of third-country textile products .
I also consider that this may promote fair competition in the EU and on the international stage .
The Lithuanian textile and clothing sector is one of the most specialised in Europe , with 1 000 enterprises involved in this sector employing 40 000 people .
For me , and the majority of Lithuanians , it is therefore important for the new rules on the labelling of textile products mentioned in this report to help protect the reputation of our textile sector .
Hopefully , the new legislation will simplify the current labelling rules .
Furthermore , we need reliable chemical tests to confirm that textiles created meet hygiene and environmental criteria .
European consumers have the right to know what they are buying .
The use of any products of animal origin must be clearly shown on the label of the textile product .
The new textile labelling rules should help stop consumers from unwittingly buying textile products made from real fur or leather .
The fate of the Lithuanian textile and clothing sector is closely linked to the EU , as 84 % of Lithuanian textiles are exported to the EU .
Not many people are aware that Lithuanian textile manufacturers sew uniforms for various military and police forces throughout Europe , including NATO .
Therefore , both Lithuania and Europe should be interested in increasing efforts to improve quality control and transparency .
in writing . - Following today 's vote on labelling , consumers will no longer face the risk of mistakenly buying textiles containing real leather or fur .
I believe that consumers have the right to know what the products they buy are made from , and this report ensures that any animal-derived materials will be indicated on textile product labels .
This is good news not only for people who do not want to buy products that contain real fur or leather , but also for those who suffer from allergies .
I am disappointed that this report did not make origin labelling compulsory for textile products , but I am encouraged that the Commission will come forward with an assessment report to address such issues in the future .
I have voted in favour of the report on naming and labelling textile products .
The proposed revision of EU legislation primarily concerns technical issues which do not have a major political impact .
However , the resulting simplification of the processes will help to promote innovation within the industry .
The compromise reached by several groups in the European Parliament also takes into consideration existing problems involving counterfeit products in the European textile sector and calls for transparent and coherent trade regulations to ensure protection for consumers .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Manders .
The text on which we have voted not only proposes to combine the three directives on the labelling of textile composition into a single European regulation applicable to all the Member States , but it is also designed to simplify the procedure for recognising new fibres .
Mr Manders 's report would probably have been more complete if it had included a rule on compulsory origin labelling for products originating in non-EU countries but , given the difficulties that occur when certain subjects are tackled , I believe that in the end , a good compromise was reached in the final text that was put to the vote .
I am voting for this proposal as it amends certain aspects of Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 , so as to extend its validity to 31 December 2015 and make certain adjustments resulting from the entry into force of bilateral agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Serbia .
Given that the interim agreements / stabilisation and association agreements ( SAAs ) grant trade concessions to Bosnia and Herzegovina on the products identified in the autonomous trade preferences , these concessions have to be withdrawn from Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 .
These concern the preferential tariff quotas for baby beef , sugar and sugar products , certain wines , as well as for certain fishery products .
The termination of the trade preferences would take from the beneficiaries an objective economic advantage in their trade with the EU .
This could have extremely negative consequences on the overall economic performance of the whole Western Balkans region , with subsequent negative repercussions on their domestic reform and transition processes .
Moreover , their economic recovery could be seriously jeopardised .
I voted in favour of this report .
The European Union has granted the countries of the Western Balkans exceptional unlimited duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products .
The key aim of these measures is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market .
In turn , economic development is to foster political stability in the entire region .
These trade preferences were granted for a period ending on 31 December 2010 .
I agree that the validity of the exemption provisions should be extended to 31 December 2015 .
The termination of the trade preferences would take from the beneficiaries an objective economic advantage in their trade with the EU .
This could have negative consequences on the overall economic performance of the Western Balkans , with subsequent negative repercussions on their domestic reform and transition processes .
I support the introduction of exceptional trade measures for countries and territories benefiting from the Stabilisation and Association process .
Everyone is aware that trade is a driver of economic development and these trade measures will revitalise the economies of the Western Balkans .
In addition , granting the Western Balkan countries privileged access to the European Union market will also enable us to encourage more rapid integration of their economies with that of the European Union .
We are voting today on the extension of exceptional trade preferences such as tariff exemptions and trade preferences for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia , and Kosovo until 2015 .
Under the terms of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 , the preferential tariff quotas apply to baby beef , sugar and sugar products , certain wines , as well as certain fishery products .
This extension is aimed at addressing the widespread economic crisis , given that terminating trade preferences would compromise these countries ' economic recovery , and would have consequences for the whole stabilisation and transition process of the Western Balkans .
This report focuses on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 , which introduces exceptional trade measures for countries and territories participating in or linked to the EU 's stabilisation and association process .
The countries of the Western Balkans are in this situation , and products originating from them enjoy duty-free status and exceptional unlimited access to the EU market .
These measures are aimed at mitigating the crisis and revitalising the economy of these countries .
These exceptional measures came to an end on 31 December 2010 and if they are not extended , there will be severe consequences for wealth creation , jeopardising economic recovery and the internal reform and transition processes .
I therefore agree with the amendments proposed by the rapporteur , as well as the extension of these measures until 31 December 2015 , subject to the necessary adjustments resulting from the new bilateral agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia .
This report is aimed at extending exceptional , unlimited , duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the stabilisation and association process .
The pretext of this is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market , in the belief that any economic growth resulting from this will foster political stability throughout the region .
These measures cannot , however , be considered in isolation from the situation of severe economic and social crisis that exists today in the Balkans , particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Kosovo .
The current crisis in this region is obviously part of the wider crisis of capitalism and is being aggravated by its impact : however , it is deeply rooted in a long history of interference , aggression and military occupation , promoted by the EU and its main powers , and the US , seeking to impose their economic and political dominance on the region .
The secession of Kosovo and the role of the EU in this are indicative of that , and the internal process dubbed ' reform and transition ' represents the current stage of this process of the imposition of imperial rule over the region .
The proposals made here today should be viewed , analysed and understood in this light .
This report is aimed at extending exceptional , unlimited , duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the so-called stabilisation and association process .
The pretext of this is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market , in the belief that any economic growth resulting from this will foster political stability throughout the region .
These measures cannot , however , be considered in isolation from the situation of severe economic and social crisis that exists today in the Balkans , particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Kosovo .
The current crisis in this region is part of the wider crisis of capitalism and is being aggravated by its impact : however , it is deeply rooted in a long history of interference , aggression and military occupation , promoted by the EU and its main powers , and the US , seeking to impose their economic and political dominance .
The secession of Kosovo and the role of the EU in this are indicative of that , and the internal process dubbed ' reform and transition ' represents the current stage of this process of the imposition of imperial rule over the region .
in writing . - In Council Regulation ( EC ) 2007 / 2000 , the European Union granted exceptional unlimited duty-free access to EU markets for almost all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the stabilisation and association process .
The main objective of these measures is to revitalise the economies of the Western Balkans through privileged access to the EU market .
In addition , economic development has promoted political stability throughout the region .
These trade preferences were granted for the period that ended on 31 December 2010 and which currently apply to Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Kosovo .
The abolition of trade preferences could , however , have very negative consequences on the overall economic performance of the Western Balkans and , consequently , a negative effect on their domestic reforms and the transformation process .
Moreover , it could seriously jeopardise the economic recovery .
In order not to disrupt trade , it is therefore desirable to extend the application of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 to 31 December 2015 .
The purpose of these measures is to help countries in the process of stabilisation , such as the countries of the Western Balkans , through preferential trade measures with the EU compared to third countries .
In view of the proper decision to extend the regulation until 2015 , giving particular attention to Bosnia and Herzegovina and to Serbia , I confirm that I voted in favour .
I welcomed this important document because , through Regulation ( EC ) No 2007 / 2000 , the European Union has granted exceptional unlimited duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the Stabilisation and Association process .
The key aim of these measures is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market .
In turn , economic development is to foster political stability in the entire region .
The trade preferences were granted for a period ending on 31 December 2010 and currently apply to Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Kosovo , as defined by UNSCR 1244 / 99 for all the products under the scope of Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 .
Products originating in Albania , the Republic of Croatia , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia or Montenegro continue to benefit from the provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 when so indicated or from any measures provided in the same regulation which are more favourable than the trade concessions provided for in the framework of bilateral agreements between the European Union and these countries .
This proposal amends certain elements of Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 in order to permit the extension of its validity to 31 December 2015 and make certain adjustments consequent to the entry into force of bilateral agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia .
in writing . - I strongly support the amendment of certain elements of Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 in order to permit the extension of its validity to 31 December 2015 and make certain adjustments consequent to the entry into force of bilateral agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia .
This report endorses the pressures exercised by the European Union on the Balkan States to serve the interests of the former .
It even charges Parliament to take , in cooperation with the Council , ' appropriate measures ' if the governments of these States do not show sufficient desire to liberalise their economies .
This is overweening imperialism !
I shall vote against .
Under Regulation ( EC ) No 2007 / 2000 , the EU granted exceptional , unlimited , duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the Stabilisation and Association process .
The key aim of this measure is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market .
The economic development that comes about as a result will foster political stability throughout the region .
The benefits from this regulation came to an end on 31 December 2010 .
Given the economic and financial crisis that we are currently experiencing , it is necessary to extend these conditions to 31 December 2015 so that the cessation of these special conditions does not lead to stagnation in the economies of these regions , as good economic conditions are needed to maintain stability and peace in this troubled Balkan region .
in writing . - When the European Union adopted Regulation No 2007 / 2000 , it granted exceptional unlimited duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the Stabilisation and Association process .
The key aim of these measures is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market .
In turn , economic development is to foster political stability in the entire region .
The validity of the trade preferences should not be terminated because this could have negative consequences on the overall economic performances of the Western Balkans , with consequent negative repercussions on their domestic reform and transition processes .
Moreover , their economic recovery could be seriously jeopardised .
Therefore , I agree with the rapporteur who strongly supports the amendment of certain elements of Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 in order to permit the extension of its validity to 31 December 2015 and I voted ' in favour ' .
In order to stimulate the economies of the countries in the Western Balkans , they have been given privileged access to the European market .
This applies to almost all goods produced in countries participating in or linked to the EU 's Stabilisation and Association process .
The trade preferences were granted for a period ending on 31 December 2010 and cover the following countries : Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Kosovo .
The preferences remain in place for goods from Albania , Croatia , Macedonia and Montenegro .
If these trade preferences were to come to an end now , this would jeopardise further economic growth in these countries .
I have not voted in favour of the report because , as has already been explained , some points in the new regulation are not clearly worded .
This report aims to extend the validity of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1215 / 2009 , which adopts exceptional trade measures for countries and territories participating in or linked to the EU 's Stabilisation and Association Process .
The EU has granted exceptional , unlimited , duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the Stabilisation and Association process .
The key aim of this measure is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market .
I argue that there should have been provision for a study of the impact on the Internal Market with such exceptional access .
These trade preferences were granted for a period ending on 31 December 2010 .
The termination of the trade preferences would withdraw from the beneficiaries any objective economic advantage in their trade with the EU .
This could have serious consequences on the overall economic performance of the Western Balkans , with subsequent negative repercussions on their domestic reform and transition processes , and it could jeopardise their economic recovery .
I voted in favour of this proposal , which is aimed at extending the validity of these measures until 31 December 2015 .
Under Regulation ( EC ) No 2007 / 2000 , the EU granted exceptional , unlimited , duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in the countries and territories benefiting from the Stabilisation and Association process .
The key aim of this measure is to revitalise the Western Balkan economies through privileged access to the EU market .
These trade preferences , which currently apply to Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Kosovo , were granted for a period ending on 31 December 2010 , but their validity should now be extended to 31 December 2015 so as not to jeopardise these countries ' economic recovery .
in writing . - Although the final vote was postponed , we voted on several amendments .
These ' exceptional trade measures ' with the partners in the Western Balkans , under the EU Stabilisation and Association process , are indeed preferential tariff measures which guarantee easier access to the EU market for the partner countries ' exports .
They need to be notified to the World Trade Organisation .
The programme ran out at the end of 2010 , and what we have now is simply the extension to it .
It has been blocked because of the delayed comitology decision .
Early in January 2011 , the International Trade Committee made a proposal to the Council to ensure that the procedure was speeded up , but received no answer .
Thus , Parliament had to await the adoption of the Szájer report on comitology in March in order to proceed further .
An informal trialogue resolved the issue to permit adoption at first reading .
The delay has created hardship in some receiving countries , and particularly in Kosovo , and Parliament has been wrongly blamed for this .
I am voting for this proposal as I agree with the guiding principle that runs through it .
The EU is indeed the world 's largest economy .
Neither the US nor China is larger , contrary to what is usually stated in discussions on what is and what will be the number one global economy .
The difference is that the US and China have the bigger markets , as they offer better preconditions for competition , competitiveness , new services , products and innovations .
The need for a single Internal Market is critical if Europe is to become a leading player in the global economy , with a focus on the service sector and the knowledge economy , but , at the same time , the Digital Agenda and the digital economy can serve as a spearhead for realising the Internal Market for all parts of our economy .
This requires the ability to become a leader in terms of broadband and Internet use .
Opening Europe up to new services and increased mobile traffic lays the ground for new opportunities for culture and content , broadcasters and public services within the framework of broadband while , at the same time , ensuring the same opportunities for broadcasting .
I voted in favour of this resolution on a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the first radio spectrum policy programme .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that the need for one single internal market is crucial for Europe to take a leadership in the global economy , with a focus on the service sector and the knowledge economy .
The Digital Agenda and the digital economy can serve as a spearhead for making the Internal Market real for all parts of our economy .
This requires an ability to take the lead regarding broadband and the use of the Internet .
We must aim to make Europe the best and do what is best for Europe : free up spectrum for new services and increased mobile traffic , laying the ground for new opportunities for culture and content , broadcasters and public services within the framework of broadband .
The first radio spectrum policy programme ( RSPP ) is a significant step in ensuring the efficient and optimal use of this finite resource .
Europe must be in the lead in this process of change , creating the best opportunities for a competitive European knowledge economy characterised by vitality , change and innovations .
That requires access to Internet and broadband applications with the greatest capacity and the highest speed .
I voted in favour of this report .
The Digital Agenda and the digital economy represent one of the most important objectives of the EU 2020 strategy , aimed at closing the digital gap , and increasing the productivity , cohesion and competitiveness of European industry , and ensuring better access to the single market for the EU 's consumers and companies .
Today , Europe is lagging behind the US and China , which are freeing up large parts of the spectrum in order to allow for the rapid development of new services and high speed mobile Internet .
Effective spectrum use must be promoted in the EU in order to satisfy the growing need for radio frequencies , and mobile broadband capacity must be increased , ensuring better opportunities for the public and commercial sector .
We must overcome the digital divide so that by 2020 , all EU citizens have access to broadband services at a speed of at least 30 Mbps .
Future spectrum policy must also guarantee a suitable , simple and non-discriminatory authorisation system , which would create a level playing field throughout the EU and would promote competition .
I voted in favour of this report because its aim is to create maximum opportunities for business and individual consumers to take advantage of wireless Internet , radio and television services , freeing up radio spectrum .
This would benefit European citizens in two ways - easing access to modern means of communication and telecom networks would reduce the exclusion of EU citizens which still exists , particularly for those living in rural and peripheral areas , and would promote the EU economy more actively , because there would be stronger conditions for developing an innovative services sector and knowledge economy .
Europe has set itself the task of ensuring that by 2013 , all EU citizens have the opportunity to use broadband , and wireless technology represents the most convenient way of achieving this task and requires the least investment .
I congratulate Mr Hökmark on preparing such a topical report on the radio spectrum policy programme .
I voted in favour of it since I firmly endorse all measures aimed at supporting and implementing the internal single market .
Europe needs to adopt advanced systems for broadband and Internet use that are accessible to all and are also able to reach rural and outlying areas , as required by the Digital Agenda .
At the same time , it is important to ensure security for private individuals , producers , users and public authorities .
Moreover , the high cost of fibre optics and the growing demand by users for high-speed connections mean that the technological framework must be reviewed in both legislative and operational terms .
To that end , multiannual radio spectrum legislative programmes need to be prepared in order to establish strategic planning and to meet the growing demand for broadband access , particularly because official estimates suggest that data traffic will double every year until 2013 .
The objectives set in the Digital Agenda in the form of broadband cover for all European citizens by 2013 , and high-speed cover of 30 Mbps or more ( up to 100 Mbps for half of European households ) by 2020 , must be regarded as the minimum , and the ambition should be for Europe to have the best capacity and the highest broadband connection speeds in the world .
This is connected with the idea that securing a wireless broadband connection is essential in order for all citizens to have access to new and innovative services .
I fully agree with the deadline proposed by the Commission as regards making the 800 MHz band available for electronic communications services by 1 January 2013 .
Any exemptions or exceptions should be granted only for technical reasons , but specific public safety and defence needs must be taken into account .
The other bands should be released by 1 January 2012 , as stipulated in the Commission proposal .
In my opinion , we should push for the allocation of more frequencies to mobile services , with a minimum target of 1 200 MHz .
It is essential to introduce sensible rules that will make it possible to release further spectrum bands in the future .
I also consider it appropriate to deal with further thorny questions , including , above all , the costs for releasing bands .
We need to allocate radio spectrum more efficiently in the EU to ensure that we do not remain behind other developed countries progressing towards the digital society .
The points in this report are also totally consistent with the EU 's Digital Agenda .
Both consumers and businesses in the EU are increasingly using broadband Internet and mobile Internet via their smartphones or tablets , which requires the provision of fast connections .
This requires the 800 MHz band to be freed up as soon as possible for broadband mobile Internet services and even the band below 790 MHz , if it transpires that such a measure is required to cope with the increase in data traffic .
The measures advocated in the first radio spectrum policy programme are vital for reducing the digital divide and offering rapid , reliable telecommunications services in rural and isolated areas with a view to revitalising them .
Last but not least , these measures support innovation and the wider use of new technologies , which is an absolute must for the European economy 's competitiveness , as was also emphasised in the Single Market Act .
I voted for Mr Hökmark 's draft report , which supports freeing up the 800 MHz band for mobile services between now and January 2013 and sets some very ambitious objectives such as freeing up 1 200 MHz for mobile data traffic by 2015 .
The rapporteur also insists on spectrum use efficiency , greater flexibility in the promotion of innovation and on investment , as well as the need to improve the inventory of current and future spectrum usage .
Given the importance of the European telecommunications industry and information technologies for higher productivity and competitiveness in our market , I am voting for the radio spectrum policy programme .
I believe in the ability of this programme to create the conditions necessary for successful competition with the new technology markets of China and the US , as well as maintaining European leadership in the telecommunications industry .
I voted in favour of this report , which will enable the exponential demand for access to high frequency-consuming mobile Internet to be met in the short term , in particular , through the allocation of the entire 800 MHz band , freed up by the changeover to digital television in our various countries , to electronic communications services .
In the medium to long term , our aim must be to improve the use of spectrum across the board , by recognising its social , cultural and economic value .
At the same time , we are promoting innovative technologies ( femtocells , cognitive technologies ) in order to respond qualitatively to the demand for use of frequencies .
This will contribute to the objectives that the Union has set itself , including that of bridging the digital divide , so as to ensure that all Europeans have broadband access by 2015 .
in writing . - I voted to reject Amendment 20 , second part ; Amendment 69 , second part , as this had been recommended by both S & D voices on the Culture Committee , on which I sit as a substitute member .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the radio spectrum report today .
It will ultimately create employment in this sector , aid the completion of the Digital Agenda and lend itself to achieving wireless frequency targets by 2013 .
In Romania , we have one of the fastest Internet speeds in Europe .
By enhancing European broadband , this will increase our competitiveness .
It is noteworthy that the International Telecommunications Union argues that capacity has to be opened up and preferably harmonised at a global level .
We all use radio spectrum in our daily lives for listening to radio programmes , for using our mobile telephones , for remotely locking our cars and for using satellite navigation systems .
This report will aim to coordinate the EU approach for the management of spectrum across the Union .
It is important that Member States continue to engage in bilateral communications and negotiations with third countries in order to achieve their Union frequency targets .
I voted in favour of this report as it presents a set of measures that make a significant contribution to universal access to less-favoured or remote areas , such as rural areas or islands .
Access to the radio spectrum is essential to ensure that all European citizens , whether in rural or urban areas , have access to digital technologies and broadband , with the total turnover of this industry representing approximately EUR 200 billion .

Therefore , given the value of the radio spectrum , it is imperative to set out the EU 's priorities for its allocation and use .
The Digital Agenda , the digital economy and this , the first policy programme for five years , are therefore aimed at stimulating our economy and realising the Internal Market in all its aspects .
It is crucial for the European telecommunications industry to regain its global leadership and create an impetus for greater productivity , cohesion , competitiveness and access to a single market .
I would therefore like to congratulate the rapporteur on the result that has just been achieved due to an effort at finding a compromise between all the groups in an ambitious and encouraging report .
This report is on a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the first radio spectrum policy programme .
As the EU is the largest global economy , it needs to monitor all its modernisation and technological innovation processes : otherwise , it runs the risk of being overtaken by emerging economies such as China and South Korea .
The latter is an example of this development , based on digital communications , as its speed of traffic and the respective broadband coverage make it the world leader .
The objectives set out in the Digital Agenda , taking account of the constant downgrading in the speed and volume of data traffic , which is expected to double each year up to 2014 , should be seen as minimal or reassessed if the EU is to dethrone South Korea in this area .
Given that the Internet is the main instrument for creating better conditions and development and knowledge for citizens in cultural terms , particularly through the broadcasting of audiovisual content , I welcome the adoption of this report and hope that the EU will play a leading role in the radio spectrum and in the creation of development and innovation software .
We recognise the need to plan and organise the radio spectrum .
This should be done on the basis of cooperation between the Member States , mindful of the fact that the spectrum is a public good , which is important in outlining and improving a range of services for the public , including in areas of public services .
We do not agree with planning the radio spectrum based on the Commission imposing guidelines , with the aim of making the spectrum a fulcrum for ' the goals and key actions outlined in the EU2020 strategy and the Digital Agenda ' , nor do we agree with the view of this as one of the ' 50 priority actions of the Single Market Act ' .
These are EU strategies and policies which have contributed to the current crisis that we are experiencing , and persisting with them will inevitably exacerbate this crisis .
Although it mentions that the radio spectrum is ' a key public resource for essential sectors and services ' , the report points the way towards the ' possibility to trade spectrum rights ' and invites the Commission to adopt measures ' to ensure that Member States allow trading within the Union of spectrum usage rights ' ; once again , we do not agree with these guidelines and we would distance ourselves from them .
We agree with the need to plan and organise the radio spectrum on the basis of the necessary cooperation between Member States , as it is a public good , which is important in improving services , particularly public services .
We do not agree with the imposition of guidelines by the Commission with the aim of making the spectrum a fulcrum of ' the goals and key actions outlined in the EU2020 strategy and the Digital Agenda and [ ... ] included among the 50 priority actions of the Single Market Act ' .
We believe that these strategies are EU policies that have contributed to capitalism 's current state of systemic crisis .
While mentioning that the radio spectrum is ' a key public resource for essential sectors and services ' , the report points the way towards the ' possibility to trade spectrum rights ' and invites the Commission to adopt measures ' to ensure that Member States allow trading within the Union of spectrum usage rights ' .
We still do not know about these proposals , and thus far , we have not voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - The European Union is the world 's biggest economy .
The need for one single internal market is crucial for Europe to take leadership in the global economy , with a focus on the service sector and the knowledge economy .
The Digital Agenda and the digital economy can serve as a spearhead for making the internal market a reality for all parts of our economy .
This requires an ability to take the lead on broadband and use of the Internet .
It is crucial for the European telecom industry to regain global leadership , but also in order to take the lead in the development of information technologies as such and in the emergence of new services and applications .
Even more importantly , it is also crucial in order to create a momentum for higher productivity , cohesion , competitiveness , and access to one single market for the European industry as a whole .
We must aim to make Europe the best and make what is best for Europe : opening up new services and increased mobile traffic , laying the ground for new opportunities for culture and content , broadcasters and public services in the framework of broadband and , at the same time , securing the same opportunities for broadcasting as of today .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report for the reason that a renewed economic and social approach with regard to the management , allocation and utilisation of the spectrum should be adopted .
Particular focus should be directed towards the formulation of regulation which ensures greater spectrum efficiency , better frequency planning and safeguards against anti-competitive behaviour and the taking of anti-social measures with regards to the usage of the spectrum .
As highlighted in the Single Market Act , the establishment of a radio spectrum programme is key for the enhancement of the digital society and the development of technology .
I believe that the Commission should take a holistic approach towards the proper coordination of the management of the spectrum across the EU in view of the fact that this public good is a scarce and finite resource and is crucial to the furtherance of consumers , citizens and businesses within the single market .
The modern information society and the scarcity of frequency bands make strategic planning and harmonisation of the use of the spectrum essential .
Of course , this relates to mobile and wireless broadband communications , radio and television broadcasting and also radio communications at concerts or in theatres .
In addition to the issue of the frequencies , this concerns cultural diversity and also involves taking into consideration which technical options are and are not available and affordable .
Affordability is a concern , for example , for cultural organisations without a great deal of money which do not always have the funding to buy new equipment .
The goals of introducing complete broadband coverage of the EU by 2013 and universal high-speed Internet access by 2020 are praiseworthy , but perhaps not entirely realistic .
In addition , the proposal gives no consideration to the specific problems in border areas where greater coordination is needed .
By approving the Hökmark report , Parliament is opting for innovation : the broadband and mobile telephony sector is not only of great interest to Europeans , but it makes it possible to develop new prospects in terms of research and development , areas in which the European Union can and must aspire to play a leading role .
In this respect , it is important to ensure that the first European radio spectrum policy programme is in line with the objectives already outlined in the EU 2020 strategy and the Digital Agenda and comes within the priority actions of the Single Market Act .
The EU must endeavour to overcome the digital divide that results in huge disparities within Europe - between urban and rural areas in particular - so as to ensure all citizens have equal access to services , especially those involving new technologies .
I therefore welcome the ambitious targets proposed , to provide broadband access throughout Europe by 2020 , with particular emphasis on wireless networks .
I welcomed this document because Europe needs to set free more spectrum for wireless broadband .
This can and must be done with respect for present broadcasting , ensuring the same opportunities for broadcasters as they have today , and compensating for eventual migration costs where necessary .
Broadcasting and culture must be a natural part of the development of wireless services .
Today , Europe is lagging behind , while the US and China are freeing up large parts of the spectrum in order to allow for the rapid development of new services and high speed mobile Internet .
We must aim to do what is best for Europe : free up the spectrum for new services and increased mobile traffic , open up new opportunities for culture and content , broadcasters and public services in the framework of broadband and , at the same time , secure the same opportunities for broadcasters as they enjoy today .
Wireless broadband is essential for ensuring that new and innovative services are available to all citizens .
It seems obvious that this objective cannot be achieved through the use of optical fibre , the installation of which requires considerable investment , but through the use of a mix of wireless technologies available to extend the coverage of broadband ( terrestrial radio , cable , fibre or satellite systems ) to cover the whole territory of the Community , rural and peripheral areas included , enabling the market to choose the most efficient technology from the point of view of cost for operators and citizens .
Today , telecommunications are as important as ordinary communications , both for people and companies .
Furthermore , that is true in both rural and urban areas .
The wireless Internet is a requirement for receiving fast broadband connections for all Europeans .
This requires separately allocated radio spectrum in order to guarantee troublefree connections .
It is good that new radio spectrum is to be made available as the Member States are switching from analogue to digital television .
It should now be taken advantage of .
Europe needs the greatest broadband capacity and the fastest speeds to keep up with rising economic powers , like China and India , in the modern economy .
Let us work to ensure that the next generation 's Googles and Facebooks originate in Europe .
I supported the report on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the first radio spectrum policy programme .
I believe that a common radio frequency spectrum policy will provide European Union Member States with new possibilities for developing information and communications technology industries .
For their part , entrepreneurs will have the opportunity to offer new quality services , which will stimulate the development of the common European economy .
Nevertheless , in making changes to frequency spectrum policy , we must also bear in mind international agreements on the freeing up of different frequencies at an international level .
Countries that border the European Union 's eastern neighbours will have difficulty freeing up frequencies if the neighbouring countries do not do likewise .
This situation must be borne in mind , and we must anticipate that the freeing up of frequencies will only be possible when countries such as Russia and Belarus also do so .
Member States must not be placed in the forefront of the European Union 's ambitions without regard to the facts on the ground .
I was responsible for the opinion on the radio spectrum policy programme in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and I am very pleased with the text that has now been voted on .
I have been strongly advocating a forward looking and ambitious spectrum policy that would promote new innovations and global competitiveness .
This is essential while we are searching for new channels for economic growth in Europe .
Wireless Internet services , and the mobile sector in particular , desperately need new spectrum , because in recent years , there has been a dramatic growth in the sale and use of equipment using a wireless network for smart phones and other such devices .
The lack of spectrum must not be allowed to hinder innovation while we are developing new technology and services .
Radio spectrum is a scarce natural resource and a public good , of which we also have to try to make far more effective use .
The main aims of the radio spectrum policy programme are broadband access for the entire EU by 2013 and fast Internet connections by 2020 .
In addition to considerations about the ' digital dividend ' to be shared among Internet services ( that is to say , the 800 MHz band ) , we have to look to the future and survey the opportunities afforded by the next potential radio bands , such as the 700 MHz band .
The best capacity and the fastest speed would offer the best basis for competition and innovation .
The growing need in Asia and the United States of America has already been taken into account .
It is therefore especially important that we in the EU understand the importance of setting sufficiently ambitious targets in order to remain competitive in this sector .
One of the strategy 's major lines of action aims to guarantee Internet access throughout Europe by 2013 and high-speed broadband coverage of at least 30 Mbps by 2020 .
Many relatively isolated rural and island areas depend on wireless connections from mobile Internet for access to high-speed broadband .
If they are to enjoy uninterrupted connection , they must have radio frequencies dedicated entirely to them .
Frequency allocation comes under national jurisdiction but the regulations governing the sharing of the spectrum between users and operators is under the control of the European Union .
Universal access to high-speed access is largely dependent on this sharing of frequencies .
I voted for the report on radio spectrum policy as it lays the foundations for universal coverage for mobile Internet .
On 1 January 2013 , the 800 MHz frequency will be used for mobile Internet , and will provide wireless users with high quality access and thus reduce the digital divide .
This project goes even further still , by providing a new frequency band in the 1.5 to 2.3 GHz range by 2015 .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Radio frequencies serve the public interest in a wide range of areas in the Member States .
In that connection , due account has to be taken of a host of specific national and regional characteristics .
It is doubtful whether the EU can reconcile these matters of public interest and these characteristics as well and as efficiently as its Member States .
For that reason ( and in the light of the allocation of competences laid down in Article 9 ( 1 ) of the Framework Directive ) , I oppose the establishment of an overarching spectrum planning and management system at European level .
In this day and age , when new technologies have an increasingly important role , it is vital that all European citizens have the same conditions of access to digital technologies and broadband , regardless of whether they live in rural or urban areas .
Thus , the Digital Agenda , the digital economy and this , the first policy programme for five years , which have just been adopted , are vital for the development of the Internal Market .
The aim is for the European telecommunications industry to regain its global leadership and increase productivity , cohesion , competitiveness and access to a single market .
The European Union has the largest economy in the world and yet it is lagging behind other international players in digital strategy and digital economy .
Europe must take initiatives on broadband and Internet use in order to become a leader in the development of this area .
Wireless broadband is essential if we are to ensure that all citizens have access to new , innovative services .
We must bridge the digital divide and ensure that all European citizens are connected to high-speed broadband by 2020 .
Mobile broadband alongside , amongst other things , smartphones , PC tablets and smart keys , plays an increasingly important role in service supply and innovation in other areas , such as healthcare , education , culture and public administration .
We must also ensure that new technologies and equipment for consumption are accessible .
As far as the radio spectrum is concerned , our policy must have realistic yet ambitious objectives so that European companies are able to compete in the world market on a sounder footing .
in writing . - The rapporteur , Gunnar Hökmark , believes that it is crucial to defend the dates as set out by the Commission ( for example , the 800 MHz band should be available for electronic communication services by 1 Jan 2013 ) .
Any exceptions or derogations should only be given for purely technical reasons while specific needs for security and defence must be taken into account .
Bands already designated by the Commission should be freed up by 1 January 2012 , according to the Commission 's proposal .
The Union has to work to get more frequencies allocated for mobile services , with a target of a minimum amount of 1 200 MHz .
It is necessary to get the right principles in place that can enable additional spectrum releases in the future .
I support the rapporteur and therefore voted ' in favour ' .
The economic recovery is based , among other things , on the utilisation of new technologies and the digital economy .
Although the EU has set ambitious targets in its emblematic initiative entitled ' Digital Agenda ' , such as broadband cover for all EU citizens by 2013 , with speeds of 30 Mbps or more by 2020 , it is still lagging behind the USA and Japan in terms of competitiveness .
Therefore , releasing large sections of the radio spectrum to allow for the fast development of new services and high Internet speeds , via mobile connections offering citizens high capacities , is a first practical step .
It is a technical , but necessary , parameter if we are to create a clear trend towards greater productivity , cohesion , competitiveness and access to a single market for European industry as a whole , and that is why I voted for this particular report .
This report concerns the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the first radio spectrum policy programme .
This programme is a significant step in ensuring the efficient and optimal use of this finite resource .
Spectrum policy has a prominent place in the Digital Agenda for Europe and is crucial for the realisation of the policy objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
This programme is aimed not only at creating a competitive and vibrant European industry for the provision of broadband services and equipment , but also at establishing an environment that is conducive to the development of pan-European services .
Mobile broadband is playing an increasingly important role in the delivery and innovation of services in other fields such as healthcare , education , culture and public administration .
The harmonisation of frequencies will lower the costs of deploying mobile networks and the cost of mobile devices for consumers , and boost competition and consumer choice .
Furthermore , it will reduce harmful cross-border interference and disturbance .
I voted in favour of the establishment of the radio spectrum policy programme for all of these reasons .
In the context of the knowledge economy , communications networks can boost the development of the Internal Market .
To this end , broadband coverage for the whole EU , including the outermost regions , will make a clear contribution to establishing the EU as an integrated area for information sharing , furthering its claim to be a cutting-edge digital economy .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
We are told - and quite rightly - that radio spectrum is a scarce resource . I should like to point out that it is also a shared resource , that is to say , a resource over which no one can claim exclusive ownership or an ' entitlement ' .
If it is both a shared resource and a scarce resource , we need to understand how it is utilised today ; in other words , we must carry out an in-depth study of all the stakeholders in the spectrum , including the civil security and military services .
The way in which it is used today is far from optimal .
We should encourage the use of technologies that allow different services to cohabit .
Let us not forget either that not all uses are necessarily commercial in nature and therefore do not necessarily yield a profit - I am thinking of the use of the spectrum for cultural or public service purposes , for instance .
This is a very relevant issue for Lithuania .
We have the densest network of public Internet access points - my country has a population of 3.2 million , 2.1 million of whom use the Internet .
We also have one of the highest mobile penetration rates .
There is no doubt that these are positive changes .
The connection with Europe could potentially help convince international companies to establish shops and invest in Lithuania .
Other possible advantages include long distance medical diagnosis , smart energy grids and greater political accountability at local level .
However , let us not get carried away , let us get our priorities right .
On the basis of this report , the main objective of the radio spectrum policy programme is broadband coverage by 2013 for all citizens of Europe , and high speed Internet by 2020 .
But what about the million Europeans who live at risk of poverty ? Twenty per cent of Lithuanians live in poverty .
This is too high a figure for our nation .
In my country and throughout Europe , there are families who struggle to feed and educate their children and do not even consider having a computer , never mind high speed broadband .
The promotion of the EU radio spectrum should not overshadow the needs of the poorest people in Europe .
in writing . - I backed the Commission 's radio spectrum policy programme ( RSPP ) because I believe that all EU citizens should have access to a faster broadband connection by 2020 .
The RSPP will ensure that the digital divide is reduced by introducing measures to bring faster web access to all citizens and businesses .
This will be especially beneficial to those living in rural or remote parts of the EU that currently have little or no Internet connection .
This improved network will also contribute to making Europe 's digital economy more competitive , in the hope of developing an innovative and creative environment that can foster future advances in digital technology .
Transmission frequencies are a national asset .
European legislation must therefore respect Member State sovereignty when looking for a common European interest in the use of these frequencies .
On the other hand , the interests of Slovakia are in harmony with those of other Member States here .
Citizens and businesses will both profit from the use of the bands released for high quality and rapid data transmission .
European coordination is important here , because Internet technologies are not restricted by borders , and their benefits increase with the number of users .
The aim of this proposal was to make a start on solving the issue of released frequencies as soon as possible , in order to give Europe an advantage over the other strong economies .
This will bring new jobs , create new services and attract new investment to Europe .
I voted in favour of the report .
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , it is the focus of attention of an even larger number of varied lobbyists .
In the light of these developments , and against this constitutional background , and in keeping with their commitment to transparency , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish and maintain a common register in order to keep a list of the names of and exercise scrutiny over the organisations and individuals who take part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
The amendments mentioned require the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to be amended accordingly , which will be done with this report .
There has been much discussion in recent weeks about the role of lobbyists within the European Parliament .
Ever since four MEPs were accused of having accepted money from ' bogus ' lobbyists in return for tabling amendments , the institution has been seeking to clarify and reform the rules governing the activity of lobbyists in Parliament .
A kind of permanent suspicion has long surrounded MEPs ' relationships with interest representatives , hence the creation of a first register of lobbyists in 1996 .
Today , this register , in which lobbyists will have to register themselves , is being reformed .
The ' voluntary ' registration process is actually mandatory , as only registered lobbyists will be granted access to Parliament .
I also welcome the adoption of the ' legislative footprint ' : the idea of publishing the names of the people one has met when drafting reports is , to my mind , a perfectly normal transparency measure .
It is regrettable , however , that the Council , unlike the Commission , has not joined in the initiative .
I voted in favour of this report because it is necessary to amend Parliament 's Rules of Procedure following the establishment by the European Parliament and the Commission of a common transparency register .
I would like to underline that following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , it is the focus of attention of an even larger number of lobbyists , who , moreover , play a key role in the open , pluralist dialogue , and act as an important source of information for Members in the context of the performance of their duties .
In the light of these developments , and in keeping with their commitment to transparency , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish and maintain a common register in order to keep a list of the names of , and exercise scrutiny over , the organisations and individuals who take part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
This register must be kept in a manner consistent with the right of Members to perform their parliamentary duties without restriction and must not be used as a pretext to deny their voters access to Parliament 's premises .
I voted in favour because I believe all measures aimed at fostering and increasing the transparency of Parliament 's work are to be welcomed .
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in many areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , Parliament 's work has become the focus of attention of a growing number of lobbyists , who act as an important source of information for Members .
I therefore welcome the proposal to establish and maintain a common register in order to exercise scrutiny over the organisations and individuals who take part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
The submitted change to the Rules of Procedure comes in response to the corruption revealed in recent months , with three MEPs accepting a corrupt proposal from investigative journalists .
It is impossible to accept that MEPs will not be subject to public scrutiny regarding the interests they defend in their role , or the pressure they are subject to or who is putting them under pressure .
I therefore very much welcome the introduction of the common register of lobbyists and lobbying organisations .
The European Commission has already introduced such a register , and the European Parliament is therefore only extending its application to MEPs , officials and other staff of the European Parliament .
The register will include information on contacts between these people and lobbyists , and will be publicly accessible .
A similar system already operates in the US Congress , and experience there shows that it is a sensible anti-corruption measure .
I firmly believe that the expansion of the register will also prove an inspiration for the Parliament of the Czech Republic .
The introduction of a register in the Czech Republic would make a decisive contribution to the development of Czech politics .
Creating a common transparency register is certainly an important step forward , much awaited by European citizens .
EU institutions , whether elected or not , make decisions which affect citizens ' everyday lives .
In a democratic system , which the EU aspires to , it is completely natural for there to be a high level of transparency in the decision-making process .
This common transparency register also simplifies matters for lobbyists as this will provide a single means of registration instead of two , which is currently the case .
On the other hand , this register will not , admittedly , be an adequate instrument for resolving the problem of corruption .
However , I do not believe that the register 's primary aim is solely to combat corruption as the instances of corruption have , however , been very few and far between .
in writing . - UKIP MEPs abstained on this vote , not because we do not want transparency , but because these proposals are inadequate , and to vote in favour would have been to endorse inadequate provisions .
I support this decision because it makes a significant contribution towards strengthening transparency by approving the conclusion of an agreement between Parliament and the Commission on the establishment of a common transparency register .
In a representative democracy , it is important that Union institutions be able to establish and maintain open , transparent and regular dialogue with the public , their representative associations and civil society .
Following the increase in Parliament 's powers under the Treaty of Lisbon , it has become essential , in the interests of transparency , to establish a common register between Parliament and the Commission for the registration and monitoring of organisations and individuals participating in the development and implementation of EU policy .
It is therefore necessary to modify Parliament 's Rules of Procedure in order to institute the mandatory registration of any lobbyists in contact with Members of Parliament , the European institutions and their staff .
This information should be accessible to the general public .
I voted in favour of this report proposing that the register of interest groups should cover all the different European institutions .
To date , more than 1 700 organisations have been accredited as interest groups in the European Parliament , and 3 900 in the Commission .
If you want to be able to make valid comments on a subject of a technical nature , you normally seek information from those people who are most knowledgeable about these issues .
It has always been thus and will continue to be so in the future .
Lobbies play a useful and essential role in legislative work , providing that there is transparency .
In order to achieve this , the report adopted establishes new rules and creates a ' transparency register ' which is common to both the Commission and Parliament .
Citizens will find a comprehensive compilation of information about the different contact people in the EU institutions .
This ' one-stop shop ' system will make it easier to register representatives of special interests , whether from commercial or non-commercial organisations .
Parliament also particularly wants all meetings between MEPs and interest groups on a particular issue to be mentioned at the end of the reports .
I regret that registration is not mandatory , but as the saying goes : ' Chi va piano va sano ' .
I voted in favour of the report on the amendment to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure following the establishment of a common transparency register because the principle of transparency should govern all those involved in decision making and in implementing EU policy .
The common transparency register following the conclusion of an interinstitutional agreement on transparency between Parliament and the Commission entails the amendment of the Rules of Procedure so as to incorporate the new situation , and so that it can be workable in Parliament 's main legal instrument .
Having voted in favour of the conclusion of this agreement , I would also like to give my support to the procedural changes .
Transparency is a right for citizens , and it helps to maintain the credibility of the European institutions : Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
This report , which has been drawn up by Mr Casini , is on the need to amend Parliament 's Rules of Procedure following the establishment of a common transparency register between Parliament and the Commission .
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament is a colegislator in almost all areas .
Thus , in conjunction with the Commission , it has decided to establish a common register to list and monitor the individuals and organisations that have any kind of influence over the preparation and / or implementation of EU policy .
Indeed , transparency is vital to the functioning of the European institutions and it has often been seen as lacking .
The European public demands a high level of transparency from its representatives , not only in theory , but in practice , above all .
The EU must set an example in terms of the transparency of its institutions , so I welcome the amendments proposed by the rapporteur to modify Parliament 's Rules of Procedure in line with the decision made by the Conference of Presidents at its 18 November 2010 meeting .
The amendment being proposed to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure is aimed at establishing and maintaining a common register for the registration and monitoring of organisations and individuals who participate in any way in the drafting and implementation of EU policy .
The existing system , on which the proposal is based , was created and launched by Parliament in 1996 .
At the time , it was the first EU institution to do this , with the Commission subsequently adopting one with similar objectives in 2008 .
It will be modified in a process that cannot be dissociated from recent problems involving alleged lobbying , which have affected Parliament .
The arguments put forward this time are , however , different , focusing on the new powers of Parliament following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The transparency of the institutions , their functioning and the decisions made by their representatives should be an intrinsic part of democracy .
Measures helping to increase this transparency are therefore welcome and necessary .
It is not , however , clear that this will be the result of all the changes proposed here .
Although we support some of the measures proposed , we will follow their implementation with a view to evaluating their future results .
This concerns the establishment and maintenance of a common register for the registration and monitoring of organisations and individuals participating in the drafting and implementation of EU policy .
Based on existing systems which were created and launched by Parliament in 1996 and by the Commission in 2008 , it seeks to address certain recent problems , although the argument for it in the report is the new powers entrusted to the European Parliament following the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force .
Some aspects of it are positive , but we have serious doubts about other amendments .
We support greater transparency , but it is not always clear that this is the aim of all the adopted amendments .
We will see how it is implemented in the future .
in writing . - Following the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , it is the focus of attention of an even larger number of lobbyists , who , moreover , play a key role in the open , pluralist dialogue on which a democratic system is based , and act as an important source of information for Members in the context of the performance of their duties .
In the light of these developments , against this constitutional background , and in keeping with their commitment to transparency , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish and maintain a joint register in order to keep a list of the names of , and exercise scrutiny over , the organisations and individuals who take part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
One of the important corrective measures necessary is to improve the rules on lobbying firms ' reporting of expenditure incurred for lobbying activities .
The current legislation allows lobbyists to report much less than is actually incurred .
Equally important is transparency with regard to the financial resources from which a lobbying and consulting company draws its revenue .
I would like to congratulate Mr Casini on the excellent work he has done .
I will vote in favour of his proposal to create a register of lobbyists so as to increase transparency in the European institutions .
I hope , however , that representatives of the regions , for instance , will be given due recognition .
Given the fact that pressure groups , whether they represent private or public interests , play an undeniable role in European affairs , there must be greater transparency regarding the relations they have with our institution .
In my view , it should be mandatory for them to be listed on the transparency register .
I support , in particular , the idea of a ' legislative fingerprint ' , which enables those lobbyists met by parliamentarians during the legislative process to be registered .
It is indeed vital that we do all we can to regain or strengthen the confidence of the citizens in the functioning of the European institutions , and that is the direction in which this register quite rightly takes us .
I endorsed this document because the Treaty on European Union and , in particular , Article 11 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) thereof , provides a framework for , and seeks to foster relations between , the European institutions and European political leaders , on the one hand , and civil society , EU citizens and representative associations , on the other : 1 .
The institutions shall , by appropriate means , give citizens and representative associations the opportunity to make known and publicly exchange their views in all areas of Union action .
2 .
The institutions shall maintain an open , transparent and regular dialogue with representative associations and civil society .
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , it is the focus of attention of an even larger number of lobbyists , who , moreover , play a key role in the open , pluralist dialogue on which a democratic system is based and act as an important source of information for Members in the context of the performance of their duties In the light of these developments , and against this constitutional background , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish and maintain a common register in order to keep a list of the names of , and exercise scrutiny over , the organisations and individuals who take part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
It is noted that the register must be kept in a manner consistent with the right of Members to perform their parliamentary duties without restriction and must not be used as a pretext to deny their voters access to Parliament 's premises .
In addition , it will not encroach upon the powers or prerogatives of the parties concerned and will have no bearing on their powers to organise their own activities .
in writing . - I welcome this report .
Following the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , it is the focus of attention of an even larger number of lobbyists , who , moreover , play a key role in the open , pluralist dialogue on which a democratic system is based and act as an important source of information for Members in the context of the performance of their duties .
In the light of these developments , and against this constitutional background , and in keeping with their commitment to transparency , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish and maintain a joint register in order to keep a list of the names of , and exercise scrutiny over , the organisations and individuals who take part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
Parliament and the Commission are setting a good example by establishing a common transparency register to provide accreditation for lobbyists and other interest groups .
It is just as important that the Council join this initiative .
The requirement for Members to list their meetings with lobbyists on legislative matters annexed to their reports is also an important step towards greater transparency , which is needed in this type of relationship in order to avoid the kind of situations that have arisen in the past .
I did not vote for the Casini report on the establishment of a common transparency register .
I consider that the establishment of such a register is a breach of the freedom that all politicians should enjoy .
All parliamentarians take responsibility politically for their decisions and standpoints .
They are sanctioned by the electorate .
in writing . - The scope of the register covers all activities carried out with the objective of directly or indirectly influencing the policy formulation or implementation and decision-making processes of the European institutions .
All organisations , irrespective of their legal status , engaged in activities falling under the scope of the register are expected to register .
In the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , many across the party lines stressed the importance of the Council becoming part of the system .
The vote by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is an important step forward but our work on transparency continues .
I support the report of Carlo Casini and voted ' in favour ' .
Not only the European Parliament but also the European Union as a whole is suffering from a huge credibility problem .
Although Parliament has finally reached an agreement on the transparency register , no doubt bowing to the pressure of the recent lobbying scandal , this register will be powerless .
It will be necessary to record not only all work undertaken for businesses or for international companies , but also all paid lobbying for interest groups , such as professional organisations and trade unions .
Citizens have a right to transparency because it is their mandatory contributions which keep the statutory lobby groups in existence .
Complete disclosure should include not only salaries , but also fees , invitations to dinner , etc .
As these measures are a step in the right direction , I have voted for the report .
Setting up a common transparency register and improving all the rules on transparency in the European Parliament are required to increase citizens ' confidence in Parliament 's activities and ensure the necessary transparency for these activities .
I voted for both Casini reports and I look forward to the strongest possible proposals from the European Parliament 's working group on the transparency and regulation of lobbying activities .
The Treaty on European Union provides a framework for , and encourages relations between , the European institutions and European political leaders , on the one hand , and civil society , EU citizens and representative associations , on the other .
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , it is the focus for the attention of an even larger number of lobbyists , who , moreover , play a key role in the open , pluralist dialogue on which a democratic system is based and act as an important source of information for Members in the performance of their duties It is , however , essential to establish mechanisms for recording and monitoring .
In view of this , I voted in favour of this report on the amendment to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure following the establishment of a common register for the registration and monitoring of organisations and individuals who participate in any way in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
in writing . - I support this report on the conclusion of an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament and the Commission on a common transparency register .
Any actors seeking to influence decision making and policy implementation at a European level are expected to join the common register , which will make both registration and access to information about lobbyists easier .
Those who do not register shall be refused a long-term access pass to the European Parliament .
This is but a first step forward towards transparent relations between European institutions and lobbyists .
Registration should be made mandatory and the Council should also join this agreement as soon as possible .
Following the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has taken on the status of colegislator in almost all areas , thus making it the focus of much attention from lobbyists .
In view of this , and in the interests of transparency , which should guide the dialogue between these stakeholders and Union institutions , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish a common register to list and monitor individuals and organisations involved in drafting and implementing EU policy .
To this end , it is necessary to make amendments to the Rules of Procedure , and I voted in favour of these .
We must fight for transparency within the European institutions and , in that respect , I welcome the agreement with the Commission which seeks to set up at last a common register of interest groups of the European institutions .
I should just like to make one remark to say that I regret the Council 's reluctance to sign up to this common register .
Is it necessary to be backward-looking and keep on defending a lack of transparency rather than openness ?
It is , however , the duty also of the representatives of the Member States to provide information and transparency in their dealings with European citizens .
I also have a wish for the future .
I think that it is essential to move gradually towards an American-style system , which has 65 years ' experience behind it , and which is based on the publication of key documents by lobbying groups ( for example , of all contracts for more than USD 10 000 ) .
I would like to say a final word about the legislative fingerprint , which is a good idea in theory but not in practice .
Not because it would undermine the principle of parliamentarians ' independence , but rather because it would lead to endless discussions in parliamentary committees on the whys and wherefores of the choice and frequency of the meetings with one lobbyist rather than another .
To conclude , what is important is to come up with an effective and robust system .
We are still far from achieving that .
It is useful to listen to the points of view of different stakeholders when the European legislator is drafting and adopting a piece of legislation .
However , in order to quantify these influences , we must have mandatory listing of all lobbyists in a register that is common to all the institutions .
The text that has just been adopted constitutes an interesting first step towards identifying the different types of lobbyists and the sums they use to try to influence the decisions to be made .
It must develop further .
The Council should also participate in the common register , which should be made mandatory and serve as a dynamic instrument in guaranteeing the transparency of the decision-making process .
That is in the interests of European democracy .
The Treaty on European Union seeks to recognise and foster relations between the institutions and European politicians , on the one hand , and civil society , EU citizens and representative associations , on the other .
The institutions shall give citizens and representative associations the opportunity to make known and publicly exchange their views in all areas of Union action .
In particular , the institutions shall maintain an open , transparent and regular dialogue with representative associations and civil society .
The adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon has strengthened Parliament 's powers and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
In the light of these developments , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish a common register in order to keep a list of and exercise scrutiny over the organisations and individuals who take part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies .
In order to take account of changes to existing rights and obligations and the establishment of new rights and obligations for Members , the resolution adopted today advocates the need to amend Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
We were initially opposed to the report since it applied the same rules to lobbyists as to public bodies , including the regions ' representatives to the EU ; following our requests , however , the report was amended .
We think it is right to establish a code of conduct for those who have access to Parliament on behalf of private associations or companies , and we also believe it is right not to apply the same rules to churches , political parties , trade unions and public bodies .
We have therefore voted in favour .
The Casini report emphasises the importance of amending the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure following the establishment of a common transparency register .
I voted in favour of this report , which confirms the importance attached to transparency by the European institutions , because I share the view that the establishment of this register will help in controlling all the organisations and persons involved in making and applying the EU policies .
in writing . - I supported today 's report calling for a joint register of lobbyists and interest groups to be set up .
This is a first step towards greater transparency in both the European Parliament and Commission .
A ' transparency register ' will improve ease of access for citizens wishing to find specific information regarding which organisations and individuals have contact with both MEPs and Commission officials .
The Parliament has made clear that registration for lobbyists who want to meet with MEPs will be mandatory from now on .
I am encouraged by the Council 's signal that it will also consider arrangements to put in place such a register and urge them to do so without delay .
I voted in favour of Mr Casini 's report .
Transparency in the activities that involve the European institutions , even though it has recently ended up tarnished , is a prerequisite for legitimacy and a basic factor in the establishment of proper , open relations with representative associations .
I therefore believe that creating a common register for Parliament and the Commission in order to bring together all information on the organisations and individuals who have contact with the institutions will not only streamline bureaucratic procedures by providing for a single registration , but will also be a clear improvement leading towards an increasingly open and transparent dialogue with said lobbyists .
I voted in favour of this report .
It is a first step towards providing more transparency in the institutions ' work and ensuring compliance with the Union 's public administration rules .
The transparency register , as it will be called from now on , is not obligatory , but lobbying individuals or organisations will be forced to register if they want permission to gain access to the European Parliament .
Registered entities will also have to declare their sources of income and interests , as well as legislative proposals submitted .
This will increase transparency and provide more comprehensive information on individuals or organisations who contact Members of the European Parliament about certain issues or with certain proposals .
I believe that we should continue talks with the Council , so that it joins the transparency register and this register becomes a common register for all three institutions .
Between Parliament and the Commission , there are approximately 4 600 organisations accredited as interest groups .
Following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened , making it colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
This has attracted the attention of an even larger number of representatives of interest groups .
This report , which I voted for , follows the institutional agreement on the creation of a joint space for registering and exercising scrutiny over lobbyists and other interest groups in the Commission and Parliament .
A common register between the various institutions will be created with the aim of contributing to greater transparency , and which will differentiate between interest groups representing civil society and public authorities .
In the interests of transparency , the creation of a system for the compulsory declaration of all meetings between registered organisations and the Members responsible for related legislation is equally important , and should be recorded in an annex to the respective reports or recommendations .
It is just as important that the Council join this register .
in writing . - UKIP MEPs abstained on this vote , not because we do not want transparency , but because these proposals are inadequate , and to vote in favour would have been to endorse inadequate provisions .
The establishment of a common register by Parliament and the Commission to bring together in a ' one-stop shop ' all information on the actors in contact with the institutions is a step forward on the way to greater transparency .
Transparency in the political institutions is , in my view , crucial for an open dialogue with civil society .
In fact , ensuring that opinions and information can be made known and exchanged publicly in the various sectors in which the Union acts and , at the same time , guaranteeing that the organisations and individuals who play an active part in EU policy making and policy implementation are monitored , are important factors in the democratic lives of the institutions .
I would , however , like to express some reservations .
I do not agree with excluding a series of actors from the scope of the register , such as the social partners and local , regional and municipal authorities .
Their exclusion is unjustified , because these actors have specific interests and play just as active a part in decision making as many other representative associations .
I also think the information required needs to be specified more clearly so that it cannot give rise to different interpretations , as happens in the current situation .
I voted in favour of this report because transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
We must scrutinise how decisions are made , what the influences behind them are and , finally , how resources , i.e. taxpayer 's money , are allocated .
Therefore , rules for lobbying are ultimately a question of legitimacy .
The European Parliament was the first European institution to address the phenomenon of an increasing number of interest groups at European level , and it is therefore necessary to examine the consequences of this evolution .
Following the European Parliament elections , a new working group was formed between the Parliament and the Commission which was able to adopt in November 2010 a draft agreement on the establishment of a transparency register .
According to the new draft , registration is not obligatory , but currently , only the representatives of registered interest groups are allowed access to the premises of the European Parliament .
The common register ensures the widest participation of all categories of operators and makes it easier for non-commercial organisations to carry out their work .
I believe that this common register is another step forward towards greater transparency in the European institutions , and will also increase citizens ' faith in the work of the institutions .
I voted in favour of this report as it is important to clarify matters at a time when the role of lobbies is still giving rise to much debate and , at times , conjecture among European citizens .
We regret , however , that the registration of organisations has not been made compulsory , especially as it is a de facto obligation to register in order to receive a card to enter our premises .
On the other hand , we have fought to ensure that the offices representing local , regional and municipal authorities in the European institutions are not affected by this measure , contrary to what was planned in the initial text .
We consider these structures to be the direct product of democratically elected bodies .
They represent the general interest , and should therefore be distinguished from lobbyists , who defend individual interests .
Nevertheless , this register is an important step forward because , in many areas , the lack of transparency surrounding the role of lobbies can present a real democratic problem .
This agreement is a first step , although undoubtedly an important one , towards greater transparency , by making the registering of all lobbyists who wish to enjoy permanent access to Parliament and the Commission de facto obligatory , including all information that identifies the legal structure and financial interests of the organisation in question .
The existence of a register of organisations and employees involved in decision making and the implementation of EU policy thereby strengthens transparency in the dialogue between these representatives of civil society and Union institutions while , at the same time , establishing binding measures in the event of an infringement of the code of conduct in the annex to the agreement .
I hope that a second step will soon be made towards the creation of more stringent standards that ensure consistency in the public administration of the EU and the strengthening of its institutional rules .
I regret that the Council has not yet participated in the agreement and joined the transparency register , as this affects the likelihood of achieving the necessary level of transparency at all stages of the EU legislative process .
I would like to remind you that the level of transparency of political institutions is increasingly linked to its legitimacy .
in writing . - Transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
It should be easy to scrutinise how decisions are made , what are the influences behind them and finally , how resources , i.e. taxpayers ' money , are allocated .
Therefore , rules for lobbying are ultimately a question of legitimacy .
I supported this report which establishes a common register for lobbyists ( transparency register ) between the European Parliament and Commission .
The scope of the register covers many activities carried out with the objective of directly or indirectly influencing the policy formulation or implementation and decision-making processes of the European institutions .
All organisations , irrespective of their legal status , engaged in activities falling under the scope of the register are expected to register .
This agreement with the European Commission provides only for voluntary registration , even though lobbyists not included in the joint register will no longer be able to obtain a long-term access badge to the European Parliament .
The next step will be to extend the joint register to all the EU institutions and to convince the Commission and Council to make it mandatory .
We need clear rules to prevent people and organisations from influencing EU decision making in a non-transparent manner .
I welcome the adoption of the Casini report on the introduction of a transparency register common to both Parliament and the Commission .
The introduction of a public register to which lobbies must sign up if they are to have access to these two institutions constitutes genuine democratic progress to the benefit of citizens .
In this respect , the future obligation for rapporteurs to make public the names of the lobbies they have met is a further step in the direction of the full independence of the European Parliament , and will ensure that there is a balanced representation of the interests of all European citizens .
I voted in favour of this report proposing that the list of interest groups should be common to all the different European institutions .
To date , more than 1 700 organisations have been accredited as interest groups in the European Parliament , and 3 900 in the Commission .
If you want to be able to make valid comments on a subject of a technical nature , you normally seek information from those people who are most knowledgeable about these issues .
It has always been thus and will continue to be so in the future .
Lobbies play a useful and essential role in legislative work , providing that there is transparency .
In order to achieve this , the report adopted establishes new rules and creates a ' transparency register ' which is common to both the Commission and Parliament .
Citizens will find a comprehensive compilation of information about the different contact people in the EU institutions .
This ' one-stop shop ' system will make it easier to register representatives of special interests , whether from commercial or non-commercial organisations .
Parliament also particularly wants all meetings between MEPs and interest groups on a particular issue to be mentioned at the end of the reports .
I regret that registration is not mandatory , but as the saying goes : ' Chi va piano va sano ' .
I voted in favour of the report on the amendment to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure following the establishment of a common transparency register because the principle of transparency should govern all those involved in decision making and in implementing EU policy .
I believe , however , that this register should be mandatory and extended to all the European institutions .
In 2006 , the Commission proposed a ' one-stop shop ' to register lobbyists of the Commission and Parliament .
In a resolution adopted in the plenary of 8 May 2008 , Parliament welcomed the proposal and called for an interinstitutional agreement on the establishment of a common register between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Moreover , at that time , Parliament proposed negotiations on a common code of conduct for the lobbyists and discussion of the sanctions that should apply in the event of an infringement .
Under this agreement , permanent access to the Parliament premises is allowed only to the registered interest representatives .
Nevertheless , the common register seeks to ensure the widest participation of all categories of operators while respecting their different or specific duties .
The scope of the register excludes social partners , churches , political parties and local , regional and municipal authorities , taking into account their particular characteristics .
Such an agreement would benefit from being joined by the Council .
I believe that Parliament and its Members should lead by example as regards the transparency of their activities and the clarity of their aims .
I voted in favour .
Transparency is the basis of democracy .
The public has a right to it and it helps maintain the credibility of the European institutions : Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
This report , drafted by Mr Casini , concerns the conclusion of an interinstitutional agreement between Parliament and the Commission on a common transparency register .
I would like to highlight that Parliament was the first institution to analyse the phenomenon of pressure groups , having launched the register for lobbyists in 1996 .
In 2006 , the Commission proposed the creation of a ' one-stop shop ' register for lobbyists in the Commission and the European Parliament , through the ' European Transparency Initiative ' .
Indeed , transparency is essential to the functioning of the European institutions , which are often accused of a lack thereof .
The European public demands a high level of transparency from its representatives , not only in theory , but most importantly in practice .
As such , I welcome the adoption of the draft agreement on the creation of a ' transparency register ' , and I am certain that it will constitute a significant step forward in the European institutions ' transparency and will contribute to consolidating the European project among the public .
Let us begin with the assumption , as stated in the report , that the ' transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
It should be easy to scrutinise how decisions are made , what are the influences behind them and finally , how resources [ ... ] are allocated ' .
The institutions ' transparency and the clarity of their representatives ' actions should be an intrinsic element of real and genuine democracy .
Unfortunately , we know that there is sometimes a great difference between the nice-sounding words that are said and what is done .
Parliament was the first European institution to broach the subject of the increasing number of lobbies at European level , having launched the register for representatives of interest groups in 1996 .
The Commission later also began initiatives in this area , and a working group was established in 2008 between Parliament and the Commission .
In 2009 , the group approved a joint declaration and a proposal for a common code of conduct .
In 2010 , a new working group approved a draft agreement for the establishment of a ' transparency register ' which ensures the widest possible participation of all categories of operator , while respecting their different or specific identities .
It is important to monitor the practical results of this .
The report states that the ' transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
It should be easy to scrutinise how decisions are made , what are the influences behind them and finally , how resources [ ... ] are allocated ' .
However , there is often a big gap between theory and reality , despite Parliament having been the first EU institution to deal with the phenomenon of the growing number of interest groups at European level and , in particular , with the consequences of this development for the legislative process .
Following various reports and in-depth debates , Parliament launched its register for representatives of interest groups in 1996 .
In the meantime , the Commission also launched initiatives , creating a high-level joint working group in 2008 between Parliament and the Commission .
In 2009 , the group approved a joint declaration and a proposal for a common code of conduct .
After the European elections , a new working group was established between Parliament and the Commission .
In November 2010 , the working group was able to approve a draft agreement for the establishment of a ' transparency register ' which ensures the widest possible participation of all categories of operator , while respecting their different or specific identities .
in writing . - Transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
It should be easy to scrutinise how decisions are made , what the influences are behind them and how resources , i.e. taxpayer 's money , are allocated .
Therefore , rules for lobbying are ultimately a question of legitimacy .
Parliament was the first European institution to address the phenomenon of an increasing number of interest groups at European level and , in particular , the consequences of this evolution for the legislative process .
While registration is not obligatory , it can be considered as such ' de facto ' because permanent access to Parliament 's premises is granted only to registered representatives .
However , it is desirable for the future to achieve a system of registration that is obligatory ' de jure ' .
The common register ensures the widest participation of all categories of operators while respecting their different or specific identities .
The new name - transparency register - makes it easier for non-commercial organisations to join the register .
This will be a step forward towards greater transparency in the European institutions , and I hope it will contribute to giving the European project greater legitimacy among Europe 's citizens .
It is a well-known fact that there are more than 15 000 lobbyists active in Brussels trying to influence the legislative texts that are adopted there , and that they intervene at all stages of the legislative process .
Despite the fact that this activity is viewed in very negative terms in France , it is not entirely illegitimate for interest groups , whether commercial , social , trade unions , etc. to make their points of view and expertise known , especially to the less knowledgeable civil servants and elected representatives .
It therefore makes sense for these lobbies and their representatives to be listed in a register , and that their principal sources of funding should also be mentioned in this register , particularly if they come from the European budget .
Registration should be mandatory not only for these organisations , but also for all groups outside Parliament , including those which are meant to fulfil a role provided for by the Treaties ( trade unions , churches , philosophical organisations , local authorities , etc . ) , including groups composed , in part or in whole , of Members of Parliament , such as the European Friends of Israel , because in that instance , they are acting as interest groups and not as parliamentarians .
In that respect , the agreement we are voting on today does not go far enough in terms of transparency .
Following recent events which have highlighted the potential abuses of lobbying , it has appeared all the more necessary to increase transparency regarding the work of interest groups at the European institutions .
The merging of the lists of lobbyists registered at the Parliament and the Commission represents a first step towards compiling an exhaustive register of the lobbies active in Brussels and , subsequently , towards greater citizen access to democratic checks and balances in the decision-making process .
I have , however , fought to prevent the offices representing local authorities at the European institutions from being affected by this measure .
Indeed , I consider these structures to be the direct product of democratically-elected bodies ( town , departmental , regional councils , etc . ) .
They represent the general interest , and should therefore be distinguished from lobbyists who defend individual interests .
Furthermore , I hope that this register will develop to become mandatory one day , and include all lobbyists who are active at the European institutions .
The notion of transparency is crucial to European Union policy and it must be extended to cover all interest groups that participate in its operation .
The approval of a common transparency register , following a broad majority vote in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , is another step towards greater transparency in parliamentary activity .
A common register between the European Parliament and the Commission that is public and accessible online will make it easier for citizens to check the various stakeholders with whom MEPs interact .
However , the agreement still needs to be improved as registration by actors is still on a voluntary basis , although a pre-requisite for obtaining access to the institutions .
The next objective will therefore be to make registration mandatory for all lobbyists .
We also expect that , like the other European institutions , the Council will adhere to the indications of Parliament and the Commission and participate in the register .
I welcomed this report because transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
It should be easy to scrutinise how decisions are made , what the influences behind them are and , finally , how resources , i.e. taxpayer 's money , are allocated .
Therefore , rules for lobbying are ultimately a question of legitimacy .
The result achieved corresponds to the objectives laid out by the Parliament in the most essential points .
Firstly , although registration is not obligatory - which was the aim of Parliament - it can be considered obligatory de facto , because only registered interest group representatives are allowed permanent access to Parliament premises .
Secondly , the common register ensures the widest participation of all categories of operators while respecting their different or specific identities .
The new name - transparency register -makes it easier for non-commercial organisations to join the register .
Thirdly , the new mechanism provides additional information such as the number of individuals involved in all the activities relating to the register , and the level of EU resources received by the registrant .
It will also provide clarifications regarding the eligible activities falling under the scope of the register , and the processes by which complaints will be handled .
I believe that it was essential to adopt the draft agreement on the establishment of a transparency register .
The common register will be a step forward towards greater transparency in the European institutions , which hopefully will help give the European project greater legitimacy in the eyes of its citizens .
More than 1 700 organisations have been accredited as interest groups at the European Parliament , and 3 900 at the Commission .
These organisations have been listed to date in two different registers , one for each institution .
In 2008 , Parliament had called for these records to be merged so as to facilitate record-keeping .
An institutional agreement was reached between Parliament and the Commission with the aim of setting up a common register .
This agreement was awaiting validation and was put to the vote in the European legislative assembly .
I voted in favour of this text because it will enable greater transparency in respect of the actions of interest groups .
It is true that under this text , it is not mandatory to be listed on this register but Parliament will require such registration for any organisation that wishes to use its premises .
The text also proposes introducing a ' legislative fingerprint ' for lobbying , by recording in an annex to all legislative acts those interest groups that have played a role in drafting them .
The common register is due to become available online in June .
in writing . - Transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
It should be easy to scrutinise how decisions are made , what are the influences behind them and finally , how resources , i.e. taxpayer 's money , are allocated .
Therefore , rules for lobbying are ultimately a question of legitimacy .
The Parliament was the first European institution to address the phenomenon of an increasing number of interest groups at European level and , especially , the consequences of this evolution for the legislative process .
After several reports and thorough discussions , the Parliament launched its register of interest representatives in 1996 .
The joint register will be a step forward towards greater transparency in the European institutions , which hopefully will contribute to greater legitimacy of the European project among its citizens .
No pressure group representing commercial interests should obtain a permanent pass to the European institutions .
Their access to the European Parliament must be strictly limited to meetings granted to them by parliamentarians and political groups .
The proposed ' transparency register ' is nothing other than administrative legitimisation .
It serves to maintain the current situation .
The lobbyists have a bright future ahead of them .
I shall vote against this hypocritical report , which I condemn .
It would be better to make these people declare their personal links with the media , as well as their parliamentary and administrative links to the European Parliament .
Parliament and the Commission are setting a good example by establishing a common transparency register to provide accreditation for lobbyists and other interest groups .
Moreover , the compulsory nature of the register for all lobbyists who want permanent access to Parliament and to the Commission is an important step in increasing the transparency of relations between those organisations and the European institutions .
Once again , we regret that the Council has not signed up to these measures .
A voluntary register is complete nonsense and will not result in increased transparency .
In addition , the Council of Ministers is not yet involved , which means that we do not even have all the key legislative bodies on board .
Even if the Council were to become involved , there would still be enough loopholes left .
There are allegedly 1 350 expert groups working on official papers published by the Commission .
However , the identity of the members of these advisory bodies , which meet behind closed doors , remains a closely guarded secret .
The Commission is now paying more attention to the activities of former Commissioners in the period immediately after they have left Brussels .
However , are there also controls in place in the other direction ?
We only need to think of the latest move from the music industry association to the copyright department .
As these measures are a step in the right direction , I have voted for the report .
I fully support the decision we have made today on the conclusion of an interinstitutional agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on a common transparency register .
Parliament has kept a register of interest groups since 1996 and should be an example for other institutions in this regard .
The European Commission did not create its register of lobbyists until 2008 , and the Council of the European Union still does not have one .
The decision taken in the European Parliament will combine the registers of lobbyists and interest groups currently kept separately by the two abovementioned institutions .
The process will lead to greater transparency and will , above all , simplify access to information , which will be kept in one place .
Creating a common register is useful for lobbyists too , as they only need to register once .
The decision also excludes social partners , churches , political parties and local and regional governments from the transparency register .
In addition , interest groups will be recorded in the explanatory memorandum to the report or recommendation if they have obtained a meeting with a Member about a legislative dossier .
In my opinion , this decision is an important step in increasing transparency and I am waiting impatiently for the EU Council to join the common register .
Institutions earn their credentials by operating in a transparent manner .
This particular report , which I voted for , puts the question of accountability on a proper footing .
Citizens must have easy and unimpeded access in the decision-making process to the influence and activity of interest representatives .
It is a fact that , at European level , the European Parliament was the first institution to deal with the emergence of a large number of interest groups .
It is also a fact that there is still a strong upward trend here , as a result of Parliament 's constantly expanding legislative competences .
Consequently , the common register is a first and important step in controlling and safeguarding transparent action by interest groups .
The transparency of political institutions is a prerequisite for legitimacy , and it is an ethical imperative .
Parliament was the first EU institution to tackle the phenomenon of the growing number of interest groups at European level and , in particular , with the consequences of this development for the legislative process .
After several reports and thorough discussions , the Parliament launched its register for interest representatives in 1996 .
In 2006 , the Commission issued a ' European Transparency Initiative ' where it proposed a common ' one-stop shop ' register for lobbyists in the Commission and Parliament .
Parliament 's answer to this Commission initiative was the report by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the development of the framework for the activities of interest representatives in the European institutions .
The resolution was adopted in plenary on 8 May 2008 .
Subsequently , in November 2010 , the working group was able to adopt a draft agreement on the establishment of a transparency register , as Parliament had reached its main objectives .
I believe that the common register is a step towards greater transparency in the European institutions , so I voted in favour of this report .
The activity of interest representatives from a variety of areas in relation to Union institutions - in this instance , Parliament and the Commission - has undeniable advantages .
It increases the range of relevant information for decision making and provides knowledge of legitimate interests which are worthy of consideration .
However , it is essential to safeguard the transparency of the EU institutions ' actions so as to ultimately ensure their legitimacy and the thorough consideration of their scope , without misuse of power .
I therefore welcome the conclusion of this agreement , which , by making the registration of all lobbyists wishing to enjoy permanent access to Parliament and the Commission de facto mandatory , marks a decisive step in strengthening transparency in the dialogue between the EU institutions and these representatives of civil society
Transparency of political institutions ' activities is a prerequisite for legitimacy .
It must always and , in all circumstances , be easy to scrutinise how any decision was made , what factors influenced it and , above all , how resources - which means taxpayers ' money - were used .
Parliament was the first European institution to set up a register of lobbyists in 1996 .
The resolution adopted today highlights the fact that the establishment of a common register ensures the widest participation of the various categories of operators while respecting their differences and specific identities .
This mechanism provides important information such as the number of individuals and organisations involved in all the activities relating to the register and the level of EU resources received by registrants .
Brussels , which is considered by some to be second only to Washington as a mecca for lobbyists , needs proper regulations and clearly-defined principles of cooperation between decision makers and representatives of various interest groups .
We should remember that lobbying , interpreted as advocacy by various social groups , is an indivisible part of contemporary democratic systems .
Once again , Members have expressed their support for the introduction of transparency .
A common register of lobbyists will increase transparency in EU institutions .
It will also distinguish between representatives of pressure groups and representatives of non-governmental organisations and government organisations .
There is no doubt that interest groups present a platform for the exchange of information and are an important channel of communication between citizens and the European Union .
To make this cooperation as effective as possible so that it achieves the expected results , it should be regulated and transparent .
The decision concerning the so-called transparency register is not ambitious enough .
The Commission 's register , which is now being put together with Parliament 's register , is voluntary and covers a small proportion of the estimated 15 000 lobbyists in Brussels .
The register lacks relevant information .
I view the report as representing a certain , albeit limited , amount of progress .
It would have been better to have waited to see what the group led by President Buzek came up with before taking the decision .
The scandals that have been brought to light over recent months highlight the fact that Parliament 's rules are also inadequate .
We need a code of conduct which makes it impermissible for MEPs to be paid for supporting the proposals of lobbyist groups .
The only people that MEPs should represent should be their electorates ; they should not represent particular economic or religious interests .
I believe that all lobbyists should be registered .
Making exceptions for certain lobbyists will create loopholes in the control system .
During the election campaign , my party demanded mandatory registration of lobbyists on a register that is common to all EU institutions .
We also called for information to be provided on the particular issues that the lobbyists were concerned with .
The register should contain financial information , including the expenditure for their lobbying activities and who finances these activities .
A code of conduct for lobbying activities is necessary .
Lobbyists who behave unethically must be publicly exposed and it must be possible for them to be barred .
We must have double counting of gifts , travel and lunches for officials and politicians ; in other words , both the giver and the recipient must declare the gifts .
Officials within the EU must not be able to go directly into a lobbyist job with links to their previous work for a period of two years .
In addition , all in- and out-going post between EU institutions and lobbyists must be made public .
Lobbyists must not be able to request confidentiality .
Mr Casini 's report does not meet these requirements .
Transparency is an important component of democracy and a requirement for the participation of citizens , which makes it an essential means of gaining their trust .
In addition , the accountability which results from transparency requirements is an important instrument for preventing all kinds of abuse .
This draft agreement concerning the establishment of a transparency register takes all the essential requirements into consideration , which means that I was able to give the agreement as a whole my support .
The next step must be to follow up the objectives of this new register and to combat any new difficulties which arise immediately and effectively in the spirit of the original agreement .
Lobbying is a legitimate activity .
It is a basic element of democracy .
Representative democracy can function only when citizens communicate with their elected representatives and ask them to promote their interests .
From this perspective , it is not important whether citizens approach politicians as individuals , associations , trading companies or manufacturing firms .
No regulation should therefore restrict one of the basic rights of citizens .
However , the reasons for which an elected representative decides to prefer one interest ahead of another must be based on his convictions , and not on personal gain .
The transparency of an MEP 's work in contact with people who are promoting their own interests is the instrument that will perhaps best prevent corruption in the making of laws .
I therefore support the proposed common register , which takes account of the varying nature of interest groups , and distinguishes between those that lobby with the aim of boosting their profits and those that address elected representatives with the aim of achieving the greater good of society as a whole .
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers have been strengthened and it is now colegislator in almost all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure .
As a result , it is the focus of attention of an even larger number of lobbyists , who , moreover , play a key role in the open , pluralist dialogue on which a democratic system is based , and act as an important source of information for Members in the context of the performance of their duties In the light of these developments , and against this constitutional background , and in keeping with their commitment to transparency , Parliament and the Commission have agreed to establish and maintain a common register in order to keep a list of the names of , and exercise scrutiny over , the organisations and individuals taking part in the drafting and implementation of EU policies The register will be established and kept on the basis of the existing arrangements introduced by Parliament in 1996 and by the Commission in June 2008 , as developed by the joint Parliament-Commission working party and on the basis of the experience gained and the suggestions made by the parties concerned The work towards transparency must continue .

Political institutions are only credible if they are transparent , thus giving them the legitimacy that they need to preserve the democracy that characterises them .
In view of this , and considering the importance of the issue of legitimacy and informing citizens for the effectiveness and proper functioning of European policies , I voted for the draft agreement on the establishment of a common transparency register .
The smooth functioning of the Internal Market depends on the stability of the financial system and on the trust placed in financial institutions and transactions by the European public and consumers .
In the wake of the financial crisis , it has become clear that the quality of consumer protection and safeguards in the financial services sector requires tangible and significant improvement , particularly as regards monitoring and supervision .
There is a need for an effective and adequate governance system in terms of risk management , compliance with regulations , the internal audit function , strategies , policies , and processes and procedures .
This challenge , which is as important as it is complex , can be met by a package of measures with either immediate or medium-term effects .
How the accountability of members of boards of directors is organised must be clearly defined , and must be put into practice in a reasonable way , so as not to jeopardise financial institutions ' willingness to seize business opportunities , which is a desirable aspect of their work , or the quality of the human resources at their disposal .
The report identifies solutions to this , so I am voting in favour .
I voted in favour of this report .
The proper functioning of the Internal Market depends on the stability of the financial system and on the trust put by European citizens and consumers in financial institutions and transactions .
During the recent financial crisis , many financial institutions around the world failed at great cost to the taxpayer .
I support the Commission 's initiative to take a critical look at the soundness of financial institutions and of the financial system as a whole , and at the regulation and supervision of the system , in order to prevent any repeat of the crisis in the future and to ensure that the financial sector meets the needs of the real economy and displays the greatest possible degree of social responsibility .
I voted for Mr Fox 's report .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I should point out that the excellent outcome achieved at the final vote highlights once again the close cooperation between the political groups .
We therefore successfully prevented the European Parliament adopting a position geared too much towards mandatory regulations on corporate governance .
It is of paramount importance that our group promotes a balanced approach to resolving the global financial crisis .
This is why we must avoid introducing barriers in financial institutions .
The final report attaches greater importance and gives more power to the role of the European Supervisory Authorities .
The most important compromise involves putting the ' comply or explain ' principle and the mandatory regulations on an equal footing .
I think that regulations should be introduced only when the codes of good practice fail .
The approach based on the ' comply or explain ' principle is proportionate and can be applied to a large number of financial institutions .
At the same time , however , this must be supplemented by regular external evaluation and appropriate regulatory supervision .
I voted for this report because it represents Parliament 's contribution to the discussions on means of ensuring more effective governance in financial institutions in Europe .
This discussion is particularly important for finding ways of avoiding a repeat of the financial and , ultimately , economic crisis that hit the whole world in 2008 .
The collapse of a series of financial institutions cost and is still costing taxpayers dear .
Therefore , it is necessary to examine the cause of the problems that arose .
In response to the Green Paper on improving the governance of financial institutions published by the Commission , the European Parliament 's report devotes significant attention to the need to regulate more strictly the procedures for appointing managers , to laying down the competences of board members and aptitude test criteria , and to ways of guaranteeing their independence .
The report calls for the establishment of mandatory risk committees at board level , for financial institutions to be required to disclose recovery planning and supervisory reports , for an annual report to be drafted on the adequacy and effectiveness of their internal control systems , and for a similar assessment to be included in the annual report drawn up by external auditors .
Bearing in mind the importance of the trust that European citizens and consumers put in financial institutions and transactions for the stability of our financial system and , consequently , for the smooth functioning of the Internal Market , I welcome the Commission 's Green Paper and the opportunity to improve corporate governance structures throughout the EU .
Several things will need to be done in order to ensure the smooth and sustainable functioning of the European financial market , the most important of which , in my opinion , are a targeted approach responding to the needs of the real economy and the implementation of a policy of increased social responsibility and risk assessment by boards in order to avoid a financial crisis in the future .
I voted in favour of the alternative motion for a resolution on corporate governance in financial institutions as it tables proposals which would ensure improvements in corporate governance structures throughout the EU , taking into account the fact that the financial sector must respond to the needs of the real economy , contribute to sustainable growth and demonstrate greater social responsibility .
The smooth functioning of the Internal Market depends on the stability of the financial system and , consequently , on the trust put by the European public and consumers in financial institutions and transactions .
As such , there is a need to strengthen and review the current systems , which have been shown to be inadequate , with particular emphasis on mechanisms of control and supervision .
To this end , I welcome the conclusions and observations of the Green Paper and the opportunity to improve the governance of financial institutions through the Union .
I also join the rapporteur in calling for a cost-benefit impact assessment of the Commission 's proposals , with a focus on the need to preserve competitiveness and contribute to economic growth .
As such , there is an urgent need to find mechanisms and solutions that enable risk reduction and create a permanent dialogue between the supervisory authorities , auditors and the institutions .
The global financial crisis triggered by the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers bank in 2008 and ' subprime credit ' - the inappropriate securitisation of mortgage debt - sparked very serious doubts concerning the strength of financial institutions .
This forced the governments of both the Member States and the United States to inject public funds amounting to roughly 25 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) into the financial sector .
This situation led the Commission , through its Communication of 4 March 2009 , to introduce a genuine programme of reforms of the financial markets ' regulatory frameworks and supervisory regimes .
Bearing in mind the economic and financial crisis we are currently experiencing , it is never too much to redouble one 's efforts with regard to the financial sector , beginning with corporate governance which , most of the time , does not take customers into account , whether they are savers , depositors , etc .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's Green Paper , and welcome its proposals , which can and should accompany and complement the regulations adopted to strengthen the financial system in the context of the new European supervisory system .
I am therefore voting in favour of the report on corporate governance in financial institutions , and I hope that this will contribute decisively to their strength .
This report recognises some important issues and evidence , like the fact that the financial sector should respond to the needs of the economy , contribute to sustainable growth and demonstrate greater social responsibility , as well as that ' during the recent financial crisis , many financial institutions around the world failed at great cost to the taxpayer ' .
However , having made these statements , the report does not draw out all the consequences of the facts presented , simply making a few inconsequential observations .
According to the rapporteur , everything , or almost everything , boils down to tired arguments about creating an effective and adequate governance system in terms of risk management , enforcement of rules , ethics in the behaviour of some of those involved in the financial markets and institutions , and so on .
We are aware of the contribution that some of these guidelines may make towards appreciably and temporarily improving the workings of the financial system .
Nonetheless , it is obvious that they cannot alter the system 's most essential aspect : its unsustainability , predatory nature and emphasis on speculation , with the principal aim of increasing profits .
The report completely fails to address the central issue : the state recovering its role in this area ; taking back the financial sector and returning it to its social role , under public and democratic control .
The only important points that the report makes are the acknowledgements that ' the financial sector should meet the needs of the real economy , help to promote sustainable growth and display the greatest possible degree of social responsibility ' , and that ' during the recent financial crisis , many financial institutions around the world failed at great cost to the taxpayer ' .
It even claims that some financial institutions and authorities did not understand the nature , amplitude and complexity of the risks they incurred .
However , the report does not then make the correct inferences , limiting itself to questions of ethics in the behaviour of some people involved in the financial institutions and markets , as well as to creating a governance system which is effective and adequate in terms of risk management , compliance with regulations , and so on .
Of course , these proposals could slightly improve the working of the banks over time , but they do not change the exploitative nature of the system , or its principal objective of increasing profit and speculative endeavours .
The report does not , therefore , touch on the central issue : public and democratic control of the entire financial sector .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - Financial risk is essential to the existence of the financial sector , and is equally essential in terms of both the business success of that sector and security functions for the economy in general .
However , it is in the public interest that risks should be restricted to prevent systemic crisis .
This challenge , as important as it is complex , can be met by means of a package of measures which will have either direct or indirect impact .
Financial institutions should be obliged to prepare annual reports on the adequacy and effectiveness of their internal control systems , and boards should have these reports adopted .
Financial institutions should give greater attention to the implementation of measures to raise awareness about the risks , as better information about risk at all levels of society - and among employees - is often crucial in improving risk management .
Having noted , and I quote and now utter the following euphemism - ' a lack of values and ethics in the behaviour of certain actors in the financial markets and institutions ' - this Parliament has set off on a pathetic crusade to inject some ethics into the sector .
To use the word crusade is perhaps to overstate the case .
It might be better to say that some pious hopes are expressed that finally , the interests of customers and workers should be taken into account .
There is some pitiful bleating about social , cultural and ' gender ' diversity on boards of directors ( quotas for the Roma , no doubt ? ) .
There are some proposals , which have already largely been adopted at European level , on the indecent remunerations in the sector , where we could do considerably better .
There are some risk controls here and there .
In short , the point that escapes you is the fact that companies are merely playing by the rules that you set .
Now these rules , rules that you are basically refusing to question , are the free international movement of capital , the financialisation of the economy , an over-emphasis on the short term , securitisation , complex financial products that are not based on any concrete wealth creation and the constitution of large multinational groups which are more powerful than States and are not subject to control .
Until you deal with the foundations of this system , you will change nothing .
in writing . - The worst impact of the recent financial crisis has been on ordinary consumers .
Various EU governments have used taxpayers ' money to bail out some banks that had managed their affairs in an irresponsible way .
Were it not for the support of taxpayers , such banks would have collapsed with disastrous effect on different sectors of the economy in various Member States .
Now that the worst phase of this financial crisis is over , banks are still not acting , or conducting their business , in the best interest of consumers .
Instances of mis-selling of financial services products , and lack of sufficient support by banks for personal customers and small businesses that find themselves facing temporary liquidity problems , show that more tangible action should be taken by regulators to ensure that operators in the financial services industry support their clients and generally offer better protection to consumers .
Therefore , I voted in favour of this report .
I welcomed this document because the financial sector should meet the needs of the real economy , help to promote sustainable growth and display the greatest possible degree of social responsibility .
It is noted that there is a lack of values and ethics in the behaviour of some actors in financial markets and institutions .
Financial markets and institutions have to take into account , as part of their corporate social responsibility , the interests of all parties involved , including clients , shareholders and employees .
Effective risk governance is one of the most important factors for preventing future crises .
Therefore , an effective governance system needs to be established in all financial institutions , with adequate risk management , compliance , internal audit functions ( and , in the case of insurers , actuarial functions ) , strategies , policies , processes and procedures .
I believe that it is necessary to establish mandatory risk committees or equivalent arrangements .
We should not take disproportionate risks .
The financial crisis has highlighted the lack of effectiveness of the current corporate governance principles .
It is now vital for the lessons to be learnt from what has happened to avoid a similar situation recurring in the future .
The area of corporate governance is evolving all the time and it is the financial sector which has particular responsibility for serious , sustainable economic strategies .
We must maintain the sound , stable and competitive nature of financial institutions so that they can make a contribution to economic growth .
In this regard , I think that effective corporate governance must take into account equally the interests of all the stakeholders and , at the same time , the stability of the financial system .
This will allow the market to operate at its optimum and consumers will show increased confidence in financial institutions and transactions .
in writing . - I welcome this report .
The aim of the Green Paper under consideration here is to draw conclusions from the global financial crisis triggered by the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers bank in autumn 2008 following the inappropriate securitisation of US subprime mortgages .
In the light of the development of new financial instruments in a globalised world , the Green Paper takes a critical look at the soundness of financial institutions and of the financial system as a whole , and at the regulation and supervision of the system , with a view to preventing any repeat of the crisis in the future .
The Commission regards the strengthening of corporate governance as central to its financial market reform and crisis prevention programme .
In that connection , the Commission notes , in particular , that in the financial services sector , corporate governance must take account of the interests of other stakeholders ( depositors , savers , life insurance policy holders , etc . ) and of the stability of the financial system , owing to the systemic nature of many of the players involved
in writing . - Poor corporate governance in financial institutions - and particularly banks ' murky pay culture - was a key factor in creating the conditions for the financial crisis .
Labour Euro MPs backed this report which , thanks to amendments adopted at the committee stage , calls for Commission action to raise financial firms ' corporate governance standards .
These demands include stronger oversight of risks that a firm takes on , high standards of independence and diversity for members of firms ' boards , including better gender balance and , crucially , transparency around pay , so shareholders and the public can hold banks to account .
As the Conservative-led government in the United Kingdom has shelved legislation on transparency introduced by the previous Labour Government , I welcome the inclusion of my proposal to introduce such a requirement at the EU level .
Labour Euro MPs opposed the rapporteur 's amendments to weaken the committee report , including a lower requirement for representation of women , a slower timetable for action on pay reform and less information on staff pay .
The Commission must now complete its consultation and swiftly bring forward ambitious proposals to ensure that governance of financial firms will help prevent , not facilitate , future crises .
The recent financial crisis reinforced the need for us to look at the moral issues relating to managing financial institutions in a more responsible way .
Issues relating to remuneration policies , and governance of the remuneration of directors and managers of financial institutions , must be governed by ethical and moral principles that do not allow situations such as those experienced in the recent past , with the awarding of management prizes in companies that immediately afterwards filed for bankruptcy or were found to be in serious difficulties .
The EU must have a productive , social and environmental model with a long-term outlook that respects everyone 's interests : companies , shareholders and workers .
in writing . - The aim of the resolution is to strengthen corporate governance , which is considered by the Commission to be the major element of the programme of financial market reform and crisis prevention .
I disagree with that because it may lead to an increase in corruption and violations .
I voted ' against ' .
The introduction of corporate governance may increase European citizens ' confidence in the stability of the financial system , but the markets are reacting by bringing in their own mechanisms and the role played by the rating agencies must not be underestimated .
It is completely incomprehensible that citizens are having to tighten their belts to pay for the rescue package for the banks , while the very same managers at the banks who were calling desperately for help are now paying themselves bonuses amounting to millions of euro .
Far too little was done during the process of rescuing the banks to respond to this predictable development .
At the same time , many small and medium-sized businesses , which the EU always praises on paper as being the engine of the economy , were dealt a fatal blow , because , on the basis of the Basel agreements , the banks preferred to hold onto their money , rather than lending it to companies .
The banking crisis has also highlighted the collapse of the myth of the self-regulating market .
It emerged during the crisis in Asia that regulation is a sensible precaution .
It remains to be seen to what extent the new monitoring and supervisory measures will take effect .
A whole range of mistakes have been made and there has been a breathtaking lack of ethics , morals and decency , combined with conflicts of interest .
The report is a move in the right direction , but in some areas , it is not specific enough , which is why I have abstained .
This report on corporate governance in financial institutions sets out a range of measures to be implemented in the companies governing financial institutions .
In short , its aim is to draw conclusions from the global financial crisis triggered by the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers bank in autumn 2008 , related to the inappropriate securitisation of US subprime mortgages .
In order to prevent this situation from repeating itself , Parliament proposes that corporate governance must , particularly in the financial services sector , take account of the interests of other stakeholders - depositors , savers , life insurance policy holders , etc . - and of the stability of the financial system , owing to the systemic nature of many of the players involved .
The most important of the measures proposed is the development of objective competence criteria to assess the suitability of candidates for controlled roles , taking into account the nature , complexity and size of the financial institution .
I would like to align myself with this package of measures by voting for it , in the hope that the measures tabled by the Commission , and now by Parliament , will be sufficient to prevent the recurrence of situations like the one which we experienced in autumn 2008 , and which is still being seen in the daily lives of the Portuguese people .
I voted against for the following reasons .
The report does not accept that the financial crisis of 2007-2008 was systemic in nature : in other words , that it stemmed from the way the financial system is organised .
This would mean acknowledging that the way the system is organised strongly influences the decisions of the financial companies ' directors , whatever the levels of transparency required of them .
For example , the report fails to recognise that the commercial banks ' ability to make money from speculative financial investments was a very important factor in the crisis .
The report does not touch on this organisational issue , and no amount of risk boards or competence criteria for directors can avoid the harmful consequences of speculating on families ' savings for profit .
The ' herd behaviour ' of the financial markets is an inescapable phenomenon , leading to speculative bubbles which later burst .
No market in which financial institutions have a pivotal role is able to operate without confidence that the various economic operators work properly .
As such , there is a need to strike a balance between these institutions ' freedom to conduct their business , in what is an essentially private matter , and the economic impact that another crisis in the financial system could have on the real economy , and for the lives of everyone as members of a community .
If we analyse the causes of the recent financial crisis , we can see that it is necessary to find mechanisms for control of investment risk , of the composition of boards , and of directors ' pay , thereby enabling enhanced cooperation between public and private supervisory bodies , while ensuring their independence .
Since this resolution puts forward proposals in these different areas , I voted in favour .
in writing . - We had to abstain at the end .
Our AMR , co-signed by S & D and aimed at giving the resolution a stronger regulatory flavour , was rejected .
Amendments by the rapporteur to weaken the resolution were , however , adopted , as was the report containing very mixed messages .
The key player on this in the EPP ( Karas ) was on our line , and as rapporteur for CRD IV ( the Capital Requirements Directive ) , he will be given the task of dealing with corporate governance rules for financial institutions ( the follow-up to this INI ) .
His group , in particular Vice-President Wortman-Kool , let him down ( again ) .
Let us hope the actual legislation ( proposal expected in July ) will be treated with more care and determination .
The most important revelation to emerge from the financial and economic crisis was that we have an extremely greedy system .
The financial sector was not only focusing on short-term profits , but was also undermining efforts to introduce sustainable growth .
The report contains important lessons for us to learn from the financial crisis with regard to risk , boards of directors , supervisory bodies , shareholders and remuneration .
I have therefore voted in favour of this report .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution , given that the multilateral trade system continues to be by far the most effective framework for achieving equitable and fair trade at international level .
Achieving a balanced result in the negotiations of the World Trade Organisation 's Doha Development Agenda ( DDA ) must therefore be a priority for the Union 's negotiators .
The importance of this agreement is due to the fact that India is the seventh largest economy in the world .
However , I must also mention that , in spite of sustained economic growth , enormous inequalities persist .
I would like to highlight the need to ensure the free trade agreement ( FTA ) does not limit the powers that the Indian Government needs to resolve problems of poverty and inequality .
The final FTA should include a binding state-to-state dispute settlement mechanism , provisions on mediation regarding non-tariff barriers to trade ( NTBs ) , on anti-dumping measures and on compensation rights , and a general safeguard clause based on Articles XX and XXI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) .
However , it also highlights the need for the Commission to include robust and effective safeguard clauses in the FTA and to insist , during negotiations , that India ratify the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on the state of play of the EU-India free trade agreement negotiations .
India is an important EU trading partner : in 2000 , India was the European Union 's 17th most important trading partner , and by 2010 its eighth .
Furthermore , India is the largest beneficiary in the generalised system of preferences ( GSP ) , and European Union imports from India by means of preferential tariffs or a zero rate of duty were valued at EUR 19.9 billion and constituted 83 % of all EU imports from India .
Both parties expect to reap significant benefits from the removal of tariffs , and the liberalisation of trade in services and company start-ups , but I share the disappointment expressed in the resolution as regards the slow rate of progress of negotiations on the free trade agreement ( FTA ) .
Both parties must make every effort to ensure that a comprehensive , ambitious and coordinated FTA has been concluded by 2011 , because this agreement would be the basis for establishing opportunities to increase EU and Indian trade and investment , and develop business , and the FTA would increase overall exports and imports for both the European Union and India .
I agree with the position set out in the resolution that if economic cooperation between the EU and India is based on common universal values , it may become an example for cooperation with other countries .
We supported this resolution and tabled a question to the Commission because we believe it is fundamental at this moment in time , when oil prices have been at an all-time high for some months .
It has become unsustainable for many fishing boats , and especially for small-scale fleets , to see their outgoings constantly increasing because of the rise in oil prices , to the extent that they often make no profit from any of the fishing seasons .
By calling for a rise in de minimis aid from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 for the next three years , we want to send out a strong signal to the sector , which , in recent years , particularly because of the entry into force of the common fisheries policy and new restrictive measures , has seen some small- and medium-scale modes of fishing cut back , if not killed off completely .
It should also be noted that measures have already been adopted in other sectors , such as agriculture , to help them cope with this price rise .
Therefore , this aid - which we should remember is granted at national , not European , level , and is therefore dependent on each individual Member State 's economic resources - could be seen by many people as causing an imbalance in competition , but in reality , it would provide a little relief to a sector that is increasingly on its knees .
I voted against the resolution tabled by the European right , as it promotes an ultraliberal vision of the EU 's trade relations with India .
The right systematically opposed the amendments that I tabled on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament in order to rule out any liberalisation of public services , strongly condemn child labour , request legally binding clauses on corporate social responsibility and demand respect for the principle of equal pay for equal work with regard to Indians who will come and work in Europe in the future .
The compromise was impossible , the differences of opinion obvious and irreconcilable .
Only the resolution tabled by my group , together with those by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , offered a progressive vision of EU-India trade relations .
Unsurprisingly , it could not hold out against the right-wing majority in Parliament , which is a shame .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
After more than three years of talks on the free trade agreement , the EU and India are at a crucial stage , completing negotiations on the most important sectors .
However , during further negotiations , it is crucial to address some important issues .
I believe that significant attention must be paid to Europe 's most sensitive sectors , such as industry , agriculture and the services sector .
India is one of the world 's largest economies , with a rapidly growing services sector .
It is very keen to access the EU 's services market and therefore , it is necessary to carry out a comprehensive evaluation of how the free trade agreement might affect the EU 's services sectors ( and other important sectors ) and employment .
At all stages of the negotiations , we must also ensure that future trade policy is conducted in the context of the European Union 's objectives , including binding commitments on social and environmental standards .
I would like to remind you that the eighth global Millennium Development Goal states that a global partnership for development should be established which includes creating an open , rule-based , predictable and non-discriminatory trade and finance system .
The key factor to achieving this goal is for developed countries to want to open their markets to developing countries , which also includes India .
This will allow the EU to make a contribution in such areas as sustainable development , eradication of poverty and protection for human rights .
Adopting the resolution on the free trade agreement between the EU and India will help us take a step forward to fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals .
I consider regrettable the European Commission 's decision not to wait until Parliament has adopted its report on Europe 's future international investment policy and that it has decided to go ahead and offer India a mandate to negotiate for an investment chapter .
It would be usual for the European legislative to be consulted when an international negotiation mandate is involved , in a situation where the European Parliament has a relevant role to play in terms of shaping EU-level investment policies .
The Commission must respond as soon as possible to the request submitted by Parliament to define clearly the period of investment so that the provisions on investment protection do not undermine the parties ' ability to issue compulsory licences .
Furthermore , the binding state-to-state dispute settlement mechanism only serves to empower foreign investors to initiate legal proceedings at an international level against the governments of the EU and India , while domestic investors only have recourse to national courts .
This situation could undermine the national policy initiatives on environmental , social or fiscal legislation .
The free trade agreement should be the most important of all the agreements negotiated so far .
This is why focusing more attention on it would not do any harm .
I voted against this report .
We want a free trade agreement between the EU and India that helps to promote sustainable development , and that is accompanied by clear clauses concerning respect for ILO standards , environmental rules and corporate social responsibility obligations .
The right 's rejection of these requests is particularly regrettable .
We also deplore the fact that the right-wing in Parliament rejected the amendment designed to ensure equal treatment of European and Indian workers .
This is not only harmful to Indian workers ; it is also very dangerous for European workers .
We must not accept the liberalisation of services and social dumping aimed at bringing down European wages .
Moreover , the European Union must not forget its founding principles .
The Treaty of Lisbon stipulates that trade policy must contribute to sustainable development , eradication of poverty and the protection of human rights .
As far as the EU-India Free Trade Agreement is concerned , I chose to vote for the resolution proposed by my political group as I felt that it is more balanced than the resolutions proposed by other political groups .
The resolution from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament highlighted the importance of a free trade agreement with India , while mentioning the continuing inequalities in this country and the need to include in the agreement some clauses on human , social and environmental rights .
The largest democracy in the world today demonstrates paradoxes and asymmetries that have apparently slotted relatively easily into its many thousands of years of history .
Although the most extreme poverty has not disappeared , it is no less true that surges and flows of prosperity have raised India to a more prominent international role , and have revealed that its economy and society are prospering and innovating quickly and efficiently .
A free trade agreement ( FTA ) between the European Union and India could be a successful conclusion to the process of commercial interaction which has been deepening in recent times .
I hope that , as well as sharing values , the EU and India will continue trying to understand each other better and benefiting from this deeper understanding , as well as from any profits that may result from this contact .
This motion for a resolution of the European Parliament concerns a free trade agreement ( FTA ) between the European Union and India .
Trade relations between the EU and India are significant , since the EU is India 's principal trade partner and its biggest foreign investor .
For its part , the EU is the principal recipient of Indian foreign investment and , as such , it must continue to prioritise a multilateral trade system which favours developing countries .
Indeed , India is the largest beneficiary of the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) .
If we take into account the importance of strategic relations between the EU and India , as well as the safeguarding of matters relating to agriculture , respect for human rights and the issue of child labour in particular , environmental preservation and compliance with the International Labour Organisation 's recommendations on social and copyright issues , all the conditions for voting in favour of this motion for a resolution are in place .
This free trade agreement ( FTA ) is the widest-ranging negotiated by the EU to date .
Beyond its specific content , it also provokes a wider discussion on free trade , its role , its objectives and its consequences .
Free trade is one of the pillars of neoliberalism which emerged in the 1970s under the so-called Washington Consensus , as one of the key elements of the capitalist system 's response to the structural crisis that was making itself known at that time , just like today .
It represented a way for world powers with imperialist ambitions to expand their control of the markets and force new and more intensive ways of exploiting workers , playing work forces from different countries and regions off against each other .
This entailed a levelling-down of working and living conditions .
Its aim was to achieve new conditions for continuing the process of capitalist accumulation .
That remains the case .
The consequences are plain to see : on top of the pressure on workers and their rights , the competition between productive systems with very different levels of development tends to accentuate differences , strengthening the strong and weakening the weak .
It will be no different with this agreement .
The liberalisation and deregulation of world trade has greatly weakened the productive sectors of the weakest EU economies , such as Portugal , which have been run according to the interests of big business in the European powers .
Faced with the disastrous consequences of this path , instead of retracing its steps , the EU continues to show signs of wanting to rush blindly ahead .
It is in this context that we must analyse this agreement , which is the widest-ranging negotiated by the European Union to date .
What is needed are urgent and profound changes to current trade policy in order to take into account the specificities of each EU Member State , with international trade aiming for complementarity rather than competition .
This is necessary for the establishment of fair and equitable economic relationships that are mutually beneficial , are at the service of the development of peoples and countries , and are not solely beneficial for a small number of financial institutions and companies .
The multifaceted crisis that we are facing requires a new economic , social , energy and environmental rationale , as well as the defence of each country 's right to produce sustainably : free trade , one of the pillars of neoliberalism , clearly makes this unviable .
As you frequently remind us , common foreign policy must fulfil the global objectives of the European Union which are defined , in particular , in Article 3 of the Treaty , and where the elimination of poverty features prominently .
Now , for all those years that you have been signing free trade agreements with every country in the world , and especially those that systematically practise social , monetary or environmental dumping , all you have done is to create poverty for all those victims of relocations and closures of companies directly linked to unfair competition .
This agreement with India means that you are going even further .
Out with the Polish plumber , in with the Indian computer programmer or accountant !
You are , in fact , intending to open the European market to numerous services of the General Agreement on Trade in Services Mode 4 , a barbaric term used to refer to the world version of the Bolkestein Directive .
As the French winner of the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences , Maurice Allais , pointed out , free trade is only mutually beneficial if it is between countries with comparable levels of development , and further to that , I would add , if it is in targeted areas with the strategic sectors of each country remaining protected .
Otherwise , it is never a win-win game .
And there has been , for a long time now , one single loser : Europe .
I endorsed the document because the EU is India 's largest source of Foreign Direct Investment .
Both parties expect to secure significant benefits from the elimination of tariffs and the liberalisation of trade in services and company formation , and reaffirm their commitment to tariff reductions and further liberalisation of company formation and trade in services .
Market access is being hampered by non-tariff barriers to trade , such as health and safety requirements or technical barriers , quantitative restrictions , conformity procedures , trade defence mechanisms , customs procedures , internal taxation , and a failure to adopt international norms and standards .
The EU and India must pledge to speed up FTA talks and to make substantive and efficient progress towards the early conclusion of an ambitious and balanced , broad-based trade and investment agreement .
Both parties must make every effort to conclude a comprehensive , ambitious and balanced FTA by the end of 2011 .
The agreement should respect sensitivities linked to agricultural trade , but this should not prevent market opening in areas of complementarity .
The Commission must take due account of any negative impact on European agriculture , particularly in the areas of the opening up of markets , GMOs , milk , beef , intellectual property protection and origin labelling .
The Commission should also negotiate effective and transparent procurement systems and India should apply transparent and fair procedures when awarding public contracts and grant European businesses access to public procurement systems .
Good progress is being made in the negotiations on a free trade agreement between the EU and India .
By adopting the motion for a resolution , the European Parliament has today made its priorities clear .
With regard to agriculture , Parliament has focused on the sensitive areas , highlighted the sanitary and phytosanitary standards ( SPS ) and expressed its support for effective safeguard clauses .
However , there is still a great deal to be done in the area of intellectual property .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution .
Any free trade agreement the EU signs with India must in no way limit India 's ability to produce generic medicines .
If it did , it would not only damage India but harm the poor in Africa and elsewhere who depend on cheap medicine from India .
One merit of this text is that it takes account of the potentially negative effects of GMOs .
However , it promotes the liberalisation of the trade in services between the European Union and India .
Furthermore , it leaves States just one right , that of ' regulating ' public services , an action that a liberalisation of this nature nonetheless condemns .
It also calls for the liberalisation of legal and accounting services , the opening up of the market in banks and insurance , and the relaxation of investment rules .
The interests of the oligarchy are served in Europe as they are in India .
I am voting against this report .
The EU is India 's largest trade partner , with trade in goods and services worth approximately EUR 84 billion in 2009-2010 .
The EU accounts for 20.15 % of India 's total exports and 13.32 % of India 's total imports .
Conversely , India accounts for 2.6 % of the EU 's total exports and 2.2 % of the EU 's total imports .
In view of this , we cannot fail to take into consideration the fact that the objectives of the common commercial policy must be fully coordinated with the overall objectives of the European Union .
According to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the common commercial policy must be conducted ' in the context of the principles and objectives of the Union 's external action ' and must contribute ' inter alia , to sustainable development , the eradication of poverty and the protection of human rights ' .
As such , it is very important that the following not be forgotten in these negotiations : the use of child labour , and the failure to comply with international social and environmental standards , which constitutes a form of dumping , detrimental to European companies and workers .
It is therefore essential that the Commission clarify these points before concluding a trade agreement .
in writing . - Given the size of India 's market ( more than 1 billion inhabitants ) and its impressive growth rates ( averaging over 7 % a year since 2000 ) , coupled with high levels of protection , India is one of the EU 's obvious partners for concluding one of the new generation of EU FTAs launched as part of the Global Europe strategy in 2006 .
The EU-India Summit on 10 December in Brussels instructed both sides to speed up the negotiating process to pave the way for the conclusion of negotiations in 2011 .
It is necessary to take into account the dumping aspect of the relationship with India ; if there were no point related to this , I would vote ' against ' .
I think this resolution on the EU-India Free Trade Agreement should be rejected .
There is no denunciation of any kind in it of the problems that this agreement will cause to the textile industry in Europe , and northern Italy in particular ; other industries are mentioned and are given their own clauses , but the textile industry is completely ignored .
To show the validity of the agreement , the resolution highlights the fact that the Indian and European economies are complementary : the reality is somewhat different , because there are several industries , including precisely the textile industry , in which there is no complementarity at all but rather competition , and often unfair competition , carried out by our Asian counterparts .
For these reasons , I have decided to vote against the resolution .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the state of play in the EU-India Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) negotiations .
The negotiations between the EU and India for the conclusion of an FTA have developed significantly .
India is achieving a new status in the international geopolitical context , going from being a beneficiary of development aid to a donor .
This agreement is of particular importance ; in fact , if the cooperation between the EU and India currently being negotiated is based on a system of shared universal values , it may serve as a model for cooperation with other countries .
I would like to highlight the emphasis in these negotiations on the protection of the small and medium-sized enterprise ( SME ) sector in India , with the suggestions that all development cooperation programmes between the EU and India should be aimed at strengthening SMEs through measures to help finance market-driven local projects .
In India , as in the EU countries , SMEs drive economic growth and thus , job creation .
Given the significant profits that both parties will be able to make , I hope that the negotiations between the EU and India will be able to continue , with a view to quickly establishing a free trade agreement ( FTA ) which is ambitious , balanced and comprehensive .
in writing . - We voted in favour .
The EP is very much divided on the free trade agreement with India .
The first compromise ( by EPP , ECR and ALDE ) was adopted with 390 in favour , 276 against , and 10 abstentions .
The hope of sending a strong message to the negotiators to conclude the FTA with India failed .
The EPP , ECR and ALDE resolution recommending rushing into a complete opening of the Indian market at all levels , without binding language on human and labour rights , CSR , environmental dumping , etc. did not get the overwhelming majority it needed if it wanted to be a recommendation for the negotiators .
The ' counter-resolution ' by the Greens / S & D and GUE , which did not come to a vote , had solid support and will certainly be read by the negotiators .
The very worst in the EPP , ECR and ALDE compromise was avoided .
We are strongly against the EU-India Free Trade Agreement because , even though that country is making progress in worker protection and health and in the fight against counterfeiting , we have to bear in mind that it is still an unfair competitor towards our businesses .
For example , when India received a complaint from the World Trade Organisation about the 500 % tariffs that it was applying to European wines , it got round it unfairly by having the individual Indian states impose the same tariffs .
We must also bear in mind the negative economic impact that further liberalisation of trade with India would have , since the EU exports 1.9 % of its services to India , whereas India exports 11.6 % of its services to us .
That clearly means it would help India 10 times more than it would Europe .
I voted , together with my colleagues from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , against the resolution that deals with the negotiations for a free trade agreement between the European Union and India because it does not take sufficient account of the social standards with which all trade agreements must comply .
According to ' Save the Children ' , the Indian non-governmental organisation , an estimated 60 million children still work today in fields , restaurants or factories in India .
I deplore the fact that the conservative majority in the European Parliament has refused to face up to this state of affairs by rejecting an amendment which highlighted the European Parliament 's concerns over the use of children for work , children who are frequently exploited in dangerous and unhealthy conditions .
We also asked the Commission to tackle this problem at the time of the negotiations on the free trade agreement and we invited the Indian Government to do its utmost to eradicate the deep causes of this phenomenon and to put an end to it .
By rejecting this position , the majority of the right in the European Parliament has placed European and Indian commercial interests above the protection of children 's rights , and I am unable to endorse this unacceptable position .
I voted against the European Parliament resolution on the negotiations for the free trade agreement between the EU and India .
This report is entirely consistent with policies of increased liberalisation , especially in the public service sector , and with standards which have deleterious effects not only on the supply of medicinal products , but also on the development of research .
This is another instance of the ultra-liberalism that the EU is seeking to impose on all its partners .
This is the broadest agreement ever concluded by the EU in this area , and it seeks more to protect the interests of big multinational corporations than to engage in a balanced partnership between all parties and to contribute to India 's economic and social development .
This agreement is certainly not a ' win-win ' initiative as this resolution would have us believe .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution , as it is essential to strike a balance between multilateral , bilateral and plurilateral agreements .
In particular , Japan is the third largest economy in the world in terms of gross domestic product ( GDP ) .
As such , it is essential to raise questions of investment and trade in services in all trade discussions with Japan , ensuring that market opening does not compromise either European or Japanese rules on the protection of public services and cultural diversity .
I recognise that the multilateral trading system , embodied by the World Trade Organisation , remains by far the most effective framework for achieving open and fair trade worldwide .
I would reiterate my firm belief that the European Union and Japan should contribute towards a successful conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda negotiations , and I am concerned that bilateral negotiations may disturb this objective .
Lastly , I would insist that effective safeguard measures be available to prevent any surge in imports resulting from the possible liberalisation of trade between the EU and Japan that may cause , or threaten to cause , serious injury to EU industry .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on EU-Japan Trade relations .
The EU and Japan are significant partners and investors in each other 's economies with a combined volume of Foreign Direct Investment worth EUR 200 billion in 2009 .
Japan is the EU 's sixth largest trading partner , while the EU is Japan 's third biggest trading partner .
I agree with the provision that the time has come to conclude an EU-Japan Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) , but before beginning negotiations , Japan must make significant commitments on removing non-tariff barriers , which limit market access opportunities for European businesses , in other words , public procurement obstacles , insufficient recognition of international standards with respect to medical devices , and preferential treatment for national champions in financial services .
Bilateral trade volumes between the EU and Japan lag behind the bulk of the EU 's trade exchanges with its other main trading partners because of the negative effects of Japanese non-tariff barriers ( NTBs ) .
I supported the resolution 's provision that the EU-Japan FTA has the potential to lead to a win-win situation , beneficial for both economies .
In anticipation of the EU-Japan Summit at the end of the month , Parliament has adopted this resolution stating its views on trade relations between the two partners .
Unlike the European right , which spoke out very strongly in favour of opening negotiations on the conclusion of a free trade agreement , I defended a more cautious approach .
Japan is a trade power that needs to be approached with caution when it comes to trade liberalisation .
That is why my group opposed the present text presented by the European right and stressed the need to launch specific impact studies assessing the consequences of stronger trade relations for all the sectors concerned ( in particular , the automotive sector ) and for employment in Europe , before we open any negotiations .
At the same time , we emphasised the problem of non-tariff barriers , which prevent European businesses from accessing Japanese public contracts .
Indeed , it is wrong that the European Union , the region in the world that is most open to foreign investment , cannot operate on the markets of its industrialised partners under fair conditions .
I voted in favour of this report because I entirely agree that following the natural catastrophe that recently struck Japan , and which was the greatest in the country 's history , the EU can and must help this country 's economy to recover quickly .
The report calls on the Commission to set up a special system , according to which the EU , through various aspects of international trade , would , in future , be able to help countries that have suffered natural disasters .
Specifically in the case of Japan , the European Parliament resolution proposes exploiting the opportunities offered by international public procurement and services markets , particularly as it is observed that EU and Member State interest in these areas has increased .
There are still many obstacles to public procurement and trade services , due to legitimate national regulation , and the report proposes removing such obstacles by making efforts to understand the methods of mutual adjustment systems .
The report nevertheless draws attention to the fact that questions of investment and trade in services need to be raised in trade discussions with Japan in order to ensure that the further opening up of the market does not compromise either European or Japanese rules on the protection of public services , the environment and cultural diversity .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on EU-Japan trade relations .
In 2009 , the European Union and Japan accounted for approximately 20 % of the world economy and in 2010 , bilateral trade was worth EUR 120 billion .
In light of these figures , I feel there is an urgent need to start negotiations on the free trade agreements in order to encourage closer cooperation between these two trading partners and enable them to face common challenges together , such as the global economic crisis and the relentless political and economic rise of China .
The precondition for commencing negotiations and strengthening trade relations remains the obligation on Japan to remove non-tariff barriers and barriers preventing access to Japanese public procurement contracts .
During this preliminary phase , moreover , the Commission should concentrate on removing the barriers hindering European small and medium-sized enterprises .
During the vote on trade relations between the EU and Japan , I decided to vote for the resolution tabled by the political group which I belong to .
This resolution highlighted the need to remove the non-tariff barriers which the Japanese market is subject to and to deregulate access to the Japanese public procurement market before signing a free trade agreement with this country .
Trade relations between European countries and Japan go back several centuries and have been growing closer since the end of the Second World War .
Japan has been one of the most notable success stories of economic and social recovery in world history , today being a respected country , worthy of admiration .
The tragic events that have befallen the country call for our solidarity with our partners .
The tenacity and courage that its people have been demonstrating in the face of these difficulties should be inspiring for a Europe which often seems too self-absorbed and is not always sufficiently aware of what is going on beyond its borders .
I believe that both parties would have much to gain from a free trade agreement ( FTA ) that would strengthen their trade relations and remove barriers which have unjustifiably hindered relations .
I regret that such an objective still seems far from becoming reality and I hope Europe and Japan will persevere in their efforts to attain it .
This motion for a resolution of the European Parliament concerns a free trade agreement ( FTA ) between the European Union and Japan , the third largest economy in the world in terms of gross domestic product ( GDP ) .
Trade relations between the EU and Japan are not just important to their respective economies , they are fundamental : in 2009 , they represented more than a quarter of global GDP and more than 20 % of world trade .
Moreover , the EU is Japan 's third largest trading partner .
For these reasons , I am voting for this report .
However , I agree with the rapporteur that the EU needs to demand that Japan , inter alia , remove tariff barriers and obstacles to public tenders before negotiations can begin .
I also believe Parliament must send a positive signal in the wake of the tsunami which devastated part of the Japanese coast with enormous loss of life and property , not to mention the Fukushima nuclear plant .
The vision shaping this motion for a resolution is made very clear in its preamble .
It takes the view that the multilateral trade system put in place by the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) represents the most suitable framework for regulating and promoting open and fair trade and , at the same time , it is working towards the successful conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda .
It is a vision of so-called ' free ' trade as a class weapon in the service of big financial institutions and companies , promoting increased exploitation of workers and peoples .
It involves both social dumping , the destruction of productive strength , and environmental dumping , the degradation of the environment .
This trade policy and the agreements giving it concrete expression are increasingly lacking in democratic legitimacy .
They are almost always negotiated in secret , behind the public 's backs , seeking to cover up their economic , social and environmental impact , and avoiding clear , informed debate .
This approach , which is for the profit of big business , is damaging to the needs of the peoples and workers , as well as being disadvantageous for the industries of the EU countries with the weakest economies .
As such , our only option is to condemn and stridently oppose it .
The negotiations with Japan , aimed at strengthening trade relations , cannot be used as a class weapon in the service of big financial institutions and companies , promoting the increased exploitation of workers and peoples , the destruction of their productive strength , and the destruction of the environment .
The EU increasingly lacks democratic legitimacy as it is dragged rightwards ; as it negotiates trade agreements in secret , paying absolutely no mind to the sovereignty of the peoples of the Member States ; as it seeks to hide the enormous economic and social impacts that its policies will have , while failing to inform , clarify , discuss or take into account the opinion of the people .
This approach , which is for the profit of big business , is damaging to the needs of the peoples and workers , as well as being disadvantageous for the industries of the EU countries with the weakest economies .
It continues to mean a loss of rights , unemployment and poverty , with an impact on small and medium-sized farmers , fishermen and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , all of which end up as victims .
Blinded by profit , this approach limits democracy and sovereignty , and creates greater dependency in countries such as Portugal that need to create employment , and produce and create wealth in order to raise the standard of living ; that do not need more deindustrialisation , less agricultural production and less fishing .
I endorsed this document because , in 2009 , the EU and Japan represented together more than a quarter of world GDP and more than 20 % of world trade , and Japan and the EU are significant investors in each other 's economies .
The Council and Commission have noted that Japan 's capacity to remove regulatory barriers to trade is a precondition for launching negotiations on the EU-Japan Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) , thus fostering closer economic integration between the two strategic trading partners .
The multilateral trading system , embodied by the World Trade Organisation , remains by far the most effective framework for achieving open and fair trade worldwide .
I believe that the European Union and Japan should contribute towards the successful conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda negotiations .
The EU-Japan FTA would not only yield benefits in terms of an increase in the bilateral trade in goods and services , but also foster cooperation on the EU 's horizontal priorities , such as cooperation in the field of innovation , regulatory cooperation and the fight against market abuse , and cooperation on tackling broad environmental challenges , etc .
in writing . - If Japan demonstrates a real willingness to eliminate non-tariff barriers , I believe the EU should enter into negotiations with Japan with a view to signing a free trade agreement .
A few short weeks after the natural and nuclear catastrophe in Japan , the European right has had the cranky notion of threatening the Japanese Government .
Their aim is to force Japan to remove all obstacles to European companies ' access to its public contracts .
Not a word about the nuclear catastrophe .
Not a single proposal for cooperation to help it out of this situation .
Scarcely a single line of solidarity after Japan 's only nuclear catastrophe .
Shame on the European right !
In 2010 , the total amount of bilateral trade between the EU and Japan , the third largest economy in the world in terms of gross domestic product ( GDP ) , reached EUR 120 billion .
Japan is the EU 's sixth largest trading partner and the EU is Japan 's third largest trading partner .
There is , however , significant untapped trade potential .
As such , it is necessary to strengthen trade relations between the EU and Japan by focusing on the removal of non-tariff barriers to trade and investment , including numerous restrictive rules and regulatory measures for EU companies in accessing the Japanese market .
In this way , the EU-Japan Free Trade Agreement has great potential for benefiting both economies .
in writing . - Since the EU and Japan are close economic partners , they represent more than 20 % of world trade but bilateral trade volumes are not as large as they could be .
EU exports to Japan , as a ratio of Japan 's GDP , are less than 2 % , considerably below the ratio in the EU 's other main markets ( the US , China , Korea and India ) .
There is therefore a considerable unrealised economic potential that could be explored by reinforcing trade ties between the two blocs .
Negotiations should implement bilateral movement .
It is unacceptable to have unequal commodity turnover between the EU and Japan .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Today , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on EU-Japan trade relations .
This document highlights the fact that the European Union and Japan are very important to each other as trade partners .
The resolution takes into account the WTO system and the fact that in 2009 , for example , the EU and Japan represented together a quarter of world GDP , and that in 2010 , bilateral trade between the two regions was worth EUR 120 billion .
The resolution also emphasises that the EU is very much in favour of the conclusion of a free trade agreement with Japan , but that in order for this to happen , Japan must abolish non-tariff barriers and remove all obstacles to the development of cooperation .
It also emphasises - and this is something that I regard as a very important feature of EU-Japan cooperation - that attention should be paid to environmental protection during the trading process , and that measures to counteract climate change and uphold environmental and social standards should be promoted .
Furthermore , attention is drawn to the recent nuclear disaster , which is still not fully under control .
As a result , it is not yet possible to estimate fully the extent of the crisis that has hit Japan , and there is no justification for accelerating negotiations on a free trade agreement .
At present , Japan needs real aid .
The rules-based multilateral trade system put in place by the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) represents the most suitable framework for regulating and promoting open and fair trade , and the EU is in favour of incorporating developing countries into the international trade system .
At the same time , bilateral agreements such as the one being analysed at present are specific mechanisms that can help achieve the mentioned objectives .
I voted in favour of this resolution on trade relations between the EU and Japan as I am convinced that the EU-Japan Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) has the potential to benefit both economies .
Indeed , the existence of open and fair trade is a powerful tool for generating more growth and social welfare , building on the comparative advantages of each respective economy and potential synergies flowing from greater economic integration and new inputs to a knowledge-driven economy This means boosting the EU-Japan market , which , together , already represents more than a quarter of world gross domestic product ( GDP ) and more than 20 % of world trade .
in writing . - Our group did not sign or support this resolution , and we presented our own where we stated , among other things , the following : ' 1 .
Expresses its utmost sympathy for the courage and determination with which the Japanese people are confronting the catastrophes of 11 March and their terrible aftermath and calls on the Commission and Member States to help Japan with all means to rebuild its social and economic life ; 2 . Believes that the continuation and deepening of current trade relations between the EU and Japan can play an important role in this regard and calls on the Commission to concentrate all efforts on assuring this ; 3 .
Regards the multilateral trading system , embodied in the WTO , as by far the most effective framework for achieving fair and equitable trade rules on a global basis ' .
We support the text on EU-Japan trade relations because Japan ensures protection and respect for workers and the global economy , despite being a third country .
Reducing and simplifying the rules and making fair , open trade simpler can only improve its relations with Europe .
Reciprocal investment in the two economies is worth EUR 200 billion a year : the EU is Japan 's third largest trading partner and , in turn , Japan is the sixth largest trading partner for the EU .
The report also calls for an assessment of any negative impact that such decisions might entail , but we certainly think that the removal of barriers to trade and investment can only be positive .
We therefore voted in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of the oral question on trade relations between the EU and Japan , given that Japan is one of the main investors in the European Union .
Apart from that , Japan is the seventh destination for European exports .
Continuing our dialogue with Japan is an entirely positive move .
Ironing out our differences will make an important contribution to both economies .
In addition , we must focus on reducing tariffs and the regulatory measures which accompany them .
I wholeheartedly support the development of trade cooperation between the European Union and Japan , which should result in the conclusion of a bilateral free trade agreement .
The fact that in 2010 , the total amount of bilateral trade between the EU and Japan was EUR 120 billion demonstrates that both sides are extremely important to each other as partners .
Japan is the EU 's sixth biggest trade partner , and the EU is Japan 's third biggest .
Both sides are also significant investors in each other 's economy , with a combined volume of Foreign Direct Investment worth EUR 200 billion in 2009 .
It is also worth highlighting the fact that the rapid economic growth of developing countries ( BRIC ) , the economic slow-down resulting from the global financial crisis , and the pressing need to gain access to raw materials and renewable sources of energy , are absolutely key challenges which are common to both parties , making negotiations an even more urgent necessity .
In documents relating to the subject of the resolution , both the Council and the Commission have stated that a precondition for launching negotiations is that Japan should remove regulatory barriers to trade , in particular , non-tariff barriers , which place a significant restriction on access to the Japanese market for European entrepreneurs .
I believe that we should speed up the process at the highest decision-making levels , which would result in closer trade relations between these two strategic partners .
Japan 's willingness to open bilateral talks on a free trade area with the European Union provides us with an opportunity to build closer political relations and to increase economic benefits , both for the EU and for Japan .
In view of the fact that Japan is only the sixth largest of the European Union 's trade partners , Japan 's potential for cooperation with the EU in the field of trade and investment is still unexploited .
The main obstacle making it significantly more difficult for European businesses to gain access to the Japanese market is non-tariff barriers .
As a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I am sure that the aviation industry is one of the sectors where cooperation on trade and research and development would have mutual benefits for both the European and Japanese economies .
I believe that the aeronautics sector could become one of the models for cooperation between the EU and Japan .
I am voting for this proposal .
Given the scope of the threats and total EU forest area , common agricultural policy ( CAP ) financing through pillar 2 for forests should increase , subject to the existence of national forest programmes ( NFPs ) and operational management plans , which incorporate the EU biodiversity strategy and long timeframes for forestry projects in sustainable forest management ( SFM ) .
Eligibility should be extended to public actors and producer groups , shifting to area-based remuneration and including in situ and ex situ conservation measures .
Active SFM should be clearly mainstreamed and prioritised in research and practice , and should also take into account public ownership of 40 % of EU forests .
Species conservation and nursery practices should extend to associated microbial and fungal species .
In situ research into mycorhizal symbiosis should be actively encouraged .
Payments for ecosystem services ( PES ) should be formalised in view of the next financial perspectives , building on the success of forest and water projects .
Forest adaptation and resilience should be given special consideration in the creation of an EU-adaptation fund .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the Commission Green Paper on forest protection and information in the EU : preparing forests for climate change .
The European Parliament approved the provisions set out in this Green Paper , but the EU 's strategy on forests should be strengthened , the objective being to improve the management and conservation of forests .
This strategy should be directed towards both forest protection and the sustainable use of timber resources , as forests provide solutions to the problems associated with climate change .
It should be pointed out that , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , forest strategy should continue to be primarily a matter for the Member States , but the European Union should take action to support , coordinate and supplement forestry policy initiatives by the Member States , taking into account differing regional conditions .
The objective of this policy is to ensure the sustainable development of forests while helping to enhance quality of life for European citizens and to promote the development of rural areas .
Forests are the main repository of carbon and have a vital role to play in the fight against climate change .
Forests and wooded land cover 42 % of the European Union 's surface .
Forests make up biospheres which store carbon and are particularly important to environmental conservation and protection against natural disasters .
All these aspects are vital not only to the quality of life enjoyed by European citizens , but also to agriculture and rural development .
I would like to stress that sustainable forest management is of pivotal importance to the European Union 's achievement of its climate goals and to carbon dioxide capture from the atmosphere .
Furthermore , forest-based industries provide more than 2 million jobs , contributing to economic growth and employment .
I voted for this report as I think that the European Union must strengthen its strategy for improving the sustainable management and conservation of forests .
The forestry sector provides a livelihood for millions of people in the EU , among them , entrepreneurs , farmers and 16 million forest owners .
Currently , there are 2 million people employed by the forestry sector in the EU , mostly in small and medium-sized enterprises , and the sector earns € 300 billion per year .
It is estimated that there are 16 000 people employed by the forestry sector in Ireland alone .
The forestry industries contribute to economic growth , they create opportunities for growth and employment in rural areas , and they encourage rural development through local industries and tourism opportunities .
Forests are a valuable resource for the agricultural sector , the environment and biodiversity , especially in terms of the ecosystems they contain and in terms of soil fertility and protection against soil erosion .
There are significant development opportunities associated with the European forestry sector in terms of carbon capture and CO2 pools .
I welcome what the report says about recognising the importance of forestry in socio-economic and environmental terms and the request to the Commission to adopt a coherent approach to help the sector achieve its full potential .
I voted in favour of this report .
Forests and wooded land cover more than 42 % of the EU 's surface .
Forest-based industries , with a turnover of more than EUR 300 billion , provide more than 2 million , mostly rural , jobs , contributing to economic growth , jobs and prosperity through the provision of timber and opportunities for tourism .
EU forests face major threats due to climate change , new pests , increasing risk of fire ( particularly in the Mediterranean region ) , and human activity ( growing energy sector demand for woody biomass ) , which is causing deforestation .
I agree that the Commission and the Member States must intensify efforts to achieve the environment and quality-of-life goals of the Forest Action Plan , the implementation of which is currently lagging behind .
The EU forestry strategy and forest action plan also need to be updated to include the climate-change dimension and wider forest protection issues .
The challenge of successfully reconciling the forest policies of southern and northern Europe so as to have a consistent EU-wide approach is by no means easy .
By adopting this report , however , we have stressed the need for a stronger commitment to environmental protection in forest policy .
We have also highlighted the challenge that climate change presents to our forests .
While I am not sure that we need a legislative initiative prohibiting building on land cleared by fires , I am in favour of discussing robust , long-term solutions to help curb this terrible phenomenon of forest fires caused by arsonists wanting to clear land for building .
I voted on this report because it presents the European Parliament 's reaction to the Green Paper published by the Commission , intended to begin public consultation on forest protection and preparing forests for climate change throughout the European Union .
In the report , Parliament welcomes the Commission 's Green Paper and calls for the EU forestry strategy to be updated , while properly taking into account the application of the subsidiarity and proportionality principles and including the climate-change dimension and broader forest protection issues .
Parliament also reaffirms its view on the need for increased levels of funding for forest protection measures through the rural development pillar of the common agricultural policy , particularly given the new challenges entailed in climate change .
Among other possible sources of financing , the report also proposes considering the possibility of paying companies for ecosystem services , through which they contribute to biodiversity conservation and forest protection .
Among many other measures , such as strengthening coordination at EU level and information exchange between Member States , the Commission is also urged to consider submitting a legislative proposal prohibiting building on land cleared by fires proven to have resulted from arson .
The Forest Action Plan adopted in 2006 set four important objectives .
However , not enough attention has been given to them equally , as indicated by mid-term evaluations of its implementation .
The major shortcomings concern enhancing protection and biodiversity conservation and indicate that 66 % of forest habitats have an unfavourable status .
In practical terms , the conclusions show that , while attention has been focused on improving long-term competitiveness , the objectives of improving the environment , enhancing quality of life and promoting coordination and communication have not been implemented strongly enough .
Forests provide livelihoods for millions of workers , entrepreneurs and 16 million forest owners .
The forest-based industries in the EU provide more than 2 million jobs , mostly in SMEs , and have a EUR 300 billion turnover .
There are also more than 350 000 people employed in forest management .
From this perspective , it is important to pursue the objectives set out in the forestry strategies .
This fact , combined with climate change , provides sufficient grounds for mobilising all EU Member States and making equal , consistent efforts to manage the Union 's forests .
This action must be backed up with adaptations to the energy , industry , commercial , research and cohesion policies , including regional policy and the Solidarity Fund .
Europe 's large wooded areas create considerable business and employment within the EU .
Taking this into account , and not forgetting the importance of these green spaces for the environment , I consider it essential that measures be taken to combat the negative effects of climate change recorded at global level in recent years .
This is crucial in order to safeguard European forests , with all the benefits that will bring .
As such , I welcome the Commission 's initiative in the form of a Green Paper on forest protection .
In order to act effectively , it is necessary to have an understanding of the harm that our forests have suffered lately due to the new global climate situation , principally with regard to storms , increased fire-risk levels , pests and fungal diseases .
Forests and wooded land cover more than 42 % of the EU 's area .
Despite the fact that approximately 500 000 hectares of EU forest are lost every year as a result of forest fires and illegal logging , the long-term trend of increasing forest coverage in the EU appears stable .
Even though forestry policy is primarily a matter for the Member States , it is nevertheless up to the EU to coordinate and complement the Member States ' initiatives and forest programmes , giving them added value , and defining a common EU strategy and action plan .
Stepping up forest protection should form part of the EU 's and the Member States ' strategies , especially in the face of climate-related extreme phenomena such as fires and floods , landslides and desertification .
I therefore support the creation of new instruments and increased funding for measures designed to protect the EU 's forests , particularly in order to address the new challenges brought about by climate change .
Information on forest resources , the state of the forests and the impact of climate change is equally essential in order to ensure that any decisions made relating to the forests bring about the greatest possible socio-economic and environmental benefits .
The economic , social and environmental importance of forests at an international , European , regional and national level is generally well known and legitimised , to some extent , in international agreements and relevant cooperation and financing programmes .
Climate change has a huge impact on forests in every region of Europe , but with varying intensity .
Any reform made to the approach of European Union policies to forests must not simply be reduced to the challenges posed by climate change , but take into account all the aspects relating to forests ' contribution to sustainable development at regional , European and global level .
Another aspect concerns the instruments and schemes at EU level supporting the forestry sector , which are very lightweight compared with those applied in other business sectors and given the current and future contribution made by forests to achieving the sustainable development targets .
However , any reform made to the approach of European Union policies to forests must not simply be reduced to the challenges posed by climate change , but take into account all the aspects relating to forests ' contribution to the sustainable development of the environment , the rural economy , etc. at regional , European and global level .
The Arsenis report demonstrates the European Parliament 's concern for forestry policy .
Its content stresses the need to plan , for the future , sufficient and ambitious financial resources for the forest and the timber industry .
I therefore support the adoption of this text and , at the same time , renew my support for the adoption of a specific financial instrument to protect the Union 's forests .
More than 42 % of the territory of the Union is covered by forest .
The timber industry provides a total of 2 million jobs , mainly in SMEs , and creates revenue of EUR 300 billion .
Forest management employs 350 000 people .
The ratio of felling to increment is stable throughout the Union , and is in the region of 60 % , but this ratio is projected to increase to more than 100 % in some countries , with , as a result , a reduction in standing timber after 2010 .
I am convinced that the sustainable management of forests is essential if we are to maintain the capacity of the Union 's forests to fulfil their economic , ecological and social functions .
That is why I have called on the Commission to put forward proposals aimed at supplementing Regulation ( EU ) No 995 / 2010 on timber in order to ensure that timber and products derived from such timber placed on the European market all come from sustainably managed forests .
The Commission and the Member States must make the introduction of sustainable forest management mandatory within the European Union
I voted in favour of the report on ' preparing forests for climate change ' .
In view of forests ' potential for climate change mitigation and adaptation , as well as their economic , social and environmental value , there is a need to strengthen EU policy in the area of sustainable development and forest conservation , in particular , legislation on forest fire-risk prevention and management .
Forests and wooded land currently cover more than 42 % of the EU 's area .
Forests provide 2 million jobs , many in small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and a turnover of EUR 300 billion .
These figures reflect a fundamental need for effective European policy on forests , and on their use and sustainability , not only in environmental terms , but also as a key economic resource .
When discussing the protection of forests as an economic and environmental resource , I cannot forget , being Portuguese , that combating forest fires - something from which my country has greatly suffered - must be an absolute priority for any European policy in this area .
As far as national forest programmes ( NFPs ) are concerned , while I fully support their establishment , I would draw attention to their shortcomings .
NFPs must become a reality and actually reach the forests so that they can be truly as effective as we intend for them to be .
This report deals with the Commission Green Paper on forest protection and information in the EU : preparing forests for climate change .
Forests and wooded land currently cover more than 42 % of the EU 's area and constitute an important source of revenue , generating more than EUR 300 billion a year and providing more than 2 million jobs .
On top of this , forests are essential for all of us and are part of our identity .
In recent times , we have witnessed disasters and storms threatening forests .
Without forests , the consequences of climate change would be even more serious .
However , despite their importance , they have not been granted the financial investment that they merit .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which draws attention to the neglect the sector has suffered and calls for recognition and appreciation of the diversity of species existing in the EU , as well as of the need to implement a modern and active forestry policy that is able to take advantage of the area of biomass and of carbon credits , as well as of traditional activities .
Forests and wooded land currently cover more than 42 % of the EU 's area , providing a means of subsistence for millions of workers .
The conservation of forest heritage represents an important contribution to the welfare of populations , as well as contributing to job creation in rural areas .
It is inseparable from preventing forest fires : disasters which decimate extensive areas of forest annually in southern Europe , particularly in Portugal .
It is crucial to follow up on the recommendations on natural disaster prevention recently adopted here .
The report takes a wide-ranging approach to the forestry issue , focusing on certain aspects which we believe to be important .
However , it is essential to put theory into practice , especially when it comes to mobilising enough financial resources through Union support programmes and measures to enable the monitoring of forests ' ecological and phytosanitary state and , wherever necessary , their reclassification , including reforestation .
It is also essential to provide Natura 2000 with the financial means for its management and the effective pursuit of its objectives , bearing in mind that many forest areas are covered by it .
It is also essential to recognise the diversity of forest ecosystems in Europe and the multifunctionality of many of them , such as , for example , the Mediterranean 's montado agro-forestry pastures .
This report takes a wide-ranging approach to the forestry issue , focusing on certain aspects which we believe to be important .
However , it is essential to put theory into practice , especially when it comes to mobilising enough financial resources through Union support programmes and measures to enable the monitoring of forests ' ecological and phytosanitary state and , wherever necessary , their reclassification , including reforestation .
It is also essential to provide Natura 2000 with the financial means for its management and the effective pursuit of its objectives .
Forests and wooded land currently cover more than 42 % of the EU 's area , providing a means of subsistence for millions of workers .
Their conservation represents an important contribution to the welfare of populations , as well as contributing to job creation in rural areas .
It is inseparable from preventing forest fires , disasters which decimate extensive areas of forest annually in southern Europe , particularly in Portugal .
It is crucial to follow up on the recently adopted recommendations on natural disaster prevention .
It is also essential to recognise the diversity of forest ecosystems in Europe and the multifunctionality of many of them , such as , for example , the Mediterranean 's montado agro-forestry pastures .
in writing . - Forests and other wooded land account for more than 42 % of EU territory , providing a livelihood to millions of workers and entrepreneurs and 16 million forest owners .
Forest sector industries provide more than 2 million jobs , and forestry employs 350 000 people .
Among the common policies with an impact on forest protection are environmental policy , energy , industry and trade policies , as well as policy coherence , including regional policy and the Solidarity Fund .
Given the scale of the threats and the total area of forests in the EU , the financing should increase , eligibility to receive assistance should be extended to public bodies and producer groups , and contributions should be paid on an area basis and should cover protective measures .
Last week in Ireland , forest fires - on a scale not seen for a long time - caused severe destruction on lands in Donegal , Sligo and other regions of the country .
It is for local authorities , with support from the national government , to take responsibility for such events .
This is a question of subsidiarity .
In relation to the fires which occurred in Ireland recently , the Irish Government must make a full estimate of the damage done with a view to assisting those affected .
An emergency plan , like the one already in place for road accidents and flooding , must be put in place for forest fires with a view to ensuring a better response to such situations in future .
In conclusion , more funding must be given to Donegal County Council to pay the exceptional costs that will be involved .
Forty-two per cent of the entire area of the European Union is covered in forests and woodland .
Forestry industries generate revenues in excess of EUR 300 billion , and provide work for approximately two million people .
These are the figures that we must bear in mind in order to understand the importance of a European strategy for sustainable forestry management and in order to protect this significant European heritage more effectively .
We must remember the important role that forests play in terms of socio-economic services as well as their crucial role in the fight against climate change .
It is therefore urgent that we improve our ability to prevent forest fires , as these continue to destroy more than 400 000 hectares of forest every year .
In order to do this , it is important to improve the collection of information about forests , increase research , and especially to encourage Member States to exchange knowledge and experience , starting from a cross-border perspective .
At this point , I would like to underline the importance of the work carried out by the European Forest Fire Information System ( EFFIS ) and , in particular , the importance of the Global Monitoring for Environment and Security ( GMES ) programme which allows the necessary charting and surveillance of forests .
The European Parliament has sent out a strong political message to stress the importance of managing forests sustainably .
There is an urgent need to introduce the recommendations relating to the prevention of disasters .
Indeed , forest fires are one of the greatest threats to European forests and their ecosystems .
The protection of the forest against climate also helps maintain the forest industry and its competitiveness .
With revenue of more than EUR 300 billion , the timber industry in Europe provides more than 2 million jobs and is an important pool for growth .
Finally , it is vital for debates on the future of the common agricultural policy after 2013 to take account of the role played by forests .
Rural producers and public bodies must qualify for forestry measures under the second pillar of the CAP : the EU must support forest planting within the framework of national programmes for rural development .
The specification of a European forest protection strategy is part of the EU 's overall commitment to the fight against climate change .
Particularly positive points in the report that has been approved are the proposal for a specific regulation on the prohibiting of building on land cleared by fires proven to have resulted from arson , and the request for suitable funding for forestry strategies , which is currently at a very low level .
Finally , the request for appropriate sustainability criteria for biomass produced for the use of energy is also important .
We therefore urge the European Commission to continue along this route , by presenting a White Paper on forest protection to deal with these issues .
I endorsed this document because EU forests and other wooded land account for more than 42 % of the EU 's surface .
Forests provide livelihoods for millions of workers , entrepreneurs and 16 million forest owners .
The forest-based industries ( FBIs ) provide more than 2 million jobs , mostly in SMEs .
350 000 people are employed in forest management .
The EU ratio of felling to increment is stable at around 60 % .
This ratio is projected to increase in several countries to over 100 % , causing a decline in growing stock after 2020 .
European forests and forestry are governed by a variety of regional and national models , grouped according to their productive or protective orientation .
Forests provide both resources and ecosystem functions .
There are proposals to draft obligatory programmes .
Assistance must also be allocated in a targeted manner , i.e. linked to climate change .
The proposals include increasing competitiveness in the long-term , improving and preserving the environment , improving quality of life , and promoting coordination and communications .
We must make every possible effort to ensure that we safeguard and use this resource sustainably so that our future generations can also exploit it , and we should also contribute to reducing environmental pollution .
The forests and the forestry industry are already making a significant contribution to the production of local raw materials .
The forests are also a recreational area for many of the citizens of Europe and play an important role in preventing climate change .
Hardly any other area has such closely interlinked environmental , economic and social functions .
However , there are some enormous challenges facing our forests .
One of the most important of these is climate change .
It is the job of the Member States , with the support of the European Commission , to protect and develop our forests for future generations so that they can continue making a contribution in future to our natural habitats , our society and our economy .
This includes ensuring that the forests play a permanent and growing role in combating climate change and safeguarding the economic basis of the forestry and timber industries , so that we have an adequate future supply of wood .
in writing . - Today , it was an easy task to vote for the report on forest protection and information in the EU : preparing forests for climate change .
The EU forests are now facing more pressure than ever before , not necessarily because of climate change , but rather because of some of the decisions made in the EU to combat it .
The fact that we now have requested within this report legally binding sustainability criteria on energy-creating biomass is an important initiative .
The EU biofuel legislation , along with legislation for renewables , has driven our forest use in an unsustainable direction .
If we consider forests solely as a source of renewable energy , we totally have missed the point of combining sustainable industry and environment protection .
Forests are an important source of livelihood and well-being within our borders .
Therefore , this valuable natural source should be used for production rather than short-sighted energy .
One should also remember that the wood products themselves tie carbon during their whole life cycle .
Therefore , we should avoid any corner-cutting in trying to reach our renewable goals .
The European forestry industry is more sustainable than almost any other sector of the economy .
For generations , the owners of European forests have complied with the strictest legislation on forests and nature conservation .
However , the report submitted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety relating to the Green Paper on forest protection and information introduces a rising tide of regulation , without acknowledging the importance of the forests as a job creator and an economic engine .
The report calls for excessive sustainability criteria to be applied to forest management within the EU , without taking into consideration regional factors and the powers of the individual countries .
The main points which exceed the authority of national forestry policy and weaken the forests in economic terms are the provisions concerning timber supplies within Europe .
Also , the concept of ' sustainability ' has still not been defined .
Another point which I am opposed to is the implication that woody biomass is not sustainable .
I believe that we should highlight the variety of protective and useful functions provided by the forests and not take a one-sided approach .
The EU should make a greater effort to ensure that sustainable forest management is put into practice in Europe and that we act as a model for other countries .
Due to the significant contribution forests make in tackling the climate crisis , sustainable forestry management is of major importance to ensuring that the EU achieves its climate objectives .
The EU must enhance its strategy for combating the factors causing deterioration of the forests , such as uncontrolled deforestation , fires and air pollution .
At the same time , biodiversity conservation , protection against natural disasters and CO2 capture from the atmosphere are crucial to improving our citizens ' quality of life and to preserving the environment .
I therefore think that protection of the forests in the EU must be aimed at providing a guarantee that forests will fulfil their productive , socio-economic and ecological functions in the future , too .
in writing . - I voted for this important report .
EU forests and other wooded land cover more than 42 % of the EU 's surface area .
Forests provide livelihoods for millions of workers , entrepreneurs and 16 million forest owners .
The forest-based industries ( FBIs ) provide more than 2 million jobs , mostly in SMEs , and have a EUR 300 billion turnover .
350 000 people are employed in forest management .
In addition , 40 % of EU forests are state-owned .
The EU ratio of felling to increment is stable at around 60 % .
This ratio is projected to increase in several countries to over 100 % , causing a decline in growing stock after 2020 .
Measures to protect forests are vital .
European forests can be grouped in five bioclimatic zones : the Boreal , Temperate Oceanic , Temperate Continental , Mediterranean and Mountain zones ( 5 ) , compatible with the EEA 's forest typology , developed to guide policy decisions ( 6 ) .
I voted in favour of the report on the Commission 's Green Paper entitled ' On forest protection and information in the EU : preparing forests for climate change ' .
Forests should be thought of as fundamental to combating climate change .
Crucially , the European Union must step up its strategy to combat those phenomena which harm the forest , such as forest fires and atmospheric pollution .
The capacity of the forest to recover from these threats and resume its normal development in the face of the impact of climate change depends on biodiversity , not just of trees , but also of all the other organisms that live in the forest , particularly wild animals .
Consequently , those wild species that naturally colonise these special habitats that the forest provides merit particular attention from forest owners as they contribute to preserving biodiversity .
The preservation of the forest is crucial to the interests of the whole of humankind .
It is indeed a pity that it once more serves as a pretext for promoting the carbon market .
European green capitalism is at a dead end .
Capitalism and ecology are mutually incompatible .
Forests and wooded land currently cover more than 42 % of the EU 's surface and are an industry which provides approximately 2 million jobs , with an annual turnover of EUR 300 billion .
These numbers reflect a need for European policy on forests to make them sustainable , both in environmental and economic terms .
Only in this way is it possible to protect them from the dangers they face , namely fires , which are the principle reason for their destruction .
This is especially the case in southern European countries and , in particular , my country , Portugal , which loses thousands of hectares of forests every year to fires .
Climate change and forests are inextricably bound up with each other .
In the fight against climate change , it is crucial to protect the forest .
Better use can be made of the forest in this fight , not only through preventing felling , but also through afforestation and reforestation programmes .
Climate change means that every type of forest and the forestry sector as a whole are exposed to specific and unforeseeable threats such as storms , drought and forest fires .
It is therefore vital that the European Union steps up its strategy for combating these phenomena .
Sustainable forest management must aim to reconcile aspects relating to production and those relating to forest protection .
We must manage forests sustainably if we are to maintain their capacity to fulfil their economic , ecological and social functions .
Crucially , we must pay greater attention to the maintenance , balance and enhancement of the services rendered by the forest .
The preservation of biodiversity must be a priority for our political action .
in writing . - It is known that the report stresses the fact that forests should be seen as a major contributor to climate change mitigation and adaptation , rendering necessary the reinforcement of the EU strategy for combating the factors causing their deterioration , e.g. pests , forest fires , etc .
Moreover , the report focused on establishing a general context concerning forest protection , namely subsidiarity , diversity of threats according to different forest types , the central role of Sustainable Forest Management and the importance of forests for competitiveness and employment .
I voted ' in favour ' .
Dying forests throughout Europe represent both an environmental problem , in terms of natural habitats and climate change , and an economic problem .
The 5 million people who work in the forests and the 16 million forest owners produce an annual turnover of EUR 300 billion .
Current environmental conditions are responsible for bringing about changes in European forests .
We have to expect that in the long term beech trees will disappear completely in the Mediterranean region and that coniferous forests will decrease in area throughout continental Europe .
Other factors include new forms of pest attacks whose impact cannot yet be assessed and a significant increase in the risk of forest fires .
ICP Forests and the EU operate one of the world 's largest biomonitoring networks with the aim of quantifying these changes and helping to understand the cause and effect relationships .
I have abstained from voting because in my opinion , the measures proposed in the report relating to the extent to which the individual Member States will be held responsible and will be involved do not go far enough .
I voted against a part of paragraph 36 because the provision it contains is , to say the least , unrealistic .
I do not think that we should ban construction on forest land which has been affected by fire because it is actually impossible for this land to be used for other purposes .
I do not think that we should present cases of abuse as the general rule and harm the property rights of the forests ' owners who have already been affected by a forest fire .
However , I find acceptable the idea expressed in paragraph 37 , which proposes imposing a ban where a fire is proven to have been started deliberately .
However , in this situation , I think that we may be faced with the adverse consequences which would result from this : the arsonist is not necessarily the property owner and I do not understand why the latter ought to be punished .
The Commission Green Paper report entitled ' Forest protection and information in the EU : preparing forests for climate change ' presents European Parliament 's concerns on the matter .
Forests and wooded land currently cover more than 42 % of the EU 's surface and there are more than 16 million forest owners .
Forests provide 2 million jobs , many in small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and represent an annual turnover of EUR 300 billion .
On top of this , they have an essential role in combating climate change due to their capacity to absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen .
These figures reveal the importance of forests for all EU Member States , but particularly for Portugal , which has forests with very specific characteristics and plays an important role in regional planning and combating forest fires .
I voted in favour of this report since it advocates measures that I think contribute to combating forest destruction , especially fires , pests , forest fragmentation , changes in species composition and an increased demand for woody biomass .
in writing . - I welcome the Commission 's Green Paper on forest protection and information in the EU .
Since forests are the main absorber of carbon , sustainable forest management is key to achieving the EU 's climate change goals .
We need to bring protection and production together in the management of our forests in order to ensure the viability of their environmental , social and economic functions .
The EU has a role to play in promoting best management practice that suits the needs of local actors and communities , and in incentivising forestation efforts compatible with local conditions and native species .
I voted in favour of this report since I consider it absolutely essential to strengthen European policies on the conservation and sustainable management of forests , whose incalculable economic , social and environmental value it is important to preserve .
I have voted against paragraph 36 ( split 2 ) and against paragraph 37 , because issues of environmental planning come under regional or national authority , which means that decisions in these areas must be made by regional or national parliaments .
In my opinion , any intervention on an EU level would be an intervention in subsidiarity and would therefore go too far .
It goes without saying that forest protection is a key environmental issue .
Forests , when they are well maintained , provide the main carbon sink and play a vital role in combating climate change .
If they are not , and are subjected to intensive deforestation , they would produce 25 % of all CO2 emissions , a greenhouse gas caused by human activity .
In other words , the European Union , including Sweden and Finland , which together account for 33 % of Europe 's forest , and also the Mediterranean countries , have every interest in stepping up their strategy to combat threats to the forest , such as atmospheric pollution and forest fires .
In this respect , I am delighted that , as part of the vote on the Green Paper entitled ' Preparing forests for climate change ' , paragraph 38 of the Arsenis report has been adopted , which ' urgently calls on the Commission to present a legislative proposal on forest fire prevention ' and plans , in particular , ' a 30-year ban on building on land where there has been a forest fire ' .
This is a good way of countering the widespread practice of using forest fires to promote the interests of property developers .
in writing . - This is a good report with good proposals , which include recognising the generally positive trend in terms of carbon storage in forests in Europe , but also the fact that carbon storage still remains far below natural capacity , and that the forest sector could reverse to a source , due to pressures ; calling for Commission proposals to complement the Timber Regulation , in order to ensure that all timber or timber products placed on the European market are sourced from sustainably managed forests ; urging the Commission to study options for payment for ecosystem services ; and calling for a legislative proposal on forest fire prevention , including consideration of a 30-year ban on building on land where there has been a forest fire .
I am in favour of the report because forests , which cover more than 42 % of the EU 's surface area , provide a livelihood for many workers and businesses in the forestry sector .
A framework of Commission guidelines should be established ; binding sustainability criteria should be introduced , including mandatory national forestry programmes ; payment for ecosystem services should be formalised ; and forest protection policies should be strengthened by reintroducing the fire prevention regulation .
It is particularly worthwhile and striking that the amendment to prevent speculative building on land cleared illegally by fire was adopted .
There is already such a rule in Italy , prohibiting building on land destroyed by arson .
in writing . - Forests provide us with many essential eco-services , ranging from regulating the water cycle to preventing soil erosion and sequestering carbon .
The environmental and economic benefits of forests require that they be afforded urgent , continuing and long-term protection , and this is especially important in the context of climate change , in terms of both mitigation and adaptation .
This report covers a wide range of issues and is the result of much hard work and fruitful negotiation involving all the main political groups .
I sincerely hope the Commission and the Member States will act on its constructive suggestions .
I welcome the adoption of this report on the Green Paper on forests presented by the Commission .
Forests are part of our countryside and our heritage and are crucial to our well-being .
At a time when threats are becoming increasingly serious , it is vital for us to protect these exceptional natural resources better .
We are , indeed , all aware of the consequences of climate change on forests , yet our inertia in finding solutions to them is putting their preservation in serious danger .
It is our duty to preserve these fragile ecosystems , this inestimable biodiversity and this strategic sector of the economy .
I am therefore pleased at the strong political message that Parliament has sent in this , the International Year of Forests .
We cannot adopt a wait-and-see approach to the measures that have to be taken to adapt to climate change .
We also need to strengthen the European Forest Fire Tactical Reserve , given that in this area , prevention is just as important as reaction .
If we are to preserve our forests as we know and love them , we must be at the forefront of the fight to ensure sustainable management of forest areas and to protect them from the threats that hang over them .
I am voting for this proposal , given that the report has achieved a balanced approach between the most important issues for the organisation and the activities of the European External Action Service , and for the key areas of security and defence policy .
This balance has been achieved through military and civilian cooperation on the resolution of collaborations between the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) .
I believe that the proposed amendments , tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , and adopted in committee , contribute to a more inclusive definition , encompassing freedom of religion and an extension of the list of minorities in need of international protection .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution on the EP 's annual report on the CFSP .
It gives an overview of the strategic role that the EU should play outside its borders , in particular , as regards the contribution to the development of democracy and respect for human rights .
With this resolution , the European Parliament reaffirms its prerogatives : key player and holder of the function of management and budgetary control of European civilian and military missions .
We , Members of the European Parliament , once again stressed our main objective of a strong and decisive Parliament in foreign policy , particularly now having in mind the provisions of the Lisbon Treaty .
Also important is the EU multilateralism issue and the need to be always well represented in the different strategic contexts , taking advantage , in particular , of the new EEAS , the European diplomatic corps that has finally become a reality .
The reports on the CFSP of the EU and its role on the international stage , which was supported by the main coalition of the political representatives of capital in the European Parliament , namely the conservatives , social democrats and liberals , illustrate its acutely reactionary character and anti-grassroots role .
Moreover , we must not forget that the European Parliament passed a resolution putting it at the vanguard of and seeking to legalise the war being waged against Libya by the EU , the USA and NATO , in order to plunder the wealth-producing sources of that country and control developments in the area as a whole , in the midst of serious imperialist infighting .
The political staff of the bourgeois classes in the European Parliament are demanding the strengthening of the imperialist character of the EU , its further militarisation and the development of its military capabilities and those of the Euro Army , especially ' flexible ' battlegroups and rapid reaction forces , such as those being prepared with EUFOR Libya for land operations in Libya , in which Greece is heavily involved as leader of the Balkan battlegroup .
They are promoting the strategic alliance between the EU and NATO and laying plans for imperialist interventions and wars by the EU in all corners of the planet on the pretext of ' crisis management ' , ' humanitarian aid ' and ' the fight against terrorism ' , with priority being given to securing positions in the infighting between the imperialists raging in North Africa and the Middle East in general .
in writing . - I voted to oppose the measures in this report relating to the Mercosur Trade deal .
The Mercosur Trade deal has the potential to seriously undermine European agriculture and the work of European farmers in delivering public goods and high quality , safe food .
A quota of the size demanded by Mercosur would completely undermine Ireland 's beef production .
It is estimated that an EU / Mercosur deal could reduce Irish beef prices by 30 % which would inflict losses of up to EUR 500 million in Ireland alone .
The Irish agri-food sector accounts for 60 % of exports from Irish-owned companies , valued at EUR 8 billion per year , and provides up to 250 000 jobs .
This deal would result in major job losses at farm and industry level across rural areas in Ireland and the EU as a whole .
I voted in favour of this report .
The Treaty of Lisbon gave the EU great powers , with which the EU should further develop its foreign policy objectives and defend its interests worldwide with the overall aim of contributing to peace , security , solidarity , conflict prevention , the promotion of democracy , the protection of human rights , respect for international law , etc .
The EU must also act more strategically in order to bring its weight to bear internationally .
The EU 's ability to influence the international order depends not only on coherence between its policies , actors and institutions , but also on a strategic concept of EU foreign policy which must unite all Member States behind the same set of priorities and goals , so that they speak with one strong voice in the international arena .
While supporting the annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) , which is one of the European Union 's key policies , I wish to express my endorsement of the policy which the European Union is conducting at a global level .
Our adoption of this annual report reflects the strong position and role of the European Union in the field of international relations .
The Albertini report contains ideas that I agree with , but there is an underlying problem .
The basic assumption is that the EU should gradually take a predominant position in foreign and defence policy over the individual national governments .
That means that the Member States would have to give up further large portions of sovereignty over foreign policy to EU bodies , which would be charged with reaching a common position to be presented in the international community and in all multilateral forums .
I cannot agree with this prospect : the Member States would no longer be able to establish their own foreign policies on the basis of what they deem to be national priorities .
We agree that in certain contexts , the EU must strive to speak with a single voice in order to be stronger on the global stage and to represent the desires that are common to all its Member States , but that cannot come about at the cost of the Member States ' freedom to draw up their own foreign policies .
Moreover , the report calls on the EU to renew the momentum in Turkey 's EU accession process , a point on which I have never been in agreement at all .
Turkey must stay out of our organisation , because it is not and never will be Europe .
I voted against the report .
I voted in favour of this report because the Council 's annual report provides a consistent overview of the direction and actions of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) .
It is very important for the Council to continue to focus , above all , on regional conflicts and react to them swiftly .
However , the Council 's report does not contain any possible approaches to resolving those conflicts and issues .
The Council should seek to ensure that the report is more than just a catalogue of country-based events and developments .
Thus , this document should also address the issue of the implementation and safeguarding of EU foreign policy and instruments .
In addition , the Council should also include in the report evaluations of coordination and coherence between the CFSP and other external policies of the Union , as well as strategic and organisational recommendations for the future on the basis of the assessment of CFSP actions .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the annual report on the CFSP should serve as an instrument for enhanced interinstitutional dialogue in order to evaluate its effectiveness and outline the future direction of this policy .
I welcome the Council 's annual report and the efforts made to develop a European foreign policy .
I consider it of the utmost importance to adopt a position which is harmonious with the Member States ' foreign policies , since such cohesion will lead to peace , security , solidarity and conflict prevention at international level .
It will also lead to sustainable development and increase the EU 's capacity to influence the international order .
I therefore urge the continuation of the work already under way to form a united front which will improve relations between Europe and other world powers , promote a more effective response in situations of international crisis , and improve Europe 's standing on the world stage .
I did not vote in favour of paragraph 85 of the Albertini report which welcomes the resumption of the negotiations on an association agreement with Mercosur .
Such an agreement , which is intended to promote free trade , should be entered into with great caution so as not to destabilise agriculture in the Community still further .
Mercosur products are not required to meet the same environmental and social standards as their European counterparts - conditions under which there is a real risk of unfair competition .
We must ensure that we avoid such a situation .
I voted in favour of this report as the Council 's annual report provides a clear view of the policies and actions of the EU 's common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) and contributes to strengthening interinstitutional dialogue .
This year 's report is similar in structure to the 2009 common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) report .
A special section is dedicated to the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As before , there is a demand for further dialogue with the Council on the principal objectives of the CFSP .
I endorse the rapporteur 's emphasis on the need to move from a mere description of CFSP activities towards a dialogue with a strategic approach .
The rapporteur also urges the Council to consider the positions of Parliament when reaching decisions .
I believe further discussion of the strategic framework of the Union 's foreign policy is necessary , as well as a deeper knowledge of the scope of the CFSP and the mechanisms for its establishment , which should be made available to the various political players .
The high number of amendments tabled is representative of Members ' increasing interest in these matters .
This report is on the annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2009 , presented to the European Parliament in application of Part II , Section G , paragraph 43 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
It is a report based on the new institutional framework established by the Treaty of Lisbon and , in accordance with its restructuring , presents more transparently the EU 's CFSP .
It addresses the situation in various parts of the world where regions and countries are in crisis , like the Western Balkans , countries neighbouring Eastern Europe , Central Asia , Russia , Turkey , the Middle East , the Mediterranean region , Asia , Africa and Latin America .
Whilst I acknowledge that it could be improved , particularly by detailing events by country , describing the necessary means for achieving EU foreign policy objectives and by making a more qualitative assessment of this policy , which includes strategic and organisational recommendations for the future , I welcome the drafting of this report and hope that the EU continues to develop an effective multilateralism that is one of the hallmarks of the geostrategic concerns of the EU .
This is yet another report supporting the development of the European Union 's common foreign , security and defence policy .
The arguments are repeated here fastidiously .
As such , we would like to reiterate our opposition to it , with the arguments to back this up : we are talking about the defence , through various means including soldiers and diplomats , of the European powers ' economic and geostrategic interests , in collaboration with the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) .
We must remember the track record of these institutions and their tragic consequences : Iraq , Afghanistan , the Balkans and Libya , and other countries that are also on the list .
Development cooperation and aid policy , which , in the current international context , should constitute one of the principal pillars , if not the principal pillar , of a foreign and security policy , is relegated to an extremely secondary role .
There is also the typical and tedious hypocritical stance protecting the economic interests of European arms manufacturers , who have made millions by selling arms to dictators who have used them to massacre both their own people and those of neighbouring states .
These and other matters are still not being met with the response that they need : the necessary rectification of the policies backing them up .
The support given to Israel 's policies of aggression and occupation and to the policy of non-compliance with United Nations resolutions , as practised by Israel and other countries like Morocco , are other factors that we also denounce here .
This is yet another report which essentially reaffirms support for the development of the European Union 's common foreign , security and defence policies .
These are principally policies in defence of the economic and geostrategic interests of the European powers .
They are increasingly aligned with the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) , putting development cooperation and aid in second place .
The results of this are largely catastrophic , as is clear from the cases of Afghanistan , Palestine , Iraq , Libya and other countries .
We are also aware that there is a double standard protecting the economic interests of European arms manufacturers , which have made millions by selling arms to dictators who have subsequently used them to massacre their own people and those of neighbouring states .
Therefore , some of the principal questions arising from this debate are left without the required response : arms deals , the expansionist and warmongering policies of Israel and the systematic non-compliance with United Nations resolutions on the Western Sahara and Palestine .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - The report was adopted in the Committee on Foreign Affairs by an overwhelming majority .
It has achieved a balanced approach to the most pressing issues concerning the organisation and activities of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) and to key issues for the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) , such as promotion of the values of democracy , human rights and the rule of law , promotion of gender equality and energy security , the situation in Iran and in Afghanistan , the EU response to the democratic changes in the Southern Mediterranean region , and relations with major players such as Russia , China , Japan and India .
The report strikes a balance on civilian-military cooperation in crisis resolution and on EU-NATO interaction : on the one hand , it avoids relegating the EU exclusively to trade , development and humanitarian issues , the course pursued by the ECR Group , and , on the other , it rejects the GUE / NGL Group 's insistence on excluding any military component from the CFSP .
Mr Albertini 's proposal cannot have my vote because there are too many points on which we cannot agree .
One of these is the proposal for a uniform EU foreign policy .
The idea is impeccable but , in view of the North African crisis this year and the ongoing Libyan crisis , it is obviously not feasible .
There are two many fine distinctions made by different countries in the EU .
Another point on which we cannot agree is the call to increase our efforts for Turkey to join Europe .
That is why I will vote against the report .
In 2009 , the really crucial common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) decision was the appointment of the High Representative .
One has to admit that it was not the best decision .
It is quite clear that Lady Ashton is more gifted at issuing moralising press releases and playing Lady Bountiful than she is cut out for dealing with the diplomatic issues that you want her to tackle on behalf of the 27 Member States .
Thanks to the Baroness , the European Union was absent , out of synch or swimming against the tide for all key events .
However , as usually happens in times of crisis , a handful of States took the initiative - for better or for worse - got organised and took action .
The remainder either tagged along or complained when they were forced to give an opinion .
In reality , the Union 's foreign policy essentially involves distributing funding and engaging in trade , often in ways that are at variance with its professed political principles .
This is only logical : diplomacy is a matter of State sovereignty .
It is the product of each State 's history , resources and economic or geopolitical interests .
The Union 's interests are neither an amalgamation nor an extension of those of the Member States .
They are specific to the Union and often at odds with national interests .
It is wholly unreasonable that these interests should take precedence over national interests .
I endorsed this document because it is aimed at ensuring that national defence systems are consistent with EU defence systems , as well as coordinating strategies with the most important global actors , such as the United States , Russia , China , Turkey and the Arab countries .
It stresses and aims to promote a moratorium on executions .
It also indicates orientations and objectives in cooperation with other countries .
Effective multilateralism should be the overriding strategic concern of the Union and , in this context , the EU should take a leading role in international cooperation , support international institutions , facilitate international consensus and advance global action .
There is an urgent need to address global issues of common concern for EU citizens , such as fighting terrorism , organised crime , pandemics and climate change , cyber security , ensuring the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) and the eradication of poverty , ensuring energy security , the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , peaceful conflict resolution and disarmament , migration management and the promotion of human rights and civil liberties , and attention is drawn to the need for improved monitoring of EU funds in line with the European Court of Auditors Special Report No 15 / 2009 .
It takes the view that the EU should seize the opportunity of the adoption of NATO 's new Strategic Concept in order to substantially strengthen its partnership with NATO while , at the same time , developing the EU 's foreign , security and defence policies .
I believe that an organisation-to-organisation relationship must be adopted .
I voted in favour of adopting the annual report on the main aspects of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2009 .
It is a well-written and crucially important report , which discusses aspects of the common foreign and security policy in detail .
I am particularly glad to see that the report includes the amendment I tabled regarding Georgia .
My aim was to stress the significance of exerting constant and consistent political pressure on Russia to put into effect all of the provisions of the 2008 agreement , including , in particular , allowing the European Union Monitoring Mission ( EUMM ) to enter the occupied territories .
I hope that Mrs Ashton , the High Representative , will take our recommendations into account .
in writing . - I voted for this report and take the view that , in order to be consistent with the EU 's own values , EU foreign policy and external action must give priority to promoting democracy and the rule of law , good governance and fair societies , given that a rule-based democratic society is the basis for upholding human rights as well as for enhancing stability .
Reiterating the position that human rights need to be firmly mainstreamed into EU foreign policy , I believe that the new institutional structure of the EU , with particular reference to the EEAS and its dedicated department , offers an opportunity to enhance the EU 's coherence and effectiveness in this area ; urge the VP / HR to proactively pursue , through bilateral relations with third countries and active participation in international fora , the engagement of third countries in respecting human rights as well as to speak up against human rights abuses and not to refrain from taking adequate measures if they are violated ; considering the growing grave violations of freedom of belief , call upon the Commission to conduct a thorough evaluation and to mainstream freedom of belief into the EU human rights policy .
The Albertini report on the annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2009 represents an important crossroads for the future of the Union 's foreign policy .
It is really important that Parliament should unanimously call on the Council not to limit the scope of the CFSP annual report to a mere description of policy activities but , as the report rightly points out , to ' make it a policy- and solution-focused tool ' .
We must also stress that ' the report should provide more than a catalogue of country-based events and developments and should also address the question of the effectiveness of the EU foreign policy as well as of the means necessary to pursue the objectives of European external action ' .
The EU should continue to develop its foreign policy objectives and promote its values and interests at international level , with the general aim of contributing to peace , to security , to solidarity , to conflict prevention , to the promotion of democracy , to the protection of human rights , to gender equality , to respect for international law , to support for international institutions , to effective multilateralism , to mutual respect between nations , to sustainable development , to free and fair trade , and to the eradication of poverty .
These objectives will only materialise with an effective common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) shared by all the EU Member States .
As you know , I am a keen advocate of Turkey joining the EU .
I am also convinced that Europe would benefit at least as much as Turkey from its accession .
Turkey is fortunate in being located at the meeting of two worlds : it has one foot in the European West and one in Asia .
Jacques Chirac said that the European Union and Turkey have a ' shared destiny ' .
Turkey 's accession would prove that constructive , conciliatory , innovative and creative dialogue is possible between East and West .
After all , Europe is already home to between 15 and 20 million Muslims .
Turkey is a founding member of the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) , a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) and of the Western European Union ( WEU ) .
It has just been elected as a non-permanent member of the Security Council .
Finally , the fact that it is part of the G20 goes to show how significant the country is and the geostrategic role that it could play in the alliance of nations .
We need to rebuild trust between our governments and put flesh on the bones of the hopes expressed by the population and young people .
In the coming years , we need to work to bring Turkey into the European family .
in writing . - The report was adopted in the Committee on Foreign Affairs by an overwhelming majority where I voted ' in favour ' too .
It has achieved a balanced approach to the most pressing issues of the organisation and activities of the European External Action Service and key issues of common foreign and security policy , such as the promotion of the values of democracy , human rights and the rule of law , promotion of gender equality , energy security , the situation in Iran and Afghanistan , the EU 's response to the democratic changes in the Southern Mediterranean , and relations with major players , such as Russia , China , Japan and India .
I am a supporter of the common European foreign and defence policy , where the word ' European ' is of the greatest importance .
Europe must free itself from the USA with regard not only to its economy , but also its foreign policy .
It must become more autonomous in order to be seen throughout the world as a strong and independent player .
However , we have not yet identified any signs of movements in this direction .
On the contrary , this report supports and safeguards the links with the USA , in particular , via NATO .
Some people even believe that these links should be strengthened .
This would have a highly counterproductive impact on the future of the EU and would make it difficult to agree on a common European approach or attitude to important issues , as the crisis in Libya has demonstrated .
For this reason , I have voted against this report .
EU foreign policy has seen a significant development following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The EU needs a coherent foreign policy strategy based on the objectives and principles established in Article 21 of the Treaty on the European Union ( TEU ) .
EU action on the international stage is based on the principles that guided its creation , development and enlargement , with the objective of promoting the following values all over the world : ' democracy , the rule of law , the universality and indivisibility of human rights and fundamental freedoms , respect for human dignity , the principles of equality and solidarity , and respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter and international law ' .
I voted in favour of this report on the annual report from the Council to Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2009 , as I agree with the majority of the observations made by Parliament .
I would stress the fact that the report does not propose possible approaches for resolving the conflicts and issues that it presents in such a transparent way .
In view of this , I support the rapporteur 's request that the Council not limit the scope of this report to a mere description of the activities of this policy , but rather transform it into a political tool that is focused on solutions .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the grounds that the Council 's 2009 annual report on the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) - whose transparency I commend - stresses the importance of the European Union continuing to develop its foreign policy objectives , and to promote its values and interests at international level , with the general aim of contributing to peace , to security , to solidarity , to conflict prevention , to the promotion of democracy , to the protection of human rights , to gender equality , to respect for international law , to support for international institutions , to effective multilateralism , to mutual respect between nations , to sustainable development , to free and fair trade , and to the eradication of poverty .
We are now faced with the annual report on the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) , this time relating to 2009 .
My vote in favour is based on the wisdom of this report , which not only embraces the innovations of the Treaty of Lisbon in matters of foreign policy and security , but also calls for greater coordination between the recently created European External Action Service , the Member States and the Commission .
The EU must be consolidated as a strong and credible player on the international stage , and to do this , we have to move towards an unequivocal message to promote our values , such as democracy and human rights , in our foreign relations , but also in the pursuit of our interests , such as those connected with energy security .
The terms values and interests must be compatible , not exclusive in our external action .
Seen from a socialist point of view , the thematic and geographical recommendations of the report satisfy our principal demands .
I believe that it is right in its concept of transatlantic relations , particularly the EU and NATO , and in underlining the need for civil and military cooperation in crisis management .
in writing . - Three of our six amendments were adopted : the one calling for separate budget lines on common security and defence policy missions , the one calling on the Council and the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to overcome the imbalance between civilian and military planning capabilities , and the one on the urgency of addressing water management issues in Central Asia .
As for Syria , the S & D Group amendment was adopted , causing our amendment calling for the resignation of Assad to fall .
In the end , the report was adopted with an overwhelming majority .
Our group abstained .
The report emphasises the guiding role of the European Union as an effective global actor on the international stage .
Performing that role requires a more strategic external action and a single foreign policy uniting all the Member States .
That seems utopian to me in view of the ongoing events in the Middle East and in the Mediterranean countries .
I voted against the report because it seeks to limit national powers while creating new agencies and tackling new military operations , which would entail increased spending , and it also wants to give added momentum to Turkey 's accession negotiations .
This month , Lithuania is marking the seventh anniversary of EU accession .
When we joined the EU , most Lithuanians dreamt of democracy and what Europe could give .
Unfortunately , after seven years , few of those expectations have been met , either in Lithuania or at European level .
Foreign policy is one of them .
Recently a few European leaders were quick to celebrate the triumph of democracy and the death of the dictators of the Arab world - a victory of European values .
Sadly , this is far from the truth .
The EU 's efforts to consolidate its foreign policy have not been very successful .
The Treaty of Lisbon was supposed to help Europe find a single voice on foreign policy , but last week we saw more proof of the lack of cohesion in EU foreign policy : after Osama bin Laden was killed last Monday , the Heads of State of the EU issued no less than five different statements within 24 hours .
If Europe wants to remain a serious player on the world stage , we must speak with one voice .
The EU must also get its foreign policy priorities right : focusing attention on the south while neglecting our eastern borders is not a sustainable policy .
The EU must define the broad thrust of its common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in the light of growing global instability .
I am pleased to see that the report emphasises the need to involve Parliament in the process .
As representatives of the interests of European citizens , we need to contribute to defining a European defence policy .
The European Union 's fundamental aims include defending peace , human rights and democracy .
The promotion of our values must be based on an ambitious external action and diplomacy strategy .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given the Union a voice through the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission .
Our CFSP cannot tolerate division .
This vote is therefore a call for improved coordination between all institutions : the European External Action Service , the European Commission , the Member States and , of course , the European Parliament .
In a changing world , our Union needs to be more than a purely economic Union .
We have a historical obligation to make it a political Union .
The CFSP should be one of the vehicles used to achieve that .
This is the message that Parliament wanted to convey and I support this position .
I voted in favour of this report .
In order to strengthen the EU 's influence at a global level and , therefore , indirectly , the influence of the individual Member States , we need the insight and the determination to ensure increased cooperation and coordination between the different levels .
We must not put unnecessary obstacles in the path of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) to enable it to live up to its founding principles .
I have also voted in favour of the amendment , which , at the same time , calls on Baroness Ashton to make full use of her powers .
We need the active involvement of both sides to ensure that the EEAS is a success .
As a member of the Committee on Budgets and an advocate of the greatest possible transparency , I have , of course , also voted in favour of the amendment calling for separate budget lines for each mission .
I support this proposal and recommend that measures be taken to remedy the difficulty of finding professionals for civilian missions , the most utilised form of intervention .
As regards gender mainstreaming in line with United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 , and to make civilian and military missions more effective , I recommend that female personnel be involved as appropriate at every level of crisis management .
I would stress the need for women to be included in senior-level decision-making positions , regular consultations with civil society , and that capacity to work on gender issues within missions be enhanced .
I call for the establishment of adequate public complaint procedures in the context of common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) missions , and call on Lady Ashton to include a detailed report on women , peace and security in the six-monthly evaluation of CSDP missions .
I believe this would enable the experience acquired to be turned to account from a political , strategic , technical , legal and operational point of view and , in the long term , could provide a starting point for improving interventions under way and for criteria to be applied to emerging crises so as to make for the best possible balance between strategic interests and available resources .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution on the development of the common security and defence policy following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
It is important to stress that the new CSDP introduced by the Lisbon Treaty provides a firm political statement about the Union 's intention to act as a force for stability in the world .
I support the position that current economic austerity and the provisions of the Lisbon Treaty may help Member States towards smarter spending on defence by pooling and sharing a larger proportion of their defence capabilities , budget and requirements , while achieving more security for their citizens , although the reality is that the economic and financial crisis affects EU national defence budgets , programmes and force structures and , therefore , more than one year after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , there are not yet clear signs of a post-Lisbon EU holistic approach enabling traditional procedural and institutional barriers to be overcome .
Therefore , it is important that Member States find appropriate means for the implementation of the CSDP as the Lisbon Treaty provides a framework for upgrading cooperation on defence whilst achieving economies of scale , maintaining strategic relevance and providing security for the Union 's citizens .
At a time of economic and financial crisis , the European Union is being called upon to enhance its strategic autonomy in order to uphold its values , and protect its citizens by developing a shared vision of the main challenges and threats and by aligning its resources and capabilities to adequately respond to them .
I think that the new provisions on the common security and defence policy introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon offer a strong political statement of the Union 's intention to act as a force for stability in the world .
They provide a clear legal framework for reinforcing its capacities to pursue its foreign and security policy through a comprehensive approach drawing upon all the instruments available to the Union and its Member States , to prevent and manage crises and conflicts , as well as to build lasting peace .
I voted in favour of this report .
I think that the European Union needs a strong and effective security and defence policy to prevent conflicts , protect its citizens ' security and reaffirm its basic values , by making its contribution to supporting international law , the promotion of respect for human rights and democratic values throughout the whole world .
The international system is undergoing rapid and profound change .
This is driven by the shift of power towards emerging international actors and deepening interdependence , encompassing economic and financial problems , environmental deterioration and climate change , energy and resource scarcity , and interconnected security challenges .
I endorsed this important report .
In a turbulent global context , and at a time of economic and financial crisis , the EU must enhance its strategic autonomy to uphold its values , pursue its interests and protect its citizens by developing a shared vision of the main challenges and threats and by aligning its capabilities and resources to adequately respond to them , thereby contributing to the preservation of international peace and global security .
I voted for this report as it marks an important step towards implementing the Treaty of Lisbon .
The amendments proposed in this document will improve the flexibility of Europe 's military capabilities .
I should mention here that the diversification of threats at a global level requires the common security and defence policy to be adapted .
Cyber attacks , illegal migration flows and terrorism are just a few of them .
Indeed , the Union has become a preferred target of international crime .
I should also emphasise the size of the financial resources which support this policy .
I think that the review of the ATHENA mechanism by the Polish Presidency will solve the budget problem .
This will help establish a simpler contribution from Member States to the shared costs of European military operations .
The disbanding of the Western European Union and introduction of a reciprocal defence clause in the Treaty marks a step towards a common defence policy .
When we talk about a political Europe , a hotline to Europe , or even of Europe speaking with one voice , we often forget to specify that this can only happen if we have a European defence policy in place .
Recent events in Libya have shown just how much work remains to be done on this front .
Given the current financial difficulties , pooling our resources is not only politically desirable , it is essential .
Defence policy is one of the areas most jealously guarded by the Member States .
The impression one gets from this report , or indeed from others on the same subject or on foreign policy , is that the intention is to push the European Union into ensuring that it gradually gains the upper hand over the Member States in drawing up foreign and defence policy .
Apart from the objections that can be made to this approach on principle , I cannot understand how anyone can think that the EU can ever speak with one voice on such sensitive subjects , in which the interests of the individual Member States are very often different , if not quite openly conflicting .
One need only look at what has happened in the case of Libya and humanitarian intervention .
It is virtually impossible for the Member States to reach agreement and put forward a single , agreed position on events of this magnitude .
Even if it did happen , it would necessarily be at the cost of governments ' decision-making freedom and of what national politicians regard as priorities .
I voted against the report .
I voted in favour of this report because the European Union must continue to enhance its security strategy , uphold its values , pursue its interests , and protect its citizens , thereby contributing to the preservation of international peace and global security .
The new provisions of the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon provide a clearer legal framework for reinforcing the implementation of foreign and security policy , drawing upon all the instruments available to the EU and its Member States , to prevent and manage crises and conflicts , and to build lasting peace .
When conducting foreign and security policy , the EU must ensure consistency and coherence between the different areas of its external action and between external and internal policies .
I would like to stress that a credible external security policy requires closer cooperation between the Member States , mutual trust and solidarity .
I am concerned that , more than a year after the Treaty of Lisbon entered into effect , there are still no clear signs of a comprehensive EU approach to foreign and security policy , within the framework of which it would be possible to overcome the traditional procedural and institutional barriers restricting the EU 's ability to act .
I am concerned about the unwillingness of EU Member States to define a common position on the crisis in Libya , or on UN Security Council Resolution 1973 and how to implement it .
Ideas about creating ad hoc coalitions of countries as possible substitutes for a common security and defence policy are dangerous , in my opinion , as no European state in the 21st century has a real chance of being a significant player in the area of security and defence .
I would like to point out in this context that the Treaty of Lisbon provides the possibility of entrusting the implementation of crisis-resolution operations to a group of Member States , although only within the framework of a Council decision defining the objectives , scope and terms of their implementation .
A common response to the developments in Libya is essential to the creation of a new and credible approach to the Neighbourhood Policy with southern countries .
It is similarly necessary to emphasise the development and deepening of the Eastern Partnership , within the framework of which a parliamentary assembly made up of MEPs and members of the parliaments of participating states has recently begun operating .
In this context , we should insist on a tough and principled position towards the regime of President Lukashenko in Belarus .
in writing . - ( DE ) For a variety of reasons , I have voted in favour of the Gualtieri report .
The rapporteur has worked very well together with my group .
Many of our amendments have been turned into compromise texts .
Out of 29 amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , 21 have been included in the report .
Finally , many of the positions which we have supported and called for form part of the report .
I am very critical of the call for the incorporation of arms research into the common strategic framework for research and innovation .
The proposal for the use of so-called Battlegroups in the case of natural disasters is also inappropriate .
The extensive reference to the US Department for Homeland Security as an example of a suitable anti-terrorism policy is at best irritating .
I take a very positive view of the extremely open and realistic assessment of the individual common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) missions , of the statements on women and security , on disarmament and on the human rights clause in anti-terrorism measures , and of the clear reference to the decision not to mix civilian and military operations .
Finally , the rapporteur also covered one fundamental issue : opposition to absolute strategic autonomy as the final outcome of the CSDP .
I consider it of the utmost importance to adopt a position in harmony with the Member States ' foreign policies , since such cohesion will lead to peace , security , solidarity and conflict prevention at international level .
It will also lead to sustainable development and increase the EU 's capacity to influence the international order .
I therefore urge the continuation of the work already under way to form a united front which will improve relations between Europe and other world powers , promote a more effective response in situations of international crisis and improve Europe 's standing on the world stage .
The Treaty of Lisbon should represent a new political model in Europe , both in terms of the need to pool the resources of Member States in order to achieve optimum results , and of working on shared strategies and operations that will also make Europe into the political union its founding fathers dreamed of years ago .
This week , we are celebrating Europe Day , when we remember the Schuman Declaration , which spoke of a Europe which ' will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity ' .
At the moment , it is this solidarity that is missing , especially in the expression of a strong shared political will by all the Member States , which would not only give greater protection to our borders , but also make our economy more credible .
The Gualtieri report clearly underlines the fact that the European armed forces are not adequate to build a common European defence system or to reach the targets for the Union 's internal and external security set out in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Without a credible military capacity , the common European security and defence policy will remain on paper and in the words of those who do not have the necessary tools to effectively implement it .
The Treaty of Lisbon was a step forward for the EU .
It has brought greater political and institutional involvement in relations between Member States , bringing them even closer on key foreign and domestic policies and strategies .
I voted in favour of this report as I understand that the analysis therein is extremely relevant to the development of a common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) .
The tabled document maximises the EU 's role , strengthening the synergies between Member States , and between them and the EU institutions .
The development of the CSDP is even more relevant given the current economic / financial crisis , which makes it advisable to share resources between Member States in order to effectively ensure public safety , crisis / conflict management and the establishment of lasting peace .
It is more of an asset because of the observation of the legal structure presented , looking to clarify the institutional barriers verified in the post-Treaty of Lisbon period and trying to specify legislative solutions for any problems that are identified : ' Lisbon ' requires a CSDP .
I feel that the European public wants it .
The new reality will be more rational , more synergistic and more European .
The idea behind this resolution is that the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , envisages the Union 's firm political intention to act as a force of stability in the world , with a clear legal framework for making it more able to pursue its objectives .
Nonetheless , there are still no clear signs of a post-Lisbon approach which is holistic enough , allowing traditional procedural and institutional obstacles to be overcome , as well as allowing for the security and defence of the public and the European states .
I hope that the current economic austerity will encourage states to spend their resources more intelligently and that they will be capable of cooperating more effectively .
The current report evaluates the development of the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) in the wake of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is a report based on the new institutional framework created by the Treaty of Lisbon , according to which the European Union must speak with a single voice and , based on its restructuring , present common foreign and security policy in a more transparent way .
However , it is necessary to recognise that the EU has still not achieved a comprehensive post-Lisbon approach , able to overcome traditional procedural and institutional obstacles .
As such , a realistic foreign policy assessment becomes crucial , including more muscular intervention by EU forces , rather than leaving military intervention solely in the hands of France and the United Kingdom .
Whilst I recognise the need for public debate on foreign and defence policy towards setting out Parliament 's future policies on this matter , I welcome the drafting of this report and hope that the EU continues to develop an effective multilateralism , which is one of the hallmarks of its geostrategic concerns .
Some of the contents of this report are , from certain perspectives , worrying .
In essence , it confirms many of the warnings and alerts that we made as the Treaty of Lisbon was being debated and then brought into force : an irrefutable course of EU militarisation is under way , and it is now being accelerated and intensified .
The militarisation of the EU does not serve peace or the interests of the people .
The transformation of the EU into a European pillar of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) , as advocated by the Treaty of Lisbon , entails involvement in conflict zones at international level .
This is within a framework of collaboration with the United States , which assumes leadership in the process of affirming an imperial hegemony and guaranteeing the control of markets and resources , some of which are becoming increasingly scarce .
As affirmed by the proposed amendments made by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , the military interventions , supposedly undertaken in order to stabilise certain countries or regions , are on the wrong track .
Instead of stabilising these countries and regions , they destabilise them .
Instead of resolving problems , they exacerbate them .
The situation in Libya is another example of this , to add to those of Afghanistan and Iraq .
The development of the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) serves the interests of the EU 's industrial-military complex , but not the interests of the people or of peace .
As we have been warning , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the militarisation of the European Union will be accelerated even more .
This report consolidates this approach .
As pointed out by the amendments tabled by our group , military intervention or any sort of military approach to conflict resolution , with the alleged aim of stabilising certain regions or countries , is the wrong track .
Instead of resolving problems , this worsens them , as we can see in the cases of Libya , Afghanistan and Iraq .
The militarisation of the EU is not in the interest of any of its peoples .
The transformation , already under way , of the EU into a European pillar of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) is part of a process of dividing up the international sphere into spheres of influence , under the leadership of the United States .
This serves to ensure greater exploitation of labour forces and control over ever scarcer natural resources , particularly hydrocarbons , as well as control of the markets .
The development of the common security and defence policy is a threat to peace .
It is an element which deepens political intervention , contributes to the arms race , including nuclear weapons , and promotes vast profits for the EU 's industrial-military complex .
in writing . - This report , which is in five parts - headed respectively Security and foreign policy , Security and defence , External and internal security , Security through operations and Security in partnership - provides a clear vision of how the EU should pursue its common security and defence policy in order to become an autonomous strategic player and to act as a force for security and stability in Europe and the world .
The Libyan crisis has revealed the limitations of the European Union 's external action in both diplomatic and military terms .
At the moment , the unity of intent of which so much has been said seems to have been thwarted by the rightful aspirations of the Member States to retain their prerogatives in the area of security policy .
I do not agree with the idea of calling for a larger budget for this policy without there being real agreement among national governments on the use of these funds .
As I think this kind of policy should be on the list of national competences , I feel I must vote against this report .
I endorsed this report because the international system is undergoing rapid and profound change , driven by the shift of power towards emerging international actors and deepening interdependence , encompassing economic and financial problems , environmental deterioration and climate change , energy and resource scarcity , and interconnected security challenges .
In a turbulent global context , and at a time of economic and financial crisis , the EU is being called upon to enhance its strategic autonomy to uphold its values , pursue its interests and protect its citizens by developing a shared vision of the main challenges and threats and by aligning its capabilities and resources to adequately respond to them , thereby contributing to the preservation of international peace and global security , also by pursuing effective multilateralism .
Enhancing strategic autonomy in security affairs entails , for the EU , the capacity to agree upon common political objectives and strategic guidelines , to establish strategic partnerships with relevant international organisations , including NATO , and with other countries , to collect adequate information and generate joint analyses and assessments , to harness and , where necessary , pool financial , civilian and military resources , to plan and run effective crisis management operations across the extended range of the Petersburg-type missions , and to frame and implement a common defence policy , laying the first tangible foundations on which to build common defence .
It is necessary to draw upon all the instruments available to the EU and its Member States in order to prevent and manage crises and conflicts and to build lasting peace .
I supported the report on the development of the common security and defence policy following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Nevertheless , I consider that we still have a long way to go before we arrive at a comprehensive common security and defence policy .
It is not permissible that individual Member States should enter into transactions that threaten the security of another Member State .
France has entered into a transaction with Russia involving warships ; a Russia that , in the recent past , occupied Georgian territories in the course of hostilities .
In the same way , Russia has conducted provocative military manoeuvres in the proximity of the Baltic States , which expressed their concern over the transaction to which I referred .
Although the Baltic nations have repeatedly expressed their concerns , European Union officials and institutions have not responded in any way to prevent French involvement in a military transaction with Russia .
French politicians ' concerns over their economy and jobs in their shipyards are understandable .
However , within the European Union , the growth of one nation 's economy must not be achieved at the cost of another nation 's security .
This kind of action is contrary to the existing solidarity principle within the European Union .
This principle should brook no exception , and it is applicable to both large and small nations .
Only when Member States show true solidarity will there be a comprehensive common security and defence policy .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Gualtieri report .
However , I underline once again the need for enhanced cooperation between the EU and NATO .
My original amendment to paragraph 87 aimed to confirm , rather than merely recognise , NATO 's role as the bedrock for collective defence - a role which is not just ' still continuing ' but should be seen as the only option for the foreseeable future .
In addition , NATO 's role cannot be deemed to concern only its Member States , as the Gualtieri report states : it creates security for the EU 's non-NATO members too .
NATO has been , and is going to be , the foundation of collective defence , so that has to be stated in strong , affirmative language .
This morning , the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Baroness Ashton , declared that the EU and NATO are , for the first time , sharing information and data on Libya .
This is an encouraging example for further similar cooperation .
It sends a clear signal that , if there is a will , the way to meaningful cooperation will be always open .
Recent events in North Africa and Asia show that the European Union needs to strengthen its foreign policy and the alliances in which it participates .
The threat of terrorist attacks , which is still very real , points to the need to strengthen European security standards .
However , some of the proposals set out in the Gualtieri report are unacceptable .
They run counter to the strategy which has been pursued up until now , aimed at building international alliances based , for the most part , on the assumption that the North Atlantic Alliance will play a leading role .
The proposed strengthening of the European Defence Agency would not mean a genuine increase in the level of security in the EU , but merely the creation of another bureaucratic monster , incapable of performing the tasks assigned to it .
Who would take the decision to mobilise European armed forces ?
Whose interests would their units be acting in ?
How much of a say would the new Member States have ?
Would the EDA 's headquarters be relocated ?
Fears have also been voiced regarding institutional matters , such as whether growth of the EDA would not result in a reduction in the size of certain Member States ' armies , and whether there would be a clash with the remit and objectives of the European External Action Service .
As can be seen from previous reports , in spite of substantial financial investment and very good logistics and management , European forces could not cope with simple police missions in Kosovo and Bosnia .
We should perhaps give some thought to how to improve their operations before encouraging them to extend their duties to include military actions .
in writing . - I voted for this report and particularly welcome calls for increased controls of private security companies through their regulation , licensing and monitoring .
I voted in favour of the report on the development of the common security and defence policy following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Our role in the Mediterranean , in the Middle East and , hence , throughout the world , will become increasingly important .
The ongoing upheavals , which will increase after the death of Osama Bin Laden , must be tackled in full compliance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
The key to the future will lie in strengthening our political ability to define common strategies and objectives in an increasingly coordinated and timely manner .
Taking its lead from the Treaty of Lisbon , this text argues that the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) should form the basis for the collective defence of EU Member States .
It welcomes both organisations ' desire to further strengthen their partnership .
It seeks to expand the role of the European Commission and of the extremely Atlanticist Baroness Ashton in the field of defence .
Not content with bowing to the leadership of the United States , it advocates the rapid implementation of measures to liberalise the arms industry .
I voted against the report .
The Treaty of Lisbon has seen increased responsibilities for Parliament with regard to foreign and security policy .
Nevertheless , we must make every effort to ensure that these policies promote the values and interests of the EU at international level , with the general aim of contributing to peace , to security , to solidarity , to conflict prevention , to the promotion of democracy , to the protection of human rights , to gender equality , to respect for international law , to support for international institutions , to effective multilateralism and mutual respect between nations , to sustainable development , to free and fair trade , and to the eradication of poverty .
This is the only means by which the objectives that we are proposing will be realised .
The geopolitical situation in the southern Mediterranean region is currently undergoing a sea change .
If we ignore these excellent and laudable aspirations , there is a danger that the revolutions could be manipulated for the worse by some when they ought , in reality , to improve things .
We need to show the people of these countries that the EU supports their desire for change .
Since the conflict in Libya began , I have suggested that the international community should put all its energies into supporting the overthrow of the Gaddafi regime .
The duty to protect humans wherever they live and whoever they may be is a sacred universal right and duty .
What is self-determination worth when it is based on dictatorial actions or where it serves to justify the unspeakable ?
Self-determination , and even an absolute majority , do not entitle any government to deny universal values .
The delays , wavering and semantics about the scale of intervention have allowed the regime to weaken the citizen 's uprising .
The EU urgently needs to establish a credible approach for the Mediterranean element of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
in writing . - I have scrutinised the report very attentively .
The report is divided into five parts : security and foreign policy , security and defence , external and internal security , security through operations and security in partnership .
The report provides a clear vision of how the EU should implement its general security policy and defence policy in order to become the strongest autonomous strategically acting player , with the aim to provide security and stability in Europe and the world .
I voted ' in favour ' .
The report being examined today contains some aspects that are welcome and others that are less so , thus representing in the best ( or worst ) possible way the typical contradictions that the European Union reveals in its external actions .
For example , it hopes for greater integration and common management in crisis situations : recent events in Libya have shown that Europe acts dispersedly , with some Member States directly engaged , others that have wriggled out , and practically only one country - Italy - to manage the direct consequences of the Libyan crisis and the North African crises in general , in other words , a flood of migrants .
We therefore need to decide how Europe should behave : should it always be ' united ' whatever the consequences , or should it always leave the Member States free , in which case the European Union itself must adapt ?
I am baffled by the emphasis placed on the need to increase the power and resources of common actions and the European Defence Agency : given the precedents , I would not like that , too , to become a useless bureaucratic machine that is an end in itself , and its actions to become totally ineffective .
For the reasons given above , I have decided to abstain , while waiting to see what the European Union will do as a really ' great ' organisation .
I am voting in favour of Mr Gualtieri 's report .
This report helps confirm the EU as a player contributing to global stability and is a necessary step in developing a genuine pan-European approach in foreign and defence policy .
I believe that better harmonisation of already existing instruments and reaching consensus on the strategic aims of the common security and defence policy in the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon are of paramount importance .
While relying on existing financial , civilian and military resources , Europe can take even more decisive actions in the event of natural and man-made disasters and be even more involved in averting and managing crises and conflicts , and in establishing a lasting peace in third countries .
In addition to this , the European common security and defence policy and the European development cooperation policy are two sides of the same coin .
I strongly support the report , which calls for better coordination of them .
The organisation of regular meetings of a crisis management board , which will cooperate with the EEAS , is of crucial importance to this .
The proposals made in the report for a more resourceful , harmonised use of the resources for EU defence programmes and the sharing of military capacity in the EU will help achieve this policy 's objectives .
I voted in favour of this report because it provides a vision of how the EU could become an independent strategic force for security and stability in Europe and throughout the world .
The Treaty of Lisbon gave the EU security and defence policy more opportunities .
This policy became more integrated into EU foreign policy .
The European External Action Service is making a significant contribution to ensuring EU security .
When drafting the report , our Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats received support from most of the other groups , because the EU must become an independent security actor and it is necessary to review the concept and structure of the Battlegroups in the EU 's mixed civilian and military missions .
There was also general agreement with our group 's call for the EU to improve the planning process of humanitarian aid missions as a matter of urgency .
I voted in favour of this report on the development of the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The common security and defence policy is an integral part of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) .
Both dimensions have been placed within the legally binding institutional framework of EU principles , namely , democracy , the rule of law , the universality and indivisibility of human rights and fundamental freedoms , respect for human dignity , the principles of equality and solidarity , and respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter and principles of international law , including the responsibility to protect .
In addition , their objectives have been merged with the general objectives of EU external action .
On this matter , I support the rapporteur 's proposal to enhance cooperation with EU national parliaments in exercising democratic scrutiny over the CFSP and the CSDP , with the goal of mutually reinforcing their respective influence on the political choices made by the other European institutions and by the Member States , while fully respecting national parliaments ' defence policy prerogatives .
Under the framework of EU values and principles , it is crucial that its CSDP be guided by a transparent and democratic process .
The European Union 's international status can only be achieved through a concerted effort by the Member States and the EU bodies .
In this context , a common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) capable of responding to the challenges ahead remains of the highest priority .
Indeed , it will only be possible to guarantee the Union 's active voice at international level if it has sufficient defence instruments of its own .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
The Treaty of Lisbon lays the foundations for the European Union to establish itself as a credible and influential player on the international scene .
From this stems my support for a report that is necessary in order to evaluate advances made in the common security and defence policy following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and to identify what scope there is for improvement .
As a member of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , I have followed this report closely .
Personally , I have stressed the need for cooperation among Member States in the field of research , development and innovation in matters of defence .
We find ourselves in the middle of an economic crisis and , as a consequence , we must pull together in order to reduce costs and increase the interoperability of the military capacity of our Member States .
All this will serve not only to reduce defence expenditure but also to increase the autonomy of the European Union on the international scene .
I believe that this point of view has been well captured in the report , which constitutes a step in the right direction in terms of promoting a common security and defence policy which is more effective , coordinated and consistent with the rest of the policies of the European Union and its Member States .
in writing . - I decided to abstain at the final vote because we lost Amendment 1 on reference to NATO , Amendment 3 against a nuclear dimension in the common security and defence policy , Amendment 4 against flexible use of Battlegroups , Amendment 5 against using Battlegroups for mixed civilian-military tasks , Amendment 6 deleting a provision on defence research , Amendment 7 deleting a provision on defence research , Amendment 8 deleting reference to the US Department of Homeland Security , Amendment 9 deleting reference to CSDP cooperation with Frontex in the Mediterranean , and despite the fact that we won Amendment 2 on European External Action Service / Commission permanent working structures and Amendment 1 saying no to NATO developing civilian capabilities .
The report outlines the need for the European Union to operate in the global context as a stabilising force , endeavouring to keep the peace , strengthen international security and manage crisis situations .
I voted in favour of this report because I join the chorus of disappointment in Parliament at the European Union 's lack of a genuinely global and uniform post-Lisbon approach to the common security policy .
Credible and reliable military systems and capabilities are an essential condition for the development of an independent security and defence policy .
I believe , however , that a common political will needs to be adopted over the long term in order to strengthen the EU 's ability to respond to crises , while safeguarding its strategic independence .
The report in question points out the developments in European defence policy since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force .
I voted against it because it is clear from the latest events in Libya that the European Union has not acted in a united , consensual manner .
There has been a lack of solidarity in the management of the migrant crisis , revealing that when national interests are at stake , the EU forgets about noble concepts , as it has taken no interest in the problem .
in writing . - I voted in support of our common foreign and security policy report , with the hope that such a policy would take shape at last .
Up to now , our common foreign and security policy is a collection of disagreements and misguided initiatives .
The recent Euro-row over action in Libya and the subsequent German opt-out made it clear to the rest of the world that the EU is still not able to project a real common foreign and security policy .
Moreover , the French initiative aiming at consolidating the financing of the southern neighbourhood at the expense of the eastern neighbourhood sent a disastrous message to our eastern partners .
This is even more sensitive at a time when other quintessential European projects are in doubt , if not in crisis .
The euro is under constant pressure and the problem is , in part , generated by the same lack of European ambition and coherence .
The Schengen Area is rolled back on a daily basis and national barriers re-emerge as the European spirit and legislation are ignored or broken by fellow Member States .
A non-existent common foreign and security policy assisted by a huge External Action Service would seriously undermine European credibility in the world .
I am voting for this proposal as it suggests a strengthening of the EU 's role in the multilateral system .
It is entirely fair for the EU to have more effective representation in international organisations and for this representation to be valued , inasmuch as the EU is the organisation that contributes the most to development aid .
The EU 's principles and values , which promote more effective and preventive multilateral action , make it an important international player in the emerging interpolar world order .
In particular , the EU must initiate efforts to stop being a mere observer in United Nations programmes and conferences .
It must also reinforce its position in international bodies in the area of economics and monetary stability , in accordance with its role as one of the principal economic powers at international level .
I also approve of the statements in the report seeking to strengthen the EU 's role in multilateral security organisations , in the G8 and the G20 , among others .
in writing . - I voted in favour of María Muñiz De Urquiza 's report on the EU as a global actor and its role in multilateral organisations .
I would like to stress once again the need to better coordinate actions of the EU Member States in the UN and , in particular , in the UN Human Rights Council .
We consider that the new institutional structure of the EU and establishment of the Directorate for Human Rights and Democracy in the EEAS system and Brussels-based COHOM Office offer good opportunities to increase the coherence , visibility and credibility of the EU actions in the UNHRC .
Finally , in the EP , we welcomed the recommendation by the UNHRC and subsequent decision by the UN General Assembly to suspend Libya 's membership of the UNHRC .
Following efforts and actions made by some Member States in the HRC , today Syria has stated that it is withdrawing its candidacy to become a member of the UNHRC .
Taking into account these examples and our common experience in the past with the UN Human Rights Commission and , since 2006 , with the UN Human Rights Council , we suggest that clear membership criteria should be introduced in the UNHRC , and the EU should stand firmly behind this initiative .
The Treaty of Lisbon enhances the EU 's capacity to join various international organisations , entrusting it with a wider range of competences in its external action and offering it an opportunity to have a clearer and stronger single voice in the world .
The Treaty also encourages cooperation with relevant international and regional organisations and groups of states , offering the Union an opportunity to become an effective global player .
The EU 's commitment to effective multilateralism is the guiding principle of European external action .
I think that , drawing on its internal experience of cooperation among nations and institutions , the European Union has a global responsibility which it should continue to uphold .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of this report .
The processes of globalisation carry a wide range of opportunities , challenges and threats for global governance .
Global challenges , such as financial markets , energy security , combating poverty , climate change and human rights violations require joint and coordinated action .
The Treaty of Lisbon , by introducing the Union 's legal personality , enhanced the EU 's capacity to join various international organisations and provided the opportunity to assume a stronger and more influential position globally .
Hitherto , the representation of the EU and its Member States in international organisations has been fragmented , which has prevented the EU from speaking with a single voice in the international arena .
The EU must become an influential global actor and be able to defend its position .
In order to achieve this , it is necessary to enhance coordination within the EU , and this will require strong political will and flexibility on the part of the Member States concerning their representation .
I voted for the report drafted by María Muñiz De Urquiza because the European Union 's presence in multilateral organisations is one of the guiding principles of its foreign policy .
At present , the EU has a legal personality , which provides it with a higher global profile .
In addition , the Union has become , by means of the Treaty , a fully-fledged participant in international politics .
The Treaty of Lisbon has enhanced the foreign policy instruments , especially within the UN .
In this regard , I would like to highlight point 12 of the report - the first step towards coordinated , effective action from Member States in the Security Council .
I should emphasise that , at the moment , the UN is right in the midst of reforming its structures , which also allows the EU 's representation in this forum to be restructured .
I supported this resolution because I am convinced that the European Union 's desire to bolster its presence within international organisations is entirely legitimate .
European citizens , through our governments , have given a legal personality and specific powers to the Union .
European integration has built on a set of fundamental values that are constantly being extended .
We have a duty to coordinate our activities and to promote the unity of our Union , as we have already done in the World Trade Organisation .
More work remains to be done .
However , there are some encouraging signs .
The Union is trying to equip itself with the right foreign policy tools ( appointment of a High Representative , creation of the European External Action Service ) .
With its newly improved status , the Union will now be able to express its position within the United Nations General Assembly .
We are living in a world which has seen a sharp increase in the number and frequency of new crises .
In the face of this new reality , political decision makers are charged both with taking preventive action and with responding effectively to new developments .
Yet at this level , it is not a case of simply waving a magic wand .
When the EU is unable to combine forces , to agree procedures and to speak with one voice , it is often left behind .
Within the United Nations , and particularly within the International Monetary Fund , the EU needs to promote its interests .
The European Union could stand up for European interests and , consequently , the interests of Member States .
That means we need to get organised and get organised now .
This is the purpose and aim of this report .
I consider it extremely important for the European Union to play a key role in international organisations .
I believe that the decisions made on international policy should not violate the sovereignty of individual Member States .
I am also against weakening the role played by each country in the European Union individually in international organisations .
We have seen in the past differences in Member States ' foreign policies .
If the European Union gains a place on the UN Security Council , such a conflict may have a very adverse impact on the European Union 's image .
For this reason , I voted against both point 20 and the whole report .
This report is completely unbalanced in favouring a prospect whereby the EU would , in future , enjoy a status at least equivalent to that of the Member States in global and regional multilateral organisations .
In essence , that would mean the end of the Member States ' diplomatic freedom of action , since they would have to adjust their positions so as not to clash openly with those of a future Union representation .
As a result , the national governments would be unable to adequately assert their own interests in international forums .
While we can agree that in certain areas , such as monetary policy , the EU can represent the prevalent position in the appropriate multilateral organisations , it is difficult to accept the idea that the European External Action Service might take on the role of representing a common position of the Member States on the world stage when very often , the countries of Europe have such different interests that it is impossible to achieve a common position .
By voting against the report , I intend to show my opposition to its proposed future scenario in which national diplomacy would substantially be superseded by Union diplomacy , to the detriment of the Member States ' diplomatic autonomy .
I voted in favour of this report because there has been a sharp increase in political and humanitarian crises in the world , which calls for improved and more preventive EU multilateral action .
The EU should make better use of its foreign policy instruments so as to ensure better use of its leverage in multilateral organisations and to take the lead in addressing current and future international crises more effectively .
In addition , there is a need to involve non-state actors more in multilateral policy making and to promote and facilitate improved consultation with civil society organisations and social partners in the future governance structures of international organisations .
The European Union should play an active and leading role in global governance reform , by enhancing cooperation , improving institutions and engaging all stakeholders , This would make international institutions and organisations more legitimate , effective and conducive to shared responsibility .
Given that the EU is one of world 's foremost economic powers , arrangements for the representation of the EU in international bodies in the area of economic , monetary and financial stability need to be reviewed .
The EU 's mechanisms for reaching consensus and taking concerted action make it a model for a rules-based international order .
This is why the EU must cooperate with leading regional powers and actively participate in building and improving an international environment which enables it to promote its values and interests .
The timing is particularly appropriate with a sharp increase being noticed in the number of political and humanitarian crises in the world , which gives rise to the need for the European Union to deploy its foreign policy instruments more effectively so as to ensure better use of its leverage in international organisations and to take the lead more effectively in resolving current and future international crises .
On the other hand , the globalisation processes also offer a wide range of opportunities , challenges and threats for global governance , while revealing social loopholes and failures , including in areas such as the financial markets , energy security , the fight against poverty , climate change policy and human rights violations .
Indeed , the EU must enhance its role as a global actor and act as a global decision maker .
I welcome the efforts made to improve Europe 's multilateral action , and would stress the importance of the EU having an active leadership role in global governance reform .
This is a good opportunity for the EU to make use of its foreign policy instruments and to assume leadership through a more effective approach to current and future international crises .
I therefore commend the attention given to the EU 's position in the United Nations system , in the international financial institutions and in other multilateral institutions , and I agree with the reform proposals which strengthen several of the positions that we have taken .
The oft-used phrase ' an economic giant but a political dwarf ' takes on new meaning when we analyse the EU 's presence in international organisations and in other regional organisations of which it is part .
We urgently need to change this situation .
I therefore believe this own-initiative report to be timely , and I support it in general .
This report examines the role of the EU as a global player in international bodies .
In this respect , like the rapporteur , I believe that there is still a long way to go on the path to credible , consistent and visible EU external action , as there is no European strategy for every organisation of which the Member States or the EU are part .
The increasing complexity that characterises the international system makes it necessary to objectively coordinate the relationships between the Member States , and between the Member States and the EU on the various stages where we interact .
That is why we adopted the Treaty of Lisbon .
Moreover , there is already an example of good practice : our presence in the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
There is , therefore , an urgent need for the EU to be represented with a single voice in the various international bodies .
I think that drawing up a White Paper on this subject , as is proposed in the report , could be a good ' beginning of the end ' for this bizarre situation .
In its reports on EU foreign policy , Parliament has once again been utterly blinkered .
Brussels is seeking to impose European diplomacy and security and defence policies , but is failing : not for want of funding , but rather because the rationale and assumptions underpinning the approach are still wrong .
For starters , no one hears the EU 's voice on the world stage .
Only a handful of champions of a federal Europe would like to hear it speak with one voice , yet diversity and diplomatic cooperation constitute the real value of Europe , whether within the United Nations or elsewhere .
Secondly , no one heeds the muted and incomprehensible mutterings of European leaders who have no mandate and , above all , no legitimacy .
When Europe does speak with one voice , it has nothing to say .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which calls for a stronger role for the European Union in the structures of multilateral organisations ( United Nations , international financial institutions , North Atlantic Treaty Organisation , Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , World Trade Organisation , and so on ) .
In early May 2011 , the EU was awarded ' super-observer ' status by United Nations General Assembly , which means that it will now be able to take the floor and exercise a right of reply in the Assembly on the same terms as other UN Member States .
This is just the first step : we should continue to press for more .
Another important element is the reform of the Security Council with a view to improving its legitimacy by reviewing regional representation .
This report invites the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission to do something that I consider very important , namely , to seek common EU positions on the subjects to be decided in the Security Council in order to implement these positions through joint voting practices and to avoid a repetition of past dissensions .
I voted for this report because it advocates strengthening the EU 's role in peace , security and regulation at global level .
For the Union 's definitive affirmation as regards foreign policy and in the light of the objectives set out in the Treaty of Lisbon , there is a need to continue working towards the EU having a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council one day .
This European Parliament resolution is on the EU 's role in the United Nations ( UN ) system , in international financial institutions , in multilateral security organisations , in ' summit diplomacy ' and in other multilateral organisations , and calls for its role at multilateral level to be strengthened .
There is a clear need to better coordinate the action of the Union , as such , with that of the Member States .
I believe the Union should play an active and leading role in the reform of global governance so as to make international institutions and organisations more legitimate , effective and suited to shared responsibility .
I am not unaware of the many problems that a radical revision of the Union 's current system of institutional representation in multilateral international bodies would lead to , in particular , as regards potentially strengthening the EU 's position in the UN .
The House 's insistence on the need for a comprehensive review of the UN Security Council and the need to make it more legitimate , representative of regions and effective by assigning the Union a permanent seat therefore remains an objective that will be hard to achieve in the short term .
This report by Mrs Muñiz De Urquiza is on the EU 's performance as a global player and its role in multilateral organisations .
The world is currently experiencing a major growth process in globalisation terms , in particular , with the revolutions and transition to democracy of countries that have traditionally been closed and governed by totalitarian regimes , which constitutes a set of opportunities that the EU should not neglect .
Effective multilateralism constitutes the guiding principle of EU foreign policy , in line with the commitment set out in the 2003 European security strategy .
The legal personality conferred on the EU by the Treaty of Lisbon , according to which the European Union should speak with one voice , strengthens its capacity for involvement , as an authorised voice , in the various international organisations where questions of foreign security and defence policy are debated .
Although she advocates increased EU cooperation and development aid , I agree with the rapporteur 's proposals and voted for her report .
The EU does not have the legitimacy that they are attempting to ascribe to it : only the Member States and their peoples do .
This report seeks to legitimise and consolidate a path that has gradually been forged on the backs of the people in an affront to their sovereignty : to national sovereignty and its legitimacy .
The goal is to ensure EU representation in multilateral organisations - the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) , the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the World Bank - as if it were a ( super ) state .
It is seeking to replace the Member States , thereby corrupting the spirit of bodies like the United Nations General Assembly , where each country and its people still have the same weight , irrespective of their size .
The report also proposes increasing , particularly through the European External Action Service , the resources placed at the disposal of a political and diplomatic agenda whose goals include increasing the EU 's weight and influence in various forums and organisations , with a view to exploiting them .
This is an attempt to subvert the current international order , replacing it with a new , less democratic one that guarantees better conditions for big business and finance to pursue their ambitions in the endless contest for markets and resources .
The majority in Parliament is seeking to consolidate a path and a policy that goes over the heads of the organs of national sovereignty and the sovereignty of the peoples , presenting the EU as having a legitimacy that only the Member States and their peoples have , however much it costs them .
They are seeking to legitimise the EU in multilateral organisations - the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) , the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the World Bank - and are seeking to replace states with regional integration organisations , for example , in the United Nations General Assembly , where each country and its people still have the same weight , irrespective of their size .
They are proposing to increase , particularly through the European External Action Service , the resources for implementing a political and diplomatic agenda whose principle goal is increasing the EU 's weight and influence in these organisations , with a view to exploiting them .
The objectives are clear : to establish a new , less democratic international order so as to guarantee better conditions for big business and finance to compete in the endless contest for markets and domination of the world 's natural resources ; this requires the increased militarisation of the EU , and integrated and permanent cooperation with NATO , under the leadership of the United States and the great powers of the EU .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - The EU is the largest contributor of development aid and the most important trade bloc , but representation of the Union , as such , in multilateral organisations remains fragmented .
On the other hand , the EU Member States are over-represented in all multilateral organisations with the exception of the World Trade Organisation .
This over-representation - particularly in the Bretton Woods institutions - often results in dissonance among the European voices and is perceived as hugely problematic by the emerging powers , which consider the status quo to be unfair .
It would be appropriate that , in areas of exclusive competence , the EU should be the pre-eminent actor , with full membership , while the Member States might also - but not necessarily - be present as members , without , in most cases , an independent role .
The effects of the Treaty of Lisbon necessarily mean that the role played by the European Union in international organisations must be revised .
However , as we have seen all too often recently , the so-called single voice with which Europe should approach multilateral issues is often damaging to the Member States ' own prerogatives and autonomy of decision .
I must therefore abstain , because the report has some positive aspects , but they are invalidated by the considerations expressed above .
I endorsed the report because the added value of EU membership in multilateral organisations lies in the fields where it has exclusive or shared competences : economic and trade matters , environmental policy , development aid , and security and defence policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon , by introducing the Union 's legal personality , enhances the EU 's capacity to join various international organisations , entrusts it with a wider range of competences in its external action , provides , notably by the creation of the post of a Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy ( VP / HR ) and the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , the Union with an opportunity for a clearer and stronger single voice in the world , as well as encouraging all types of mutually beneficial cooperation with relevant international and regional organisations and groups of states , and enables the Union to organise itself in such a way as to be able to become an effective global player .
I believe that hitherto , the representation of the EU and its Member States in multilateral organisations , informal summits and international regimes has been fragmented , often ineffective , and still varies considerably .
I also take the view that EU Member States should increasingly consider and rely on the EU as a multiplier of power in achieving the objectives they cannot achieve independently , and that speaking with one EU voice not only increases the chances of success but also improves the legitimacy and credibility of the EU as an important international actor in the emerging interpolar world , without it losing its identity of course .
I voted in favour of this report because the EU 's role in multilateralism will need to be further reinforced in the years to come .
This is also in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
By giving the European Union legal personality , the Treaty increased the possibilities for it to join the various international and regional organisations and groups of states .
These relations will help resolve economic and commercial issues , as well as those regarding the environment .
The contribution of the European Union must also have an added value in multilateral organisations or summits where not all of its members are represented .
Unfortunately , recent , and also current , political and humanitarian crises in the world , have called for prompt , decisive action by the EU .
It is often not easy , but countries affected by such crises expect rapid action from the EU not only through its foreign policy but also in the form of prompt aid in emergencies .
The European Union 's commitment to effective multilateralism is particularly important .
The Union must take into account its own consolidated representation and that of Member States in multilateral organisations .
The current rapid increase in the number of political and humanitarian crises is worrying , which is an indication of the need to implement such a strategy for the EU .
At the moment , the Union is not fulfilling its role properly as a global actor .
I think that the enhancement and importance of its role in multilateral organisations mark real progress in terms of establishing its global significance .
in writing . - I voted against paragraph 20 because I do not believe that the time is yet ripe for the EU to have a single seat on the United Nations Security Council .
The external dimension of the European Union needs to be enhanced , since Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union promotes an international system based on stronger multilateral cooperation in which the Member States guarantee that the Union can assert their interests and values on the international scene .
New permanent structures for the EU 's external representation have been established under the Treaty of Lisbon , but this new dimension does not yet allow the Union to participate as a single entity in its own right in the work of many international bodies .
This is liable to harm the EU 's commitment to effective multilateralism , limiting its decisiveness and undermining its credibility .
Given the increase in political and humanitarian crises in the world , the EU needs to make the best possible use of its foreign policy instruments so as to ensure better use of its leverage in multilateral organisations and its ability to take the lead in addressing current and future international crises .
The promotion of democracy and human rights , specifically women 's and children 's rights , freedom of expression and the rule of law , should be at the heart of all EU external action .
Each Member State is entitled to express its own views within international bodies .
Governments are elected , unlike Baroness Ashton , the European Commission and the European Central Bank , yet this text seeks to make the latter our sole representatives .
I voted against this attempt to give the kiss of death to State sovereignty on the international arena .
The EU cannot forget its role as a leading actor on the world stage in every respect .
As such , it needs to strengthen its role in all multilateral organisations , in particular , the United Nations ( UN ) , where its role must be increasingly active now that the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) is operational .
Nations are powerless to act alone in the face of the major challenges of our times .
Multilateral action is the only way that States can get to grips with the challenges facing our world .
The economic , financial and food crises , climate change and conflicts have made us realise that we urgently need to create a form of global governance , or what Jacques Attali calls a ' world State ' .
Naturally , Europe has a role to play in this new global political arena as a soft world power based on standards , rules and leading by example .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , Europe has the foundation it requires in order to assert itself politically as well as economically .
The European Parliament has adopted a resolution on the role that the European Union should play in multilateral organisations .
As a general principle , the strengthening of the EU 's role in multilateral frameworks has been approved .
Thanks to the agreement which has been reached and the joint measures taken , the European Union is becoming a model for the functioning of a world order based on international law .
This is why emphasis has been placed on the need for the EU to cooperate with leading regions , and to participate actively in creating an international community .
Other requirements include cooperation between the Member States and the drafting of a common position , inter alia , on the issue of savings and budgetary cuts .
The EU and the Member States need to take steps to increase the EU 's role and strengthen its position within the UN ( changes to support for the UN , in particular , with regard to humanitarian policies and aid and the issue of conflict resolution ) .
Within the framework of cooperation with international financial institutions , the EU must find a solution to the problem of external economic and financial representation , which limits the EU 's influence .
As far as the EU 's role in multilateral security organisations is concerned , it has been said that the regulations which make it possible for the European Union to benefit from NATO funding should be streamlined .
Thought should be given to whether the EU should take on greater responsibility and play a more effective role in achieving joint objectives ( engaging in joint dialogue , deciding on and coordinating joint measures , etc . ) under the agreement between the EU and the OSCE .
This report on ' The EU as a global actor : its role in multilateral organisations ' presents an overview of the role of the EU .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree with its vision and ambition for an EU that has a strong presence on the international stage .
Apart from the value of each Member State per se , the EU , as an organisation , can contribute its organisational experience to the international community .
Indeed , the EU 's mechanisms for building consensus and taking concerted action make it a model for a rules-based international order .
In view of this , cooperation with the leading regional powers should be encouraged , so that the EU can actively participate in the building and improvement of an international environment that enables the EU to promote its values and interests , as required by the Treaty .
With regard to the EU 's aspiration to be a global player , it is therefore essential to strengthen internal coordination in order to speak with one voice .
This is the only way to achieve multilateral cooperation and address international challenges , namely those arising from the responsibility to protect , and the need to enhance human security as a means of achieving global security .
In the current context , it is very important that the EU be able to establish itself as a global player , capable of responding effectively to the demanding challenges that are posed at global level .
As such , it will have to commit to increasing internal coordination so that the EU can talk with one voice , thereby increasing not just the prospects for success of its actions , but also its legitimacy and credibility at international level .
in writing . - Among other things , this text establishes that Parliament notes that the EU 's mechanisms for building consensus and taking concerted action make it a model for a rules-based international order .
It therefore stresses the need for the EU to cooperate with leading regional powers and actively participate in the building and improvement of an international environment that enables the EU to promote , as required by the Treaty , its values and interests .
In particular in those fields where it has exclusive or shared competences , it considers essential , with regard to the EU 's aspiration and need to be an effective global actor and to safeguard its position , a strengthening of the internal coordination necessary to speak with one voice , the ability to shape multilateral cooperation and lead collective action in addressing international challenges , namely those arising from the responsibility to protect , and the need to enhance human security , as a means of achieving global security .
The final text of this report emphasises the strategic role that the European Union must play in international organisations .
To achieve this , there is a need , above all , to promote active , concrete participation so as to strengthen both internal and external cooperation .
That must be the primary way to increase the legitimacy of the decisions made and also to ensure that responsibilities are fully shared .
Lastly , the Member States must coordinate their positions in the United Nations Human Rights Council so as to establish clear and strict membership criteria , especially for countries where human rights violations are commonplace .
in writing . - I support the UK retaining membership of UNSC .
The European Union is today a true actor on the world stage .
Its role in international , multilateral organisations is visibly growing , and has been showing itself to be increasingly important .
The European Union should therefore play a more active and leading role in the reform of global governance .
I am talking , in particular , about the need to reform the United Nations ( UN ) system to assign the Union a place and , in particular , about its representation on the UN Security Council .
That involves a demanding degree of coordination of the Member States ' positions , but it would result in the increased coherence , visibility and credibility of EU actions at international level .
The European Union should take inspiration from the model followed in the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
For more consistent and better-integrated cooperation , it should have observer status in the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) , be more closely coordinated with the Council of Europe , and participate fully in the activities of the G7 / G8 and G20 .
This specific resolution strengthens the roles of the EU in the multilateral system .
To be specific , it clarifies the roles of the EU in international credit institutions , in the UN system , in multilateral security organisations and in other multilateral organisations in general , such as the World Trade Organisation , the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development .
Finally , the EU 's role in summit diplomacy is clarified .
Bearing in mind that European cooperation is a necessity , not a choice , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution by the European Parliament on the EU as a global actor .
Following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union 's diplomatic activities have been beefed up with a view to raising Europe 's profile on the international stage .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which calls for better representation for the Community institutions in international organisations .
The Europe of 27 is stronger now .
The new Member States have increased the Union 's economic and demographic strength .
However , the balance and coordination between Member States has been thrown out of kilter by enlargement .
The European message has changed : it has become richer and more complex .
As I see it , if we are to improve the European Union 's representation in multilateral organisations , we must first find a consensus .
I am pleased to see that the Union has supported the United Nations ' strategy , particularly in the case of humanitarian policy and conflict resolution .
Europe and the UN have a wealth of objectives and interests in common , which , in my view , justifies even closer cooperation and resource synergies .
I would therefore like to see Europe accorded a stronger position within the UN , particularly at the annual General Assembly .
I have voted in favour of this report .
The EU must increase its independence and develop its dialogues with third countries .
It must speak with a more powerful and more unified voice and respond much more quickly , in order to be able to act as a trustworthy and reliable partner .
The international situation has recently been changing ever more rapidly .
The rising economic importance of Asia , the revolutionary movements in Africa , the increased terrorist threat , the need to establish joint and sustainable European raw materials strategies and ever more frequent violations of human rights are just a few of the problems with which EU diplomacy has to contend today .
Experience has taught us that it is powerless in many cases .
The European Union 's foreign policy appears to be poorly thought-out and poorly coordinated .
Furthermore , the idea of joint and sustainable European policies has lost out on more than one occasion to the interests of the largest countries of the ' old ' EU .
A perfect example of this is the lack of a rule ensuring geographical balance when filling posts in the European External Action Service .
This system needs to be changed , and it was for this reason that I did not support the Muñiz De Urquiza report .
I believe that it identifies key conditions which the EU and the Member States should meet in order to be able to perform better the tasks enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , we should not endeavour to replace NATO with a new EU army , but instead concentrate on the appropriate division of tasks during international crises .
The EU 's role could lie in the provision of humanitarian aid , while the North Atlantic Alliance would coordinate military aid .
This distribution of tasks could also make it possible to strengthen cooperation with the EU 's most important trade and military partner , namely the United States .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Statement by the President of the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee - Novel foods ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the statement by the President of the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee - novel foods .
Conciliation procedure regarding the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1331 / 2008 and the repeal of Regulation ( EC ) No 258 / 97 and Commission Regulation ( EC ) No 1852 / 2001 on novel foods .



Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are disappointed that it has not been possible to reach agreement on the Novel Foods Regulation and that therefore , it is not possible to guarantee adequate information for consumers on the foods that we eat or to ensure that Europe has clear , strict rules on foods from cloned animals .
What I have said is not meant to be controversial : it is not Parliament 's fault .
If we have been unable to regulate cloning - one of the main sticking points in these negotiations - it is because the governments have not shown enough willingness .
However - and I address this point to the governments and the Commission - food safety and information on the products that reach our tables are basic principles of the European Union .
Everybody says so , but then we have to act accordingly , or else it becomes a slogan that consumers do not believe .
When these issues are being discussed , Parliament is not prepared to look the other way and content itself with the kind of general reassurances that the Council provided during the negotiations .
On such a sensitive and serious food safety issue , it is not acceptable just to dab on a touch of face powder to look good to the consumers .
Parliament was calling for a credible solution : the labelling of all foodstuffs derived from cloned animals and their offspring .
That really would have been a step in the right direction .
I would like to make another remark on a more general level : the governments continue to think that it is their prerogative to make all decisions .
It is still not clear to them that there is an institution - the European Parliament - which codecides .
We are directly elected by the citizens and we are determined to enforce our rights .
I invite the governments to read the Treaty of Lisbon carefully , because I am sure they have not paid attention to all parts of it .
I would like now to appeal to the Commission and to Commissioner Dalli , whose conduct during the negotiations was admirable , although perhaps the Commission did not explain his role in conciliating the positions .
Commissioner , I invite you to table a proposal on cloning as soon as possible in order to regulate the sector effectively once and for all .
That is what the people of Europe are calling for and what Parliament is calling for as well .
I would also like to acknowledge the Hungarian Presidency - which inherited this thorny problem only in the final stage of the procedure - for having made every possible effort to make up for lost time .
I thank all the Hungarian Presidency representatives for that .
I know they do not deserve any blame at all , which is due instead to the stalemate that occurred within the Council between the different national government positions .
Lastly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , who was magnificent : highly passionate , enthusiastic and competent .
She has followed this dossier with a love that really does credit to her , and I believe all of us owe her a huge vote of thanks , as we also do to the whole delegation from Parliament , all our fellow Members , the chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and everyone else .
We all worked together day and night to achieve a goal .
We were not successful , but the questions have been raised and I am sure that , if Commissioner Dalli is true to his word , we will be able to find a way again to provide ourselves with good regulations on cloning and novel foods .

Thank you , Mr Pittella , not least for the enthusiasm with which you made your statement .
I will now give the floor to Mrs Győri to respond on behalf of the Council , although I understand that you have lost your voice , so a representative will be speaking on your behalf .
I invite you to take the floor on behalf of the Council .
Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , today 's debate is a good occasion for me to present the Presidency 's observations on the recently held conciliation on the proposal for a regulation on novel foods .
It is also an excellent opportunity for the Presidency to learn Parliament 's opinion on this important issue .
Our European institutions have suffered a major collective failure .
There is no other course but to learn from this experience in a constructive manner based on professional criteria .
It is in this spirit that I turn to you today .
I have come not only to speak but also to listen to you .
I would like to begin by emphasising that the Presidency genuinely regrets that your institution and ours , the Council , were unable to reach agreement .
This is all the more true because both the Presidency and the Council attributed great importance to this proposal .
This was an unrivalled opportunity for us to update the European Union regulation in an area which directly affects us all : food .
There was a real chance for the European Union to show how it contributes in a tangible manner to making the lives of European citizens better .
The proposed regulation would have been a particularly good means of answering disputed questions on food from cloned animals by tightening the provisions of the 1997 regulation .
The 1997 regulation provides that such food products can only be marketed after an authorisation procedure .
In contrast , as a result of the recent conciliation procedure , a clear , albeit temporary , agreement was reached .
All parties agreed that the marketing of food from cloned animals must be completely prohibited .
Furthermore , this ban would have come into effect immediately after the regulation entered into force .
If the conciliation had been successful , we could now be jointly welcoming an imminent ban on the marketing of food from cloned animals .
This prohibition could have entered into force as early as the end of this month .
Unfortunately , this was not to be .
In the light of the failed negotiations , we may be apt to blame each other .
At the same time , it is our common interest and duty not to give in to this inclination but to seek a solution together .
Although the conciliation procedure has come to an end , the needs and expectations of European consumers have not altered at all , and therefore I am pleased to note that we have another chance to make progress .
It is up to us to restart this process as soon and as effectively as possible .
We must do our utmost especially to ensure that what we have agreed in the negotiations to date is not lost .
At third reading , we have reached the point where , in principle , we have agreed on an immediate ban on food from cloned animals .
We must not allow this agreement in principle to be lost .
Likewise , we must protect the major advance made in relation to engineered nanomaterials and traditional food from third countries as well as similar , important issues .
I believe that what we eat is important to all of us , and the kind of nourishment our children and grandchildren grow up on is even more important .
I would like to take this opportunity of thanking the Commissioner and his organisational units for the hard work they have done over the last few months .
I also welcome the fact that the Commission - as it has unofficially informed us - is working on drafting a new proposal at an accelerated pace , striving to preserve as many elements of the provisional agreement reached during the recent negotiations as possible in the new legislative proposal .
The Presidency guarantees its support to both the Commission and Parliament , and hopes that an opportunity to adopt this new proposal will arise as soon as possible .
Madam President , honourable Members , we are aware that the Commission has little room for manoeuvre .
After all , it is the task of the Council and Parliament as the two colegislators to find a solution which satisfies the needs and expectations of European citizens through joint efforts .
In the light of all this , I look forward to your views with truly great interest .
Welcome
Before I give you the floor , Commissioner , let me first extend a welcome on behalf of this House to the members of a delegation from the People 's Consultative Assembly of the Republic of Indonesia , who have just taken their seats in the official gallery above .
I would like to extend a very warm and special welcome to all of the delegation headed by His Excellency , Dr Lukman Hakim Saifuddin , the Vice-Chair of the People 's Consultative Assembly .
Indonesia is a key EU partner in South-East Asia .
Indeed , it is the leading country in the Association of South-East Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) , with whom the European Union signed a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement in November 2009 , and currently holds the chair of ASEAN .
Our two parliaments have an excellent relationship .
A delegation from Parliament visited Indonesia just a few months ago .
It is therefore a great pleasure to be able to welcome our friends and counterparts from the Indonesian Parliament today .
We hope that your visit will be fruitful and beneficial .
( Applause )
Statement by the President of the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee - Novel foods ( continuation of debate )
We shall now continue the debate on the Statement by the President of the European Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee - Novel foods .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , as I have already had the opportunity to state to both the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I cannot but express my disappointment at the failure of conciliation , notwithstanding our best efforts to find an agreement .
This situation is unfortunate , since we had made a lot of progress over recent months on the issues in the novel foods proposals .
Let me recall some of the elements on which there was clear agreement and which , if adopted , would bring many improvements to the legislation currently in place : a centralised procedure for approval of novel foods which streamlines the authorisation process while maintaining food safety ; a definition of ' nanomaterials ' and the obligation for pre-market approval , and a labelling requirement for all food ingredients containing nanomaterials ; a simplified procedure applicable to traditional foods from third countries , to facilitate EU market access for these products ; and the need for food business operators to share scientific data , where tests on animals are involved , in order to limit animal testing where possible .
These improvements will contribute to Europe 's innovation drive by facilitating the marketing of novel foods without any compromise on safety .
This dossier requires our concerted attention in order to put these improvements in place without further delay .
They will bring huge benefits in terms of both consumer protection and innovation in the food sector .
It is therefore my hope that we can capture the momentum of negotiations by making a proposal on this issue very shortly .
The failure to conclude this dossier came despite a number of positive steps achieved on the issue of cloning during the last months and hours of negotiations .
The Commission remains committed to following up the report of October 2010 which , I recall , proposed the following : a temporary suspension for five years of the use of the cloning technique in the EU , of the import and use of clones for food production , and of food from clones , which would be combined with the introduction of traceability systems for imports of semen and embryos from clones .
Furthermore , the Commission recognises the progress made during conciliation .
It is also clear to me that , on the issue of cloning in all its facets , we need to find an agreement that can be implemented and one that is justified and proportionate .
The Commission is ready to come up with a comprehensive proposal after the necessary impact assessment .
I welcome the conciliatory tone adopted by Mr Pittella and by the Presidency .
We need collectively to reflect further on the next steps , and I am ready to discuss with you , and with the Council , possible scenarios to deal with these two important issues and to agree on a process that will guarantee a positive outcome .
Such a collective reflection should seek to set a course for success on both dossiers so that consumers can reap the benefits .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Liotard , the Hungarian Presidency and Commissioner Dalli and his team for their efforts .
Unfortunately , however , this regulation , which is so important and so necessary , has not reached a satisfactory conclusion because of a labelling requirement that went beyond what was possible in practice .
This is a subject that inspires passion and attracts media attention , factors that run counter to logic and pragmatism .
I have to say that we have missed the chance to take a step forward , have condemned the agri-food industry to living with obsolete legislation and have put the brakes on European technological advancement , of which we are so supportive in theory .
We cannot demand something that involves a level of cost and bureaucracy that cannot be assumed by the food-producing sector , nor can we demand something that we are not capable of imposing upon third parties .
We cannot legislate on something that later we will not be able to implement because we would be deceiving consumers .
I repeat , it is a pity that we have not reached agreement because this regulation dealt not only with cloning and with how many generations and which products must be labelled , but also with many other points on which agreement has been reached , such as nanotechnology and foodstuffs coming from third countries , which were very important for consumers and for the agri-food industry , not only from the point of view of the internal market , but also from a health perspective and in terms of innovation .
Since cloning is too complex a matter to relegate to a few paragraphs in another proposal , I urge the Commission once again to prepare a report and present a separate legislative proposal that regulates every aspect of cloning , based on food security and all scientific data .
Given that Commissioner Dalli has committed himself on numerous occasions before this House to presenting this proposal , I trust that the Commission will send it to us as soon as possible .

Madam President , Mrs Győri , Mr Dalli , ladies and gentlemen , I have been involved in many negotiation processes here in Parliament , but the 12 hours of this conciliation procedure , which lasted from 19 : 00 to 07 : 00 the next morning , will remain in my memory for a long time .

This was a very special event .
Unfortunately , the two sides came from different planets .
Parliament 's approach was clear , which was to focus on the interests of consumers and of the citizens of the EU .
Others were considering the interests of the meat and agriculture industries .
Because of these divergent approaches , we were not able to reach an agreement .
This is a pity , because we now have a gap in the EU food legislation which we need to close very quickly .
We were all relatively clear about this , including Mr Pittella , who acted as chair , and the rapporteur .
The entire team was pulling together .
Now we need to take the next step .
We must fill this gap .
Mr Dalli , you must present two proposals : one on novel foods , because we have almost reached a consensus on this with regard to nanomaterials , the centralised approval process and imports from third countries .
The other proposal concerns cloning .
You have listened to everything that we have to say on this subject .
We do not want these products on the European market .
At the very least , we want them to be labelled , because consumers should have freedom of choice .
That is your job and Parliament is ready to support you .
I hope you will be able to submit a proposal very soon .

Madam President , I would first like to thank Mrs Liotard , Mr Pittella , Mr Leinen , and the entire negotiating team .
Thanks to them , we have maintained an extremely cohesive position throughout this very lengthy trialogue and I think that the only positive aspect of the dossier is that the European Parliament has been united in defending public health and the interests of consumers .
That is what we have been elected for and not for anything else .
While I recognise the need to move forward and not to assign blame , there is no getting away from the facts , and when it came to conducting negotiations in which Parliament had already abandoned a great deal , well , that was too much .
As if we should even be asking ourselves whether or not to label products sold on the European market when the consumer 's freedom of choice is fundamental in European law !
What has happened is totally unacceptable and we have been fobbed off with spurious pretexts .
We have been presented with legal excuses .
We were not entering into a commercial war ; the rules of the WTO were not being violated .
In legal terms , this was all untrue .
Not being able to label is an excuse .
It is technically incorrect .
It is perfectly possible to label and trace .
Simply , it was something we were unwilling to do because , as Mr Leinen pointed out just now , we put interests other than those of consumers first .
So , now , we need to move forward , and we need to move forward quickly .
The issue of cloning is increasingly being used by all who want to call the European institutions into question .
It is an argument put forward by those who mistrust our institutions .
It is an argument put forward by those who mistrust the foods placed on the European market .
For pity 's sake , we urgently need to adopt a clear position on cloning to prevent cloned meat and the offspring of cloned animals being placed on the European market , which is what European consumers and European citizens want !
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , after two long years of hard work , the Novel Foods Regulation has collapsed in disarray because a suitable agreement on the cloning issue could not be found .
Throughout the conciliation proceedings , I had warned that the stubborn refusal to compromise would lead to disaster and eventually it did .
Now we are back to square one , and we have lost a considerable amount of important and beneficial legislation on novel foods .
Conciliation proceedings are most certainly a useful mechanism in the legislative process , but they become futile and pointless if participants are not prepared to negotiate and to compromise .
If the Parliament had not been so inflexible , then we would have a much needed update of the rules .
Now we have to fall back on the 1997 Novel Foods Regulation , which is completely outdated .
If the European Parliament is trying to show that it is a powerful , responsible legislative body which is proud to have achieved the Lisbon Treaty , I think it flunked its first test .
The Commission now has to move forward and prepare separate legislation to cover cloning .
I only hope that MEPs will learn from their mistakes and realise that it is the people of Europe who suffer if we cannot agree on these key issues .
Madam President , I think that Mr Leinen put his finger on it .
This is a dossier that is finely balanced between the interests of the meat processing industry and the agricultural industry and those of the consumer .
I think that is the crux of the problem .
I think that we , as Parliament , have done important work here , along with the rapporteur , who I would like to congratulate for all her efforts .
We have worked hard and we have also shown ourselves to be flexible .
We were prepared , at any given point , to make a number of concessions , but it was never enough .
I do have reservations about the insufficiently flexible approach taken by the Commission to these concessions , but I am also not particularly satisfied with the Commission 's stance - not with your position , directly , Mr Dalli , but at one point , one of your fellow Commissioners , the Belgian Commissioner , Mr De Gucht , went behind the backs of the conciliation committee to appear before this Parliament 's Committee on International Trade , where he proceeded to present a whole series of sophisms .
The grounds cited were connected with the WTO , and we all know - Mrs Lepage was quite right to say this - that such grounds are out of the question here .
I think that the rapporteur will be coming back to this issue shortly .
What needs to happen now ?
Certainly , we have lost some time .
I believe that we do now have to ask the Commission to bring forward a new proposal in respect of novel foods quickly - we know that that may be possible , as something approaching an agreement was reached .
A proposal also needs to be brought forward about how we are going to deal with cloned food , meat from cloned animals and their offspring , and so on .
I have a warning to give , Commissioner : I want to see this happen on schedule .
I do not want to see this dossier kicked into the long grass and for us to then have it put before us at the end of our term or for it to be held over into the next parliamentary term .
This is the Parliament that debated this dossier at first and second reading and in conciliation .
It must therefore also be this Parliament that concludes it .
Madam President , I would like to begin by expressing my sincere thanks to my fellow Members in this House and in the delegation for the universal support I received in the negotiations , right until the end .
I am also full of admiration for the Hungarian ambassador , who really did all she could , as did Mr Dalli , in fact .
It is a real pity that we were unable to reach agreement in relation to clones .
Consumers can still find cloned products on their dinner tables , unsolicited and unlabelled , even though 77 % of European citizens are opposed to this .
I would say to the Council that banning clones alone is the politics of symbolism .
The real key here is the banning of offspring .
The clones themselves are so expensive that you would not make a hamburger out of them .
We were thus unable to reach a compromise on this issue .
The Council and the Commission both kept reiterating that a ban on offspring would be in contravention of World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules .
Mr De Gucht then went further by coming to Parliament and saying that it would lead to a trade war .
You can imagine , then , how surprised I was to read , clearly set out in a secret internal Council document that I got hold of - it is a document from the Legal Service of the Council of Ministers - that a ban on cloning offspring is actually perfectly justifiable under WTO rules .
The document clearly stated that
' The bans [ on ] food from cloned animals and [ ... ] food from offspring of clones could be justified on the basis of the consumers ' ethical considerations ' .
( NL ) I would like the Council to tell me whether all the Member States knew about this document .
If so , why the constant use of the argument about global trade wars so that no compromise could be reached with Parliament ?
I am now really curious to know what the real underlying reasons were .
If the Member States ' negotiators were not aware of this document , that is a scandal as far as I am concerned .
If they were aware of it , then disingenuous arguments were used .
Mr Dalli , the citizens await your next move .
In my view , regulation must be brought forward very quickly now .
You know that I am still prepared to collaborate and I am certain that we can find a solution .
I will hand over the document to the Council .
( FR ) Madam President , what Mrs Liotard has just said is absolutely incredible .
I would therefore like to press for an answer to the question she has just asked .
I am utterly amazed and would like to ask the Commission if it was also in possession of this note .
It is , in fact , unacceptable that , for weeks and weeks , we were being told that we would be engaging in open warfare with the WTO , that Mr De Gucht told us we would no longer be able to sell planes , that we would no longer be able to sell anything if we took that decision , when there was a legal note stating the exact opposite .
I think this is a crucial issue from a political standpoint .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think the Council has really outdone itself .
It should be remembered that the persons who represent Europe 's citizens are the ones democratically elected by them .
Therefore , if Parliament has continually insisted in committee and in this Chamber that cloned meat is not acceptable to our people , the Council ought to have taken notice .
Responsibility for this decision , which is very bad for business , lies wholly with the Council .
Except for the part dealing with cloned meat and a few other foodstuffs , the text would have been adopted by a very large majority .
The Council did not want it .
It is the same Council that , on the one hand , declares itself in favour of the liberalisation of everything and , on the other , forces the removal of the ' Made in ' wording on textiles because it does not want to give consumers the correct information , and is giving us a hard time over labelling because it does not want labels to indicate the place of origin or provenance of the food on our people 's tables .
That is the Council 's position .
Mr Pittella - and I thank him - did well to uphold the honour and the views of almost all Members of this House by rejecting the blackmailing proposal that the Council wanted to force on us .
I therefore thank Mr Pittella , the rapporteur and all those Members who had the courage not to give an inch on what we considered truly useful for our people .

( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Győri , Mr Dalli , ladies and gentlemen , we are all disappointed and that is obvious , but I do not think that the responsibility lies with the European Parliament 's negotiating delegation .
In my opinion , the Commissioner and the Minister who are present are not responsible either .
On the contrary , it was other representatives of the Council and the Commission who rushed to do their duty and identify problems in third countries which were not fully discussed .
Mr De Gucht and representatives of the finance ministries , for example , from Germany , which is my home country , painted horrific pictures of trade wars on a larger scale than the banana war and a number of other issues .
I do not believe that any of this had a basis in fact .
Yesterday , I had the great pleasure of meeting with representatives of the American embassy from my country , who had come especially to Strasbourg and even spoke German with me , to discuss issues relating to food policy .
The arguments of the American diplomats were not sufficiently convincing to prevent us from being able to find a solution .
I asked them what their opinion on the subject was and I did not get the impression that it would have been impossible for us to come to an agreement with the Americans if we had wanted to .
What particularly surprised me was that the Americans gave me this document describing origin labelling in the USA .
For example , minced meat must be labelled in the USA .
It must be clearly stated on a pack of hamburgers where the meat comes from .
How can we talk about a trade war if , at the same time , we want to label cloned meat and the meat from descendants of cloned animals ?
We should have made more effort in this area and not said immediately , as soon as the Americans expressed their doubts , that we could not do this .
I am calling on the Commission to see this as an argument for producing a new proposal .
We must be more self-confident if we want to implement this in the face of opposition from third countries .
Madam President , the President-in-Office of the Council spoke about the need not to point a finger of blame , but I think it is time for some intellectual honesty .
We all agree , yes , that we should not eat clones , but we all know that nobody is going to eat clones .
Another big sticking point in the negotiations was the Council 's failure to act on the import of embryos and semen into the EU , which allows farmers to breed offspring of clones .
Those offspring are bred from clones who have suffered to be born .
Commissioner , is it not true that we have , or soon will have , EU laws which prohibit the placing on the market of products from seals , of dog and cat fur , and of cosmetics which are tested on animals ?
We have those laws , so why can we not have a law which prohibits the placing on the EU market of products which result from the cruel practice of cloning ?
I agree with Ms Liotard .
This is not a matter for the World Trade Organisation : it is a matter of political will , and we can show that , and that is what will satisfy this Parliament , and that is the basis for agreement .
( DA ) Madam President , a huge amount of work has gone into this regulation , both by Mrs Liotard and by the shadow rapporteurs .
Many thanks for that .
Unfortunately , it all ended , as we know , in disagreements about food from cloned animals .
I come from a country where food from cloned animals is prohibited .
However , cloning is nevertheless coming in through the back door .
The subject is often brought up in guarded secrecy outside the debate .
I find it strange that we want total transparency in everything from socks and television to medicines and banks , but when it comes to food , the situation is completely different .
Colourants , gases to increase shelf life , growth hormones , antibiotics , GMOs and much more besides are used - preferably without consumers being able to read about it on the packaging .
Why is no one interested in ensuring that foodstuffs are as natural as possible ?
Why do we not pay more attention to our own health and welfare and that of our productive livestock ?
I cannot understand why so little responsibility is shown for the health of children and adults in certain European circles .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it really is regrettable that this draft law was overturned , and I agree with my fellow Members who say that it was due to the fact that the Commission and the Council decided to give priority to the interests of the foreign meat industry .
Their interests are the desire to do business by cloning animals , at the cost of animal suffering .
Parliament , meanwhile , listened to European consumers , the overwhelming majority of whom do not want the use of cloning in meat or milk production , the overwhelming majority of whom want to reduce animal suffering , not increase it .
Parliament has not actually been inflexible .
It made huge concessions , and was ready to withdraw the ban on labelling .
The Council did not even agree to this , and , as we have now heard from Mrs Liotard and Mr Liese , for example , the arguments put forward by the Council and the Commission were completely mendacious and were most likely even knowingly false .
It is quite clear that no lasting solution to this problem will be found unless we take it as given that we should respect the will of European consumers to reduce animal suffering instead of increasing it .
( FR ) Madam President , I would first like to make a general observation .
When we talk of consumers ' lack of confidence in the institutions , I believe that is not the issue .
It is often individuals who create such mistrust and who derive a personal interest from doing so .
I will now get back to the substance .
It is true that , at the end of a long night of negotiations , which lasted from 19 : 00 to 07 : 00 , there was huge disappointment .
It is true that the European Commission now has a huge task ahead of it , because it must submit new proposals and because developments in technology now make the revision of this legislation essential .
When we think , for example , of nanomaterials , that appears very urgent .
It is completely unacceptable that there is no control over cloning techniques or over the food resulting from these techniques , which could be intended for human consumption .
There are clear principles and I believe that all of us in this Parliament are entirely in agreement .
Consumers must be informed of the origin of food derived from cloned animals and their offspring .
We must demand two things : traceability and labelling .
I am in no doubt about the will of Commissioner Dalli to clarify this matter and to find the right solutions to the countless issues that remain unresolved .
Traceability is essential .
European consumers must be able to make an informed choice .
As European legislators , we cannot afford to say to the public : ' Europe is doing nothing because we have not succeeded in reaching an agreement ' .
Commissioner , I know that you are endeavouring to overcome the institutional stalemates we are witnessing in order to give a firmer guarantee not only to consumers but also to food business operators .
There is no time to spare and we must act quickly to find a way forward .
Madam President , I am afraid I will be less diplomatic .
I have to say to the Commissioner and the representative of the Council : you are again proposing a ban on food from cloned animals but nobody can buy food from cloned animals .
Cloned animals are very expensive to use for food .
It will be their descendants that are used for food .
That is why we want a ban on their descendants , and why we want clear labelling of the descendants .
I am afraid that your role in the negotiations was not productive .
You were fighting against this labelling on descendants , which was a minimum common denominator with the Council .
This was our chance to have an agreement .
Please learn the lessons , listen to what this institution has to say on the issue , and come back to us with a decent proposal .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Dalli , ladies and gentlemen , I also very much regret the fact that the negotiations have failed , in particular , because we will now have to wait for years until we have rules governing , for example , nanotechnology in foods and products from third countries which are currently unknown in Europe .
It seems that by including cloned animals in this legislation , we have fallen into a trap .
I must say that the way we have debated this issue has not been dignified .
The discussions went on all night with each side going to and fro and neither wanting to give in .
Then , in the end , the negotiations failed , which is very unfortunate .
I would like to make one point .
We are talking here about a number of subjects and about legislation .
We used the same strategy for genetic engineering .
We did not want genetic engineering and we significantly raised the limits and the requirements .
What was the end result ?
The technology developed to such an extent that it was even able to meet these high standards .
We are currently discussing the fact that we do not want cloned animals because the animal welfare requirements are not being fulfilled , which gives rise to risks .
I have spoken to the scientists and I predict that the technology will develop to such an extent that it will no longer be possible to apply a general ban on cloning animals .
However , I believe that these scientific developments are highly questionable .
We must look more closely at the basic principles that we need to lay down in order to put in place proper regulations .
We should not attempt to slow down or even prevent certain developments by means of legislation .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to begin by saying how disappointed I am in the failure of conciliation .
Although whole months , and even years of work have been spent on this , the outcome is disappointing , especially at a time when agreement was possible on many items in this dossier .
However , the rapporteur deserves all our appreciation for her efforts .
On the issue of food from cloned animals and their offspring , Parliament was right when it maintained its point of view based on principle .
We are aware that we are representing the will of European citizens when we oppose the presence of cloned animals and their offspring in the food chain .
During the negotiations , the Council ignored these legitimate concerns , which is extremely regrettable .
If we had accepted the Council 's final proposal , we could not have claimed that we defended the wishes of ordinary citizens not to have cloned meat on their table .
We were not prepared to approve laws which would have allowed food from the offspring of cloned animals to enter the market without it being labelled as such .
As for the future , I would like to remind the Commission of the commitments which it made in October 2010 , mainly , to ban cloning techniques for producing food in the European Union .
Another commitment was to set up traceability systems for reproductive material originating from cloned animals outside the EU .
These commitments were made on several occasions and must feature in the new proposals .
I am confident that Member States will focus greater attention on the legitimate concerns of the European Union 's citizens .
( IT ) Madam President , I agree with everything that the Members who have spoken before me have said .
I , too , was a member of the delegation to the Conciliation Committee .
As the negotiations went on , there were feelings of hope , disappointment and even rage , if I may say so , because we were there representing over 500 million people , the vast majority of whom - according to all the surveys and research - keep crying out that they do not want food from cloned animals or their offspring on their tables .
Labelling and traceability were really the minimum on which we had taken a stand .
Had we accepted the compromise , we would have found it empty .
Mr Pittella is right : a dab of powder , a touch of rouge , perhaps a little wool pulled over the eyes , but nothing more than an empty shell .
Let us not fool ourselves : nobody pays EUR 100 000 for a bull only to put it through the mincer and sell it as hamburgers .
For all the rest , there was no regulation ; we would have been accepting deregulation , and we cannot do that .
Today , however , we are still here defending certain decisions and maintaining that it was a collective failure .
It was not a collective failure , though , because there was agreement on practically everything , even though it failed miserably giving people the impression that big business and trade rules prevail over the European citizenry , whom we are here to represent and defend .
I therefore call on absolutely everyone to start again with a fresh mind and a fresh outlook , because I hope and pray that the expectations and the will of the people will be respected next time .
( LT ) Madam President , probably everyone would agree that information is one of the main driving forces in the modern world .
This rule also applies when talking about food safety .
We are still considering and , hopefully , will adopt new rules on the provision of general information on foods to consumers , as well as different issues , such as fruit juice and derived products .
Unfortunately , it was not possible to reach a compromise with the Council on novel foods and we have taken a step backwards .
The majority of consumers do not want food products from cloned animals , but the reality is that they exist .
It is therefore essential to ensure that the public is made aware .
However , arguing that it could cause difficulties for business and producers , representatives of the Member States did not endorse the requirement for labelling or traceability , in other words , the minimum requirements for being able to ensure consumer awareness .
Thus , consumers still have no way of knowing , whether , for example , the milk they are drinking comes from cloned animals .
However , this is just one side of the coin .
Now we have prevented new technologies , research and the use of results in the food industry .
With such disagreement , we ourselves have postponed the solution of these problems indefinitely .
We all expect emergency proposals from the European Commission that will help us to eliminate this legal impasse .
Madam President , are we really surprised that we did not reach agreement ?
Certainly , my view from the outside was that there were too many differences around the table , and I am not sure that starting at 7 p.m. a meeting which was doomed to fail at 7 a.m. was such a great idea , but we still have to resolve this particular problem and perhaps dividing the legislation into two parts might achieve it .

The issue of cloning is a very sensitive issue , and there are animal welfare concerns which others have spoken about , but the issue of reproductive material needs to be addressed .
We need clarity as to how this can be addressed within the WTO rules , because farmers in Europe want access to the best technologies available to them to be more productive .
So , within that framework , we do have issues to resolve here in this House , and I hope that they can be resolved satisfactorily .
Finally , on the issue of Europe 's standards versus the rest of the world , we import meat products into the European Union .
Are we as clear about what we are importing as we are demanding about what is produced within the EU itself ?
This is also an issue which needs to be addressed .


( DE ) Madam President , Mr Dalli , firstly , I would like to thank Mr Dalli for his efforts in the area of prevention .
I hoped and expected that we would see this level of commitment from him with regard to cloned materials .
We have had several hours of intensive discussions and I see myself as a representative of the people of Europe who clearly support the position that Parliament has taken and want to see progress in this area .
Together with 500 million Europeans , we want clear labelling as the minimum solution .
In reality , we would like a ban on cloned animals and on products from cloned animals , regardless of which generation they come from .
We hoped for your support , Mr Dalli .
We did not understand why the Council was not on our side , because the Council is made up of elected representatives of the Member States .
However , they were obviously serving the needs of the market and not those of the people .
We hope that in future , you will put the people at the centre of your decision-making processes and not the market .
( DE ) Madam President , consumer protection policy is a central element of overall European policy .
If we do not manage to provide consistent protection for consumers , then we will have totally failed in this respect .
It is important to explain that it is not just the majority of consumers who do not want cloning , it is also the majority of farmers .
I believe that some Member States have deliberately sabotaged the negotiations .
They have decided to protect the agriculture industry and defend its interests .
All the talk of an imminent trade war , which has been mentioned several times today , was simply a pretext .
For reasons of European animal welfare policy alone , we should be taking measures against cloning , Mr Dalli , and we hope that you will draw up a regulation as quickly as possible .
There is a need for action .
We are calling on you not to wait for months , but to come to grips with this issue straight away .
The ban on cloning is simply one step in the process .
We must insist on a regulation being introduced which covers the descendants of cloned animals , otherwise the whole thing will be fundamentally ineffective .
( SK ) Madam President , I do not want to point fingers , but I think that the failure of the conciliation procedure is a setback and we have thrown out the baby with the bathwater .
Cloning is not just a complex , but also a sensitive topic .
Dolly the sheep was neither the first nor the last cloned animal .
Tens of thousands of other attempts end in failure .
Deformed foetuses with excessively large organs die in the wombs of experimental animals , others are born dead and others perish just a few days after birth .
Cloning is a worse tyranny for animals than small cages or being transported in lorries without water .
It is therefore right that the regulation on new foodstuffs includes a ban on the sale of cloned animals and their offspring .
I do not believe it is highly complex to deal with the cloning issue now .
We must now give a clear signal to food producers that products from animals that are suffering have no place on the European market .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , novel foods are food products or ingredients that undergo production processes and involve a change in nutritional value .
I have a number of doubts about the new Novel Food Regulation .
What relation will it bear to the regulation on genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) , since cloning is an aspect of genetic engineering and , as with GMOs , it involves actual genetic manipulation ?
How will the movement of these foods between European countries be regulated ?
How will the scientific tests needed to test the safety of these novel foods be carried out ?
What will the criteria be for defining these products and , most of all , how will consumers be informed of the characteristics and nutritional properties of the novel foods they purchase ?
My central concerns are consumer protection , food safety in the use of these novel products , and correct information .
I therefore believe there must be total traceability for consumers , especially for natural products , for which we already find it difficult to guarantee traceability .
( EL ) Madam President , I believe that this entire issue has arisen due to a lack of information for consumers and the public .
Where there is no transparency in information for the citizens of Europe and the world as a whole , impasses are created and we get nowhere .
What I want to emphasise is that , when there is a strong reaction to such products , we and the decision makers and legislators need to toe the line demanded by public opinion .
We therefore need information and transparency in everything we do if we are to finish what we have started .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I have taken careful note of the opinions expressed during the course of this debate .
I would like to thank honourable Members for their views and assure them once again that the Commission will continue to work with Parliament , Member States and stakeholders from all sectors in pursuit of the common aim of moving forward as fast as possible with both proposals on novel food and cloning .
I must stress that the position taken by the Commission during the conciliation - and we were advancing various proposals in this regard - was that , as I said before , any solution or any compromise that could be reached had to be implementable .
It would be possible to implement , and it would be justified and proportionate .
Whatever all of us would like to have - and as Commissioner responsible for consumers , I am all for information to consumers - this must , however , be evidence-based and we must have an impact assessment .
That was our position .
The Commission has never put forward a position against any type of labelling , but we were saying that every decision we take has to be assessed to ensure the impact it is going to have on our citizens at large , be they producers or be they consumers , and that is the position that I still hold .
I can assure you that the Commission services and I will pursue this challenge with all determination and energy , and I also assure you , especially Mr Staes , that I do not put off decisions that need to be taken .
Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , on behalf of the Presidency and the Council , thank you for the debate .
I would like to express my special thanks for the speeches which acknowledged the efforts of the Hungarian Presidency and which recognised these efforts .
We also welcome the fact that the arguments put forward during the conciliation procedure have been presented here .
At the same time , we wish to repudiate statements or suggestions alleging that either the Council or the Hungarian Presidency acted dishonestly or in bad faith , or was under the influence of interest groups .
The best aspect of the Treaty of Lisbon is that it increased our joint responsibility .
We have tried and are trying to act in this spirit .
We have been unable to agree , so now in this respect , any product may be served at our tables without restriction .
This is worse than the Council 's last offer would have been .
Precisely what was that ?
It was a ban on cloned animals and products derived from them , and the monitoring and labelling of first progeny , naturally within reasonable limits .
One only has to think , for example , of the very many ingredients salami has .
Reasonableness and pricing will set the limit .
We wish to say specifically to Mrs Liotard that , as regards the internal Council document you quoted , the Member States were aware of it and naturally the Council was aware of it , and even discussed it .
It helped in establishing our position .
You cited a sentence taken in isolation from this document while failing to mention that the document states in its conclusions precisely that there are risks from the aspect of WTO compatibility , as well as that these conclusions also mention that the most acceptable solution is labelling , which , I repeat , was included in the Council 's last offer .
However , I agree with you all that we should move on as soon as possible .
We hope that before long , we will know more about aspects of food safety due to scientific research and progress .
I am pleased that Commissioner Dalli promised that there will be a new , separate draft on cloning and the subject of cloned products soon .
Madam President , all the speeches made by the Members who have spoken before me - whom I thank , starting with the rapporteur - as well as the documentation presented by the rapporteur herself , which underlines the fact that our proposals , had they been accepted , would not have unleashed a trade war , have shown that there was no collective failure , and I repeat this to the Hungarian Presidency without wishing to be polemical .
There certainly was a failure , but it was in an area for which the governments were clearly responsible .
Let nobody tell me that merely labelling beef from cloned animals or their offspring could be considered an honourable and satisfactory agreement for Parliament , because this was little more than no agreement at all .
Let us now draw a veil over all that and look to the future .
It is , first of all , the Council 's job to get the governments to agree once they know what Parliament 's positions are , which are the positions of the people of Europe .
Labelling of products from cloned animals and their offspring is the minimum we will settle for .
Work is needed within and between governments to accept this minimum .
I therefore call on Commissioner Dalli - who I know is very willing - to table a Commission proposal incorporating our positions as soon as possible , so as to allow this House to approve the regulation on cloning .
We must also go ahead on nanomaterials , and now that the cloning part has been removed , we can move quickly on these .
I have one final comment : you have all noticed how united Parliament is .
This is substantial , 360 degree unity .
You may perhaps have made a mistake during the negotiations , thinking that there was no cohesion in the European Parliament .
Please do not make that mistake again , because on sensitive issues relating to people 's health , we are and will remain united .
( NL ) Madam President , this is actually a point of order .
Several times in the debate , the position of Commissioner De Gucht has been mentioned .
Mrs Lepage asked Commissioner Dalli whether he was aware of the Council 's legal advice .
I heard Mr Dalli give many answers to our questions , but I did not hear an answer to that question , even though it is a crucial one .
Is this perhaps a matter of a lack of consensus within the Commission , as Mr Dalli is in the Commission as the Commissioner for Health and Consumer Policy , while Mr De Gucht , by all accounts , came out with false arguments that were invalidated by a Council document .
I would like to hear from the Commissioner what his view on this is .
The debate is closed .
Small Business Act review ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question to the Council on the Small Business Act ( SBA ) review by Bendt Bendtsen , on behalf of the PPE Group , Edit Herczog , on behalf of the S & D Group , Fiona Hall , on behalf of the ALDE Group , Reinhard Bütikofer , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , Giles Chichester , on behalf of the ECR Group , and Niki Tzavela , on behalf of the EFD Group - B7-0301 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the Small Business Act ( SBA ) review by Bendt Bendtsen , on behalf of the PPE Group , Edit Herczog , on behalf of the S & D Group , Fiona Hall , on behalf of the ALDE Group , Reinhard Bütikofer , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , Giles Chichester , on behalf of the ECR Group , and Niki Tzavela , on behalf of the EFD Group - B7-0302 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , the economic crisis has had an effect on Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises .
In addition , there are the new Basel rules that are now to be implemented in the forthcoming Capital Requirements Directive .
This will probably make it even more difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises to obtain capital for the growth that Europe needs .
In this resolution , the European Parliament is sending a clear signal to the Commission that it is now that the necessary decisions need to be taken to benefit our small and medium-sized enterprises .
Now it is true that politicians should not be running businesses , but they should be involved in creating the fertile soil in which Europe 's businesses can grow .
I am pleased that we will now have a revision of the Small Business Act .
We must take relevant action instead of merely toasting our European enterprises .
There is an urgent need for better access to financing for small and medium-sized enterprises .
There is also a need for enhanced market access , including the modernisation of the standardisation system within the EU , and for better access for small and medium-sized enterprises to public procurement opportunities .
Finally , I would like to mention that we need to reduce our enterprises ' administrative burden , in connection with reporting , for example .
Why should small business owners have to submit a report more than once ?
Once should be enough .
The public authorities should deal with the further distribution of the information themselves .
We must consider the fact that , when we produce new legislation in the EU and get it implemented in the Member States , we often impose even more burdens on our small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is therefore not enough simply to reduce the number . We must also ensure , every time we produce legislation , that we do not create additional burdens for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Overall , we need to make it easier for businesses to operate in Europe and we need to act now .
Mr President , Commissioner , I beg your pardon .
I glanced up at the public gallery for an instant as I have the good fortune that a visiting group from Hungary also happens to be present right now .
The Small Business Act has become incorporated into European thinking in recent times .
Based on the practical experience of the last two years , now is the time to review , update and strengthen the Small Business Act .
We , the posers of the question , have summarised the most important issues in 34 points in the proposal for a decision .
I would like to mention a few of these .
Implementation is very important .
The Member States have done their work with different degrees of efficiency and commitment with consequent success .
We would like a single database and results table to measure success and excesses .
Commissioner , in our view , the aim is not to infringe employees ' rights in any way but to create jobs .
Reducing administration is not the same as infringing upon employees ' rights , but rather the opportunity must be created for micro and small enterprises to cooperate .
As regards access to financial resources , it is very important that the use of funds available at European Union level be more efficient .
We have achieved 75 % efficiency until now and roughly 50 000 SMEs have received funds in this way .
At the same time , approximately 300 000 SMEs have managed to access funding under the competitiveness and innovation programme .
We must definitely strengthen and preserve this .
It is very important that the institutional network helps small and medium-sized enterprises .
For this reason , the European Enterprise Network must be strengthened .
We would very much like to find a solution that allows the Erasmus programme for young entrepreneurs to continue .
We would like all the 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises to be able to hire at least one more employee .
In this way , we could make a significant contribution to improving the labour market situation .
However , it is highly important that the labour force working for small and medium-sized enterprises be better qualified than at present .
It is especially important that they can take part in the implementation of the Green Economy programme and obtain digital skills .
The most important thing for us is that young entrepreneurs with small and medium-sized businesses should not regard different forms of enterprise as losers but as winners .
author . - Mr President , the Small Business Act was given a warm welcome by SMEs , but that was two years ago .
It is really important that we now show small businesses that this was not just a piece of paper .
On the issue of administrative burden , the target should not be a once-off which we reach and then abandon .
It is something we have to keep working on .
I am particularly concerned about the situation that micro-businesses find themselves in .
It is all right - or it is relatively all right - for a small business of 249 employees that has specialist administrative staff but , for a micro-business with one or two staff , over-regulation can actually make trading impossible .
We should not forget that micro-businesses of less than 10 employees actually make up over 90 % of all EU businesses .
Micro-businesses really need to be treated like family units and , in particular , the EU and its Member States need to work together to look at how small businesses can be given upfront support for energy efficiency improvements .
Indeed , the broader question of finance for SMEs is vital .
Just before Easter , a number of MEPs from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy went to California to see how investment works in Silicon Valley .
What we discovered was that venture capital was much more available than in Europe , and that those who provided it were much more risk-taking in their approach .
Californian venture capitalists expect nine out of ten investments to fail .
The one in ten which succeeds pays for all the rest , but the motto is ' fail fast ' .
There is much we can learn about how we could better support our own innovative small businesses in Europe .
Perhaps not least , we should not stigmatise failure but rather use it as a step to success .
author . - Mr President , there is a fundamental paradox in EU policy on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
On the one hand , there is almost unanimous support for their importance to the economy , to employment , wealth creation , innovation and flexibility , and their overall sheer size within the economy .
If positive rhetoric could be converted into orders and cash in the bank , then the Union 's SMEs would be in great shape .
However , the big challenge - which is addressed in this resolution - is how to convert warm words into useful deeds without just throwing money at SMEs - money that is not available in today 's economy .
On the other hand , the EU combines this positive sentiment with plenty of legislation on employment protection and environmental requirements : legislation which is well-intentioned but all of which bears most heavily on SMEs , increasing the administrative burden on small business when we should be reducing it .
There are many constructive suggestions in this resolution .
I particularly like the proposal for combating the practice known in my country as ' gold plating ' , whereby national authorities add layers of regulation to European measures .
My personal view , as one who worked in a small business for 25 years , is that actually , while it would be nice to reduce this burden of administration , the best we can do for small businesses is to improve access to information and to finance .
Mr President , it does not happen every day in Parliament that Members of six different political groups table a joint question which leads to a debate .
Today , we have a case of this kind and it is no coincidence that it concerns the role of small and medium-sized businesses .
This is a commonly held and broad-based concern .
One of the questions we are asking is : What is the Commission doing to further strengthen the particularly successful financial instruments in future for small and medium-sized companies ?
One of these successful instruments is the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) .
What will happen to CIP when the common strategic framework for research and innovation is developed ?
What opportunities will there be for small and medium-sized enterprises in this context ?
It will definitely not be possible to make the concept of innovation so broad and far-reaching that it covers all the relevant activities and all small and medium-sized businesses .
However , we must not make the mistake of only promoting the competitiveness of those small and medium-sized firms which have been identified as being particularly innovative .
Therefore , I believe that it is very important for the right decisions to be made in the common strategic framework .
I would also like to mention specifically that this also concerns the issue of the criteria on which simplification and the reduction of red tape are based .
CIP is already much less bureaucratic than the Seventh Framework Programme .
It would not be sensible to apply the standards of the Seventh Framework Programme in the case of small and medium-sized companies .
We need to find a practical way of continuing the measures which have been good for small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , in programmes such as CIP , so that these activities do not fall by the wayside during the course of a reorganisation .
author . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleagues on their contribution to this very useful resolution and to state that I agree with all that has been said so far .
Nevertheless , I have made some amendments on a couple of issues which I feel could be constructive and useful contributions to the final text .
Firstly , there is no mention in the text of the effects of illegal trade on small businesses .
Unfortunately , in this day and age , illegal trade is a reality and a phenomenon which is growing in all Member States .
To put it simply , illegal trade is one of the biggest obstacles to the emergence and growth of Europe 's small businesses .
My second comment concerns the Commission 's ' second chance ' initiative for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
In these times of economic difficulty especially , it is important to support SMEs and help them to develop .
This leads me to my last point .
I think it is regrettable that few of our innovative SMEs grow into larger companies and that there are fewer young , R & D-intensive , innovative firms in the EU than in the USA .
Significant shortages in innovation-related skills prevent SMEs from adopting innovative smart business models and new technologies .
This is an issue we must address , and we must cultivate in Europe the risk-taking spirit that exists in the USA among the young generation of Americans .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I am grateful to Parliament for the interest shown in the Small Business Act and the opportunity afforded by this especially to discuss what action we should take with regard to the different initiatives mentioned in relation to the review of the Small Business Act .
The Small Business Act is a very important tool which helps us create a more favourable business environment for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Small and medium-sized enterprises make a major contribution to the European economy as the vast majority of companies belong to this category and they provide jobs for over 90 million people throughout Europe .
For this reason , the full implementation of the policy for small and medium-sized enterprises and , in particular , the Small Business Act , is a high priority task for the Hungarian Presidency .
The success of our competitiveness strategy depends on how our policy initiatives affect small and medium-sized enterprises .
One of the keys to future growth is that highly competitive and innovative small and medium-sized enterprises should operate in Europe .
Accordingly , the Council welcomes with great pleasure the Commission 's communication on the review of the Small Business Act , which was published on 23 February 2011 .
In the communication , the Commission suggests various new initiatives in several priority areas for further action to be taken .
These initiatives were created as the result of wide-ranging consultations with associations of small and medium-sized enterprises and the relevant authorities .
Thus , they duly bear in mind the interests of both the enterprises themselves and other stakeholders .
The Commission 's communication was discussed at the informal meeting of competitiveness ministers in Gödöllő in Hungary on 13 April 2011 .
At these talks , the ministers fully supported the Presidency 's opinion that the four main issues to be handled as priorities are smart regulation , financing , internationalisation and governance .
More work is needed to enable us to make progress in these issues .
At the same time , it is the Presidency 's firm intention to maintain the impetus of the process at the meeting of the Competitiveness Council to be held on 31 May 2011 , which will also consider the mid-term review of the Small Business Act .
At the aforementioned meeting , the Presidency would like the Council to adopt conclusions in which the ' think small first ' principle is applied in particular , that is to say , the principle which the Commission 's communication is based on .
As regards the status of the European private company , the European Commission first made a recommendation on the subject in a Council draft regulation in 2008 .
The idea behind the proposal was to make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to do business in the single market , and this must result in reducing costs and increased economic growth .
Some concerns arose in the Council about certain aspects and parts of the proposal .
Despite the commendable efforts of the Swedish and Belgian presidencies , the Member States have not managed to reach agreement to this day .
I can assure the honourable Members that the Hungarian Presidency is striving to find the way to progress with regard to the particularly problematic issues of this proposal and will continue to do all it can to bring the matter to a successful conclusion .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , many thanks to the honourable Members for this important oral question and your debate .
I will respond to the question on behalf of my colleague , Vice-President Antonio Tajani .
In fact , small and medium-sized enterprises account for 99 % of all European enterprises and generate most of the value-added of the real economy and create two-thirds of the jobs in the private sector .
The EU is relying on SMEs and is creating the conditions under which they can develop and grow in order to create jobs in competitive markets .
SMEs need less red tape , easier access to finance green markets and skills that match the needs of the real economy .
These are the principles behind our SME policy as presented in the review of the Small Business Act for Europe .
I will outline five avenues of work in the frame of your five questions in the oral question in my response on behalf of the Commission .
In the review , the Commission invites the Member States to systematically assess the impact of the legislation on SMEs by using the SME test .
The European Parliament and the Commission are working together on a study of the application of the SME test in the Member States and at European level .
The Commission will use this test as a basis for planning additional measures to support implementation and the exchange of best practice .
We are also currently completing a study on the problems associated with licensing and official authorisation , company transfer and bankruptcy procedures in the Member States .
The study will enable the Commission and , in particular , the Member States , to plan appropriate measures for applying the ' think small first ' principle to administrative services .
This will be made possible in particular by expanding online administration and the one-stop shop in line with the recommendations made in the review .
Secondly , a new system of governance will be introduced .
The Commission has invited the Member States to appoint a SME representative - ' Ms or Mr SME ' - to monitor the implementation of the SBA at national level .
The national representatives will be members of a consultative group for the SBA which will help to assess and disseminate information concerning the measures taken to support SMEs .
They will meet for the first time at the SBA Conference in Budapest on 24 and 25 May this year .
Thirdly , SMEs are intended to be the main beneficiaries of the European programme to reduce the administrative burden .
The Commission has submitted to the Council and the EP proposals for reducing administrative costs very substantially - by up to over 30 % when they are implemented - while the proposals already adopted will reduce administrative costs by 22 % .
The Commission is relying on the Parliament to ensure that our proposals are adopted as soon as possible .
Certain proposals , such as the review of the Fourth Accounting Directive , will benefit SMEs in particular .
When it has been adopted by the Council and Parliament , the review of the Fourth Accounting Directive will enable Member States to exempt very small enterprises from certain accounting obligations .
Fourthly , the SBA has also created a framework to enable SMEs to take up the challenge of energy efficiency by improving their energy management and seizing the opportunities presented by the environmental market .
The action plan to encourage eco-innovation will also be implemented , paying particular attention to SMEs by promoting networking , low carbon technologies and efficient management of the use of resources .
We will also continue developing action specifically devoted to environment and energy experts within the Enterprise Europe network .
Finally , as part of the flagship initiative on the Agenda for new skills and jobs , the Commission will assess future skills needs in micro- and craft-type enterprises .
An initial study on identification of future skills requirements in micro- and craft-type enterprises up to 2020 has just been published .
It identifies the actions which need to be taken to meet future skills requirements , promote them more effectively and include them more systematically in training programmes for both micro-enterprises and craft-type enterprises .
Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , today , we find ourselves discussing in this House a joint proposal for a resolution on the revision of the Small Business Act , which the Commission submitted in February .
The relationship between small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and the economy can be defined in many ways , but in a sense , they are the axis around which any economic system revolves , in this case , the European economies .
If they are strong , the economy will do well ; if they are weak , the economy will do badly .
SMEs generate jobs , growth and , accordingly , prosperity for society .
I shall refer to three factors that seem to me to be fundamental to achieving a strong network of enterprises .
First , the adoption of information and communication technology and the development of technologies such as online administration or cloud computing , which save money , reduce costs and effort and , therefore , improve the competitiveness of SMEs .
Second , innovation , which is equally fundamental in this sector .
Accordingly , up-and-coming enterprises in the small and medium-sized business sector must be strongly incentivised .
Third , SMEs must be able to participate fully in the internal market , both in terms of cross-border public tendering and as regards all other features of the internal market , which are capable of providing extraordinary benefits to SMEs in terms of their competitiveness but are currently failing to do so .
Finally , after all this comes the value of entrepreneurship , a social value which must be strong since , if it is not , the whole network will be weak .
In this area , both governments and the European Union have much to do , principally through education .
Mr President , certainly , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) have the advantage of being flexible and agile and close to the customer , which enables them to make decisions much more quickly .
These are very important characteristics in times of crisis , when the ability to respond quickly is vital .
Moreover , as we well know , they make up more than 90 % of the fabric of our business sector and they are a valuable model that we must maintain , because the effects of a large business failing or relocating are much more devastating , above all , in employment terms .
For that reason , we , and governments in particular , cannot afford to throw a spanner in the works of these businesses .
For that reason , we approved the Small Business Act and , for that reason also , exercises such as this one are vital to the continuing progress of Member States in applying the political and legislative measures that we have agreed .
Ladies and gentlemen , European SMEs urgently need the firm political will to improve their access to public tenders that is contained in the Small Business Act to be converted into real , tangible , operative measures .
We applaud the measures that some Member States have taken , such as dividing tenders into lots and improving electronic access to information from centralised websites and interactive web pages , but we do not think that this is sufficient .
From this House , we must insist that those responsible for public procurement within the various administrative bodies incorporate terms into their tender specifications that facilitate positive discrimination in favour of SMEs and remove contractual provisions that hinder their participation .

Mr President , Mr Rehn , the joint question on the review of the Small Business Act shows that there is still a great deal to be done to ensure that medium-sized companies in Europe have freedom to act , particularly on a national level .
However , I am pleased that in recent years , we have succeeded in implementing almost all the provisions of the Small Business Act in the European Union .
Most recently , a new directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions came into force in March , which will make an important contribution to improving payment practice in Europe .
Now the Member States have two years to implement the new directive .
I would like to call for this timeframe to be shortened , in particular , in the Member States where this would not present a significant problem .
Instead of delaying implementation for two years , it could be completed , where possible , within one year .
The Member States have not yet been able to agree on the statute for a European private company .
Therefore , I very much welcome the fact that the Hungarian Presidency is following up this issue and making it one of the focal points of its work .
This form of company in particular could enable small and medium-sized enterprises to save a great deal of money .
I am thinking , in particular , of accounting , establishing a company and ongoing legal advice .
Therefore , I would like to say again how pleased I am that the Hungarian Presidency is focusing on this area .
The issue just mentioned by Mrs Riera Madurell is also important , and that is public procurement .
Here , we can still achieve a great deal for small and medium-sized enterprises .
There are many bureaucratic regulations in this area and it is often particularly difficult for small and medium-sized businesses to take part in the public procurement process .
We need greater transparency and we must also try to make the most of the opportunities presented by the modern media and , in particular , the Internet .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the Small Business Act is precisely what we , as politicians and legislators , should be focusing on as we look for ways of fostering new growth and re-energising our economies .
SMEs make up more than 98 % of the businesses in my rural constituency of Wales .
As public sector jobs in the UK as a whole are becoming less certain , and more of my constituents are , I hope , going to be either setting up or working for small businesses , I fully support and endorse the ambitious targets for reducing the administrative burden on SMEs , and goals such as the SME test for all legislation .
Coupled with the ' one in , one out ' policy for regulation that my own government is operating , these measures should begin to achieve our objective .
But now is the time to be bold , to be more ambitious and to achieve more .
I have seen so much creativity in Wales , as it develops into a hub of activity for new businesses in the highly profitable global gaming world and a centre for cultural excellence with regard to film and programme production , yet I find myself asking questions about how to foster and encourage this development .
Big projects like the European patent and the Digital Agenda need to deliver for these small businesses , providing jobs and a future for people in Wales and the whole of the EU .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this review 's 10 principles include helping SMEs to benefit from opportunities of the single market , but the eurozone is collapsing , so how can it provide more opportunities ?
It also wants SMEs to benefit from the growth in markets .
What growth ?
In September 2009 , I asked Commissioner Andor what specific measures he would introduce to assist SMEs , following my similar request of him when he spoke to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on taking up the portfolio .
I got no answers then , but now it seems I have some .
The review 's five guidelines to reduce pressure on SMEs include simplifying the rules on VAT and reducing the rates , and a directive on late payments , but that is just tinkering with existing rules and regulations .
The first principle of the review - creating a right environment - should not mean proposing new rules such as European private companies and state aids .
It should mean ripping rules out by the hundred .
After all , Commission President Barroso said in this House in July last year : ' red tape is strangling SMEs ' .
( PL ) Mr President , legislation which is too complex or unintelligible , which is too strict , or which does not keep up with the latest changes , is obviously not conducive to development or progress .
As coordinator of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I would therefore like to draw particular attention to the importance , during the legislative procedure , of observing the principle of including small and medium-sized enterprises in ex ante and post ante impact assessments .
This would make it possible , as early as during the law making process , to identify and eliminate obstacles which may be posed by new regulations for a sector which , after all , is the flywheel of the European economy .
Similarly , complying with the principles of ' think small first ' and ' only once ' , and limiting the excessively strict transposition of the requirements of EU directives into national regulations , by bodies in the Member States naturally , will result in a noticeable reduction in the administrative burden on the SME sector .
Both the Stoiber working group and the review of the Small Business Act presented by the European Commission have confirmed that administrative obstacles and excessive burdens relating to control measures often cause delays , and sometimes even prevent the further expansion of small companies which have the potential to generate new jobs .
I therefore also regard it as legitimate to ask whether the analysis promised by the European Commission , concerning a reduction of the administrative burden to 25 % of its current level , is available yet .
I also agree with the proposals to the effect that both the EU institutions and the Member States should be guided by these principles when creating new legislation or revising existing legislation .
It is alarming to learn that implementation of the Small Business Act is coming up against many obstacles in the Member States , although the examples of several countries show that following these principles yields good results .
Finally , I should also like to draw your attention to the significance of the ongoing work on European contract law , and the work on the establishment of a European patent protection system which has begun in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
There can be no doubt that good regulations in this area will give a direct boost to the development of innovation , particularly as regards the activities and growth of small and medium-sized enterprises .
( RO ) Mr President , at the end of March 2011 , the European Union had an unemployment rate of 9.5 % , with a rate of 9.9 % in the euro area .
What is of even greater concern is that the youth unemployment rate is almost double the unemployment rate for the whole population .
Improving the business environment and access to funding , as well as facilitating SMEs ' access to the Structural Funds , will foster the development of an entrepreneurial spirit .
SMEs need legislative and fiscal stability .
Repeated amendments to tax legislation or changes to the conditions for accessing the various types of funds make it difficult for them to do business .
Another issue , especially during times of crisis , is that SMEs are affected by the delay from public institutions in settling their invoices .
All these factors affect SMEs ' forecasts for achieving their business plans , as well as their business and , most of all , their innovative capacity .
Between 2006 and 2008 , SMEs managed to win just 33 % of the total value of public procurement contracts .
Given that public procurement contracts account for 17 % of the European Union 's GDP , we think that SMEs need to increase their involvement in the public procurement market .
This is why we call on the Commission and Member States to take the necessary measures by 2015 to ensure that at least 50 % of public procurement transactions are carried out electronically , in keeping with the commitment made by Member State governments in Manchester in 2005 .
I should point out that the single market is not in operation yet in the services sector , which is having an adverse impact on SMEs ' business activities in the European Union .
In 2008 , the Commission presented , as part of the European Economic Recovery Plan , the programme which involved the European Investment Bank offering a global package of EUR 30 billion in loans earmarked for SMEs .
The EIB intended to supplement the loans for medium-sized businesses with EUR 1 billion a year .
I would like to ask the Commission at what stage of implementation this programme is at , whether it intends to top up the funding , and whether these funds are distributed equally to all Member States .
( IT ) Mr President , three million jobs have been lost in comparison with several million euro invested in support policies .
That is the disastrous outcome , in terms of impact on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , first of the triumphal Lisbon project , and then of the ' photocopy ' Europe 2020 strategy , on which we are even deciding to focus resources from the next multiannual financial framework for 2014-2020 .
I therefore cannot but stress what thousands of European citizens and taxpayers are wondering : what use is Europe if it cannot solve the economic problems of the continent , if it cannot speak with a single voice on matters of foreign policy , and if it squanders money ?
I hope that what Commissioner Tajani has said on several occasions comes true .
I hope that the review of the SME code really is able to simplify red tape , ensure access to and recovery of credit , and facilitate internalisation .
With the Late Payments Directive , we have reached a real , concrete goal , but as a result of political will and not Europropaganda .
If the costs of the umpteenth strategy will still only finance talk , I call on the European institutions to make amends to the dozens of small entrepreneurs in my region , Veneto , who have taken their lives rather than see their small businesses fail .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , parents very often pay attention to the child that cries the loudest , although in truth , attention ought to be paid to another child entirely .
Similarly , politicians and the press pay attention most often to large companies , which have a lot of money , which have a big voice , although attention ought rather to be paid to others , that is to say , small enterprises .
For us in Europe , large enterprises are like large trees , but these large trees do not make up the whole enterprise wood .
A few figures .
Over 90 % of enterprises in the whole of Europe are small and medium-sized , not large .
Approximately three quarters of all those in employment work in small and medium-sized enterprises , which produce the same proportion of Europe 's gross domestic product .
The time has come for us to switch our attention from large enterprises , which are loud , I should not like to say - like children - but they are loud , and pay attention to the quieter ones , most of whom work after all with the small ones .
In this context , then , Commissioner , I call upon you to pay greater attention to your own Commission 's commitment to reduce the administrative burden for small and medium-sized enterprises .
You can do this by evaluating your legislation , and not by introducing regulations that make the administrative burden more costly .
By supporting small and medium-sized enterprises , we shall be acting more swiftly to encourage economic growth throughout the European Union . Thank you for your attention .

( DE ) Mr President , I wanted to ask Mr Balčytis what he thinks of the Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs programme , because he has mentioned that the financial situation in this area has become highly precarious as a result of the crisis .
I have heard that the Commission intends to limit the scope of this programme .
Do you not believe that it would be more sensible in the light of the financial crisis to ensure that the owners of small and medium-sized companies have the opportunity to find out about new areas of business ?
( LT ) Thank you very much for this question .
How we plan to restructure our society , and who , in future , will have to deal with the main issues , not just for small business , but big business as well - this really is a priority issue of our future .
The Erasmus programme you mentioned is also very important and I believe that in future , the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament should all increase their efforts to ensure that such programmes do not suffer , and that henceforth we have people , better prepared people , to implement many of the theoretical wishes that we have expressed here today .
After all , someone has to put theory into practice .
I agree with you entirely that Parliament should not consent to reducing such programmes in the future .
( PL ) Mr President , the work currently being carried out on the review of the Small Business Act should concentrate , in particular , on establishing a European Private Company Statute , thus facilitating the cross-border operations of economic entities in the EU market .
Although the time taken to set up a company has dropped in recent months , an analysis carried out by the European Commission has showed that over half of Member States still do not meet the requirement for it to be possible to do so in three days .
Furthermore , the majority of Member States are still not carrying out assessments of the impact of future legislative and administrative initiatives on SMEs , and the ' only once ' principle is also not being applied in full .
Over the past two years , the list of countries in which it has been possible to close down a business entirely within a year has remained the same .
I would therefore suggest that the European Commission should become even more involved in efforts to ensure that the Member States implement these provisions .
In addition , I believe that further measures under the Small Business Act should also cover improved availability of funding , access to risk capital markets and the development of points of single contact in the Member States to facilitate administrative procedures .
It is worth pointing out that in order to achieve our objective of an employment level of 75 % , as enshrined in the Europe 2020 strategy , it is imperative to support SMEs .
As a result of the economic crisis , these SMEs are feeling the strain of a series of additional expenses , instead of generating jobs .
( RO ) Mr President , the Small Business Act needs to be brought into line with the Europe 2020 strategy priorities to improve the regulatory environment to meet the needs of SMEs .
This means that the measures presented need to be implemented quickly , in their entirety , especially the ' think small first ' principle .
I think that particular attention must be focused on supporting large-scale funding for innovative companies .
According to the Commission 's assessment , Romania is a model of good practice in applying the principle of ' promoting entrepreneurship through the Start business programme ' .
The programme has a budget of EUR 21.2 million and is aimed at developing management skills among young people .
I have also noted progress in the implementation of the principle of ' accessing funding for SMEs ' .
The government is supporting the set-up and development of at least 1 100 SMEs for young people .
( RO ) Mr President , I want to start by welcoming the European Commission 's proposals for reviewing the Small Business Act for Europe .
In practical terms , the European Commission notes in its communication of 23 February 2011 the quite significant progress which has been made since the Small Business Act was adopted in June 2008 , but warns about the challenges remaining .
Therefore , SMEs still have problems in expanding their activities , improving their innovative capacity , accessing markets and obtaining funding , and face excessive red tape .
In most cases , when it comes to transposing the directives into national legislation , the bureaucratic requirements laid down by the European Union are actually exceeded .
In order to ensure greater transparency , each Member State should produce tables comparing national bureaucratic measures with those required by EU directives .
An assessment also needs to be made of the impact which the new EU legislative proposals could have on SMEs .
( SK ) Mr President , more than two years have passed since the adoption of the Small Business Act initiative , and it is therefore right and proper that in February , the Commission issued a notification of the review of this initiative .
It seems that our efforts to promote a more favourable legislative environment for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) have so far failed to make a sufficient impression in the business sector itself .
On the basis of discussions with representatives of organisations representing SMEs , the Commission has therefore prepared further measures through which we can help to improve their situation .
In my opinion , we must , above all , focus more on implementing the new rules in national legislation .
The experience from my own country shows me that national bureaucracies are unbelievably obstructive , and stubbornly resist all changes that would limit their ability to victimise small businesses .
I therefore believe we must persevere with the simplification of rules for SMEs patiently and rigorously , and trust that our efforts will somehow bring the expected result .
( DE ) Mr President , one particularly positive feature of the Small Business Act is the provision which makes it easier to establish companies in terms of both time and cost .
I also welcome the obligation on the public sector to pay invoices within 30 days .
However , some bureaucratic obstacles remain in place , for example , as far as cash flow is concerned .
We need to evaluate to what extent the Basel criteria could cause a serious credit crunch for small and medium-sized enterprises .
As far as the cross-border area is concerned , we should finally get the European private company under way .
From the perspective of the cost-benefit factor , this form of company could , in future , be more important than the European company .
I am thinking in this respect of subsidiaries and transfers of registered offices throughout Europe .
Finally , I would just like to say that we need to follow up on the measures to give small and medium-sized businesses access to China and other markets in Asia .
( HU ) Mr President , I agree with the statement in the review that further measures are needed .
I believe it is important for the European Union to have a better overview of how the governments of the Member States implement the Small Business Act .
The mid-term review is also important because the problems of small and medium-sized enterprises - the difficulties of obtaining funding , the size of administrative burdens , overregulation and market access problems - appear to be becoming permanent .
I think it is a good idea as well to enable small enterprises to register themselves as European private companies , thereby reducing the administrative burdens and , at the same time , realising smart regulation is an extremely timely issue .
A high priority in this is spreading the ' only once ' principle across Europe and examining whether the regulatory framework of certain policy areas is as it should be and , if it is not , what changes are required .
Mr President , it is a fact that , if every SME created one extra job , unemployment would finish in Europe .
That is not actually an impossible task .
Instead , however , many of them are shedding jobs , partly due to the recession , but also due to a preponderance of regulation and red tape .
This certainly needs to be tackled urgently .
I am pleased to say that our new government yesterday announced measures to help SMEs which were broadly welcomed by the business community today - measures relating to VAT , PRSI , travel tax and internships .
At European level , it is essential that we tackle fraud in particular .
The black market economy is thriving and needs to be tackled on a European-wide basis .
We also need to encourage businesses to avail themselves of the opportunities in e-commerce and establish a European-wide patent .
If we do this , we can actually end unemployment and also help the creation of many new businesses .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Small Business Act review is a great opportunity if it is based on an understanding of how precious our small and medium-sized enterprises are .
In the economic fabric of Italy , small and medium-sized enterprises represent a major and essential part of the production market .
They are even more important in southern Italy , where I come from , because the whole productive fabric is organised around small and medium-sized enterprises .
In the past , entire industrial areas were teeming with small businesses that guaranteed thousands of jobs .
Today , many of those businesses have gone bankrupt or closed , not least because of unfair competition , as the students from Barletta who are here today are well aware .
Europe therefore needs to send out a strong , effective signal to guarantee less red tape , lower costs , greater transparency and shorter delays in payments , and to ensure the stability that small and medium-sized enterprises demand and need so much .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , many thanks to the honourable Members for a very serious and substantive discussion .
The Commission is aware that more needs to be done ; this has been underlined by several Members , and I fully agree that the well-being of small and medium-sized enterprises is crucial for Europe 's recovery , for growth and for employment .
When our SMEs do well , the European economy does well .
I can assure you that the implementation of the ' think small first ' principle and the actions proposed in the Small Business Act are a foremost priority for the Commission .
I want to thank you for your support in this regard .
The Commission is looking forward to working closely with all relevant players , especially the European Parliament , to ensure effective implementation of the Small Business Act at European level and at national level , in the Member States .
The European SME Week in October will be a good opportunity to work together to raise awareness of SME policy and the needs of SMEs everywhere in the European Union .
We are organising this event together with the Parliament and the Commission .
Mr President , ' Action here and now ! '
Mr Bendtsen said , and I strongly agree with his standpoint .
We have heard that small and medium-sized enterprises are also major employers in the European Union and , after the economic crisis , examining and reviewing how we may be able to help them recover is especially important .
The Hungarian Presidency believes in a work-based economy and society , and regards small and medium-sized enterprises to be among its key partners in this .
The economic environment has changed dramatically since 2008 ; hence , a review really is needed .
For our part , too , we welcome the six-party agreement which Mr Bütikofer mentioned , and we are also grateful that several speakers acknowledged the Hungarian Presidency 's endeavours and that the Hungarian Presidency is handling this issue truly as a priority .
Allow me to draw your attention to a few specific matters .
After listening attentively to the Members , we are pleased to say that there is indeed complete agreement on the principles .
The small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of European economic growth and employment .
Therefore , improving the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises is a priority for the Council as well .
To this end , and to reflect this , the Competitiveness Council is preparing to adopt the Council 's conclusions at its previously mentioned meeting on 30-31 May 2011 , about which the Presidency is submitting a draft to the Council .
The main elements of this intend to give answers to the problems identified as the result of the review of the Small Business Act .
What are these ?
These are better access to loans and market access , both in European and global terms , as well as enhancing the conditions of market access and alleviating administrative burdens .
The Council believes that the transposition as soon as possible of the Late Payments Directive - which , as you are aware , has been adopted - is important , and this we note with pleasure .
The Council is striving to achieve this and is encouraging Member States to do so because it would be a great weight off the shoulders of small and medium-sized enterprises and would greatly improve their liquidity .
It is also a pleasure for me to announce that the Council is close to reaching an agreement on the Commission 's aims to reduce the costs of establishing a business .
The essence of this is to be able to start up an enterprise in at most three days , for the cost of at most EUR 100 , and for licences to be obtainable in under a month .
There are two other specific matters I wish to mention .
One is the issue of the European patent .
23 Member States have already joined the enhanced cooperation and the Council is discussing the basic regulation now .
We regard this as a major breakthrough from the aspect of EU competitiveness and , in particular , the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Mr Creutzmann wished to know about the matter of the European private limited company and asked it to be handled as a priority .
We have made significant progress .
Now only a very small group of Member States have not joined the consensus .
The adoption of this would truly be a turning point for small and medium-sized enterprises , thus we are working on it very hard and also trust that Members will be able to exercise some sort of political pressure and motivate through their own channels in order to generate the necessary majority .
We have talked about this to the eminent representatives of the Committee on Legal Affairs as allies on several occasions .
Lastly , allow me to mention the connection with the Europe 2020 strategy .
Here , we believe that it is important to convert the objectives stated in the strategy into laws , actions and measures which improve the position of small and medium-sized enterprises , but , of course , the Member States must also do their own homework .
The European framework in itself is not enough ; thus , for example , we believe that tax systems need to be simplified and to be made friendlier for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Several Member States are acting in this spirit . Among them is Hungary , currently holding the Presidency .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 May 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome the Commission communication on the SBA review as it deals , to a large extent , with the problems which SMEs are faced with and for which European and national policies will have to come up with a solution .
The Single Market Act has placed a strong emphasis on supporting SMEs .
A large number of the measures proposed , such as the review of the accounting directives , cutting red tape , improving access to the capital and public procurement markets , etc. feature in this communication .
One of the major problems facing SMEs is the lack of access to funding , which not only hampers innovation but also the growth of these businesses .
Innovative SMEs in particular need broader access to informal funding and to funding based on venture capital holdings as well , which is the main source of funding for new businesses .
SMEs can also be supported by domestic tax incentive measures , especially during the first few months of business .
Finally , I think that the Late Payments Directive has to be implemented fairly for SMEs .
Furthermore , with the aim of helping SMEs expand their cross-border activities , the process of recovering cross-border debts will need to be facilitated and the European Private Company Statute adopted without delay .
, in writing . - The Irish Government 's Jobs Initiative has correctly concentrated on the jobs-rich sector of tourism ; while the EU 's Small Business Act has the potential to complement this in the area of SMEs over the coming years .
The purpose of the SBA has been to reduce the administrative burden of doing business and improve access to finance for SMEs .
Commissioner Rehn reported this evening that it has succeeded in reducing the cost of doing business by 22 % in some areas and will continue to concentrate on this initiative .
The principal message of the Small Business Act is to ' think small first ' - to concentrate business legislation across the EU on small and medium-sized enterprises - and the EU has committed tonight to continue the focus on this area .
To this end , it is important that entrepreneurs in Ireland are fully informed on how to make best use of the Small Business Act .
Micro , small and medium-sized enterprises play a central and key role in the growth of the European economy ; they are the main source of employment and have a fundamental impact on the development of European competitiveness and innovation .
We can therefore say in good faith that we will not succeed in achieving the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy unless we support small and medium-sized enterprises and unless we make it easier for them to make full use of the single market .
The solutions provided for in the Small Business Act , including fewer bureaucratic obstacles , improved access to sources of funding , and easier access to the market , are particularly significant and , in my opinion , effective measures aimed at putting in place the best possible conditions for the development of SMEs .
However , problems arising from the implementation of these solutions at Member State level may pose a threat to their effectiveness .
I am therefore also hoping that the Member States which have not yet fully implemented these measures will make every effort to ensure that this process is completed as soon as possible .
SMEs encounter difficulties in obtaining access to funding and the market .
The future MFF must provide measures for overcoming these difficulties .
Increased support is needed for financial programmes and instruments which are already operating successfully , but have turned out to be inadequate , such as the competitiveness and innovation programme .
Access to financial support must be improved for new innovative businesses in the form of start-up funds .
Setting up a European capital risk fund and expanding the permanent risk-sharing products offered by the European Investment Bank through the Risk Sharing Financial Facility will also benefit SMEs .
On the issue of SMEs having access to the market , I call on the Commission to propose a plan for introducing and selling innovative products on the market .
Furthermore , a set of measures is required to support SMEs in implementing the new energy efficiency plan .
I welcome this initiative by Parliament because the broad consent between the political groups to initiate a debate on small and medium-sized enterprises illustrates their crucial role as a driving force for growth in the EU .
The recession is making it even more difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises to raise capital .
Their access to the markets , to financing and to information urgently needs to be improved .
We need to limit the administrative burden by simplifying the regulatory environment .
At European level , it is important to combat the black market economy and to give small and medium-sized enterprises incentives .
The Commission recently announced 12 actions for 2012 to stimulate the single market , including measures for funding for SMEs and worker mobility , measures which I believe are a move in the right direction By making integrated use of the single market and exploiting the advantages which it offers , we can strengthen growth and prosperity at European level and give new momentum to enterprise .
Measures such as a European patent and the European professional identity card must be strengthened and applied widely in order to strengthen competitiveness and employment .
Developments in the ongoing debt crisis and the EU response ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on developments in the ongoing debt crisis and the EU response .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I fully understand the significant interest in this Parliament in the actions being undertaken within the Union and beyond to tackle the challenges which some Member States are facing in relation to their public finances .
The global financial crisis has had a significant impact on both revenues and expenditure in all our countries , even if the extent and nature of that impact is not the same in all cases and the capacity of individual Member States to handle the consequences is also very different .
The first thing I would like to stress is that it is the Member States themselves which are , first and foremost , responsible for ensuring that their public finances are sustainable and on a sound footing .
Similarly , it is for each one of them to ensure that their economies are competitive , flexible and resilient .
Of course , that does not mean that public finances and economic performance are not also a matter of collective interest .
We are part of a Union , and our economies are interlinked in a number of ways : through the single market and , in many cases , through the sharing of the common currency and the deeper economic integration which that implies .
More generally , we all have a commitment of solidarity towards each other , based on a desire to protect and promote the wider European interest .
What that means is that we all want to see a stable and strong economy across the EU as a whole and , within it , of the euro area in particular .
Where necessary , this has to involve taking steps to ensure the stability of individual Member States .
We have a number of tools at our disposal to do this .
We have the coordination mechanism that seeks to ensure that appropriate economic and budgetary policies are pursued by each and every Member State .
These are being updated and reinforced , and I am pleased that negotiations between the Council and Parliament are advancing well .
We also have access to the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism , which can offer support at EU level to any Member State , whether inside or outside the eurozone .
In addition , and for the eurozone countries specifically , further instruments have been set up and are continuing to be developed .
Greece has received a package of coordinated bilateral loans from Member States as well as a loan from the IMF .
Ireland has received a package consisting of bilateral loans , a loan from the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) and also a loan from the IMF .
The support package for Portugal , which will also draw on both European and IMF support , is also being prepared .
Ministers of the eurozone Member States are also finalising the technical details of the European Stability Mechanism , which is due to take effect from 2013 as a permanent financial support mechanism to replace the European Financial Stability Facility .
Non-eurozone Member States are also participating in this process .
I would now like to turn briefly to the situation in the three eurozone countries to which I have already referred .
I should , however , mention that , from the outset , many of the issues in relation to these Member States are discussed outside the regular Ecofin format , reflecting their specific characteristics as members of the eurozone .
The chair of the Euro Group would be better able than I to give you further details on many of these points .
First , Ireland .
Following the agreement last December of an overall EUR 85 billion assistance programme for Ireland , the Irish authorities have undertaken a great deal of work to implement the adjustment programme to which the financial support was attached .
This programme has been kept under constant review by the new government .
The Ecofin Council will review compliance with the programme for the first quarter at its meeting on 17 May , next Tuesday .
I cannot say much in advance about that discussion , but the overall assessment is likely to be that Ireland 's performance is in line with expectations .
However , some specific challenges remain .
Ireland will , in particular , need to stick to the powerful fiscal adjustment as well as ensure that its financial sector is on a stable footing for the future .
Second , Greece .
Greece has come a long way since the very difficult situation last year , and its efforts should be commended .
It has been faced with a daunting challenge and has demonstrated unwavering commitment and clarity of purpose .
The adjustment programme is broadly on track .
The latest implementation report , drafted jointly by the Commission , the IMF and the ECB in March , concluded that the programme has made further progress towards its objectives .
Some of the reforms needed to deliver the programme 's medium-term objectives are being put in place .
The report also identifies further areas where reforms are required in order to build the critical mass necessary to ensure fiscal sustainability and economic recovery .
The Commission , the ECB and the IMF continue to monitor progress on the implementation of the adjustment programme closely .
The next review is scheduled for this month .
The Member States participating in the bilateral loan agreed in March to reduce the interest rate by 1 % and to extent the maturity of the loan .
This is also a positive development .
The technical details of the implementation of this agreement are currently under discussion .
Finally , Portugal .
On 6 April , the Portuguese caretaker government announced its intention to seek financial assistance from the European Union .
This followed a period of intense pressure from the financial markets .
However , Portugal was also going through a period of political uncertainty which , as we know , led to the resignation of the government on 24 March .
The Portuguese Parliament had previously rejected the new fiscal conciliation package proposed by the government .
Negotiations between the Troika and the Portuguese authorities have now been finalised and the memorandum of understanding on the policy conditions attached to the financial assistance is being agreed .
The financial envelope will be around EUR 78 billion covering a three-year period .
In line with recommendations by the Ecofin Ministers at the informal Ecofin in Budapest in April , the programme covers reform in a number of areas , including public finance , labour and product markets and the financial sector .
We consider that such measures are essential for growth potential and increased economic stability .
Endorsement of the final financial package is also expected at next week 's Ecofin Council .
This is only a brief overview of the measures being taken to address the impact of the global financial crisis on the EU and on three Member States in particular .
As I said at the outset , the Hungarian Presidency is not directly involved in all of the detailed negotiations , some of which were more specifically within the remit of the Euro Group .
The Presidency is , however , committed to doing its part to assist in ensuring that all necessary measures are in place in order to address the current problems .
We consider that this is essential if we are to boost Europe 's competitiveness in the longer term and , in so doing , deliver the strong role which Europe as a whole needs .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Europe 's economic outlook today is quite dualistic .
On the one hand , the recovery in the real economy has taken hold and is becoming more solid and self-sustaining .
On the other hand , it is uneven and we still face turbulence in the financial markets , especially in the sovereign debt markets .
Thus , the key task of the EU 's economic policy now is to contain the sovereign debt crisis and thus protect the ongoing recovery in the real economy of Europe .
Now , with the EU-IMF programme of Portugal waiting for its adoption next Monday in the Eurogroup Ecofin meeting , we are beginning another chapter in this necessary endeavour .
Last week , the Portuguese Government presented an economic reform programme following our productive negotiations with the government , the opposition , civil society , social partners and the academic world .
These talks are reflected in the programme .
It is a Portuguese programme that deserves the support of the European Union and of the International Monetary Fund .
Our joint assistance of EUR 78 billion shows the strong commitment to help Portugal and safeguard the financial stability of Europe .
It is a demanding but fair and necessary programme of adjustment . It will require major efforts on the part of the Portuguese people .
Great attention has been paid in its preparation to social fairness and protecting the vulnerable .
Europe stands by Portugal for the sake of the country and for the sake of economic stability in Europe .
Considering recent developments , it would be wrong to say that the debt crisis is no longer a burden for the European economy , yet it would be equally wrong to claim that the EU has not responded to the crisis .
Consider this : only a year ago , the euro area Member States agreed on a conditional loan package to Greece in order to prevent a meltdown of our financial system .
Within this one year , from last May until today , we have created effective stability mechanisms which were at first temporary and which will then become permanent as of 2013 .
We are implementing a very systematic programme of fiscal consolidation in all Member States , and they are committed to bold structural reforms to boost growth and job creation .
We are , with your active support , addressing the systemic weaknesses in EU economic governance in order to prepare for a profound change in the policy making landscape of the European Union .
We are , again with your support , addressing the shortcomings of our integrated financial market by toughening financial regulation and implementing the new supervisory architecture .
At the present juncture , financial stability is being safeguarded by the EU-IMF stability mechanisms and especially by the actions that the Member States - especially the vulnerable Member States - are themselves taking .
Still some people argue that the crisis management strategy , especially with regard to Greece , is failing .
I disagree with this view .
The first - and the primary - objective of our strategy has been to prevent another cardiac arrest of the kind that followed the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 and subsequently led to the financial crisis and economic recession worldwide .
We have done that and thus protected the ongoing recovery in the real economy in Europe .
Secondly , we have been able largely to contain the distress in the sovereign debt markets to the three countries in the programme .
As seen in the bond spreads , Spain is decoupling from these countries thanks to its determined action on the fiscal , financial and structural fronts .
Thirdly , the programmes in both Greece and Ireland are still in the relatively early stages .
The Greek programme has been running for one year and its counterpart in Ireland for about five months of the three years of the programme .
Both countries are pursuing very ambitious programmes of fiscal consolidation , structural reform and financial repair .
Our review mission is currently in Athens with the ECB and the IMF to assess the implementation of the programme and to prepare an updated analysis of the debt sustainability of Greece .
The work will be concluded in the coming weeks , which will facilitate well-informed decisions .
In any event , while the fiscal effort of the past year is unprecedented - over 7 % of GDP , or EUR 20 billion - it is clear that Greece has to seriously reinforce the implementation of the economic reforms , achieve a breakthrough in the privatisation programme , and then ensure its full implementation .
It is absolutely necessary and urgent that the domestic disputes are put aside and cross-party support achieved for the recovery of Greece .
It is an illusion to think that there were any real alternatives to the economic reform programme .
This is , therefore , a real test of the credibility of the Greek political forces , both government and opposition , and ultimately , of the will of the Greek people .
The present stage of the crisis is a closely intertwined combination of sovereign debt crisis and banking sector fragilities .
We cannot solve one without solving the other ; we must resolve both in parallel .
Therefore , the banking sector repair must be completed to safeguard the provision of credit to the real economy , to enterprises , households , individual citizens .
A new round of bank stress tests is being conducted .
The results will guide the necessary restructuring and recapitalisation of the banking sector .
Ahead of the publication of the results , the Member States will need to release their strategies for possible restructuring or recapitalisation of their vulnerable institutions .
Such plans should be ready as soon as possible and should include a detailed timeline .
In conclusion , the fundamental reforms of financial regulation and economic governance in the European Union are profoundly changing the economic and financial architecture of Europe .
In the near future , a whole new set of rules will provide the basis for stable , sustainable growth and job creation .
In the meantime , we must continue our work to safeguard financial stability and thus protect economic recovery in Europe , which is the key for sustainable growth and improving employment .
This continues to call for very difficult decisions at European and national levels .
I trust we all have the wisdom and courage to take such decisions .
Mr President , I would like to thank the minister , Mr Kármán , and Commissioner Rehn for their explanation , given what we have seen over recent weeks .
If confidence in the market is weak , every trace of doubt has direct consequences for those countries that already find themselves in difficult circumstances and thus , for the euro as a whole .
Unfortunately , that became apparent last weekend and then it was denied in the press that any secret meeting was taking place , which then has a double whammy effect on the already fragile confidence .
I hope that the parties in question learn very quickly from this .
Mr President , easy choices and pain-free solutions have been out of the question for quite some time .
The support measures for Greece , Ireland and Portugal need to be robust in order to restore financial and economic stability .
The package must pave the way for sustainable public finances and economic growth .
I therefore want to call on the Council and the Commission to look deeper than the funding needs of these countries over the coming year in order to avoid us facing the same problems in a year 's time .
Mr President , it is important that decisions be taken in June on an ambitious package of legislation aimed at strengthening economic governance in Europe in order to win back the confidence of the markets and also in order to ensure growth and jobs on behalf of all our citizens and to increase the cohesion of our economies .
I therefore want to call on the Council to give its backing to Parliament 's ambition to provide greater accountability and more public debate in this House , greater involvement of the national parliaments , and to put an end to horse-trading in the Council when the Commission 's view is not to its liking .
This package must include a strong monetary arm alongside a strong economic arm , including the Europe 2020 strategy to secure the tenability of our social market economy for all 27 Member States .
I am thus calling on you to show resolve in the Economic and Financial Affairs Council ( Ecofin ) next week .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr President , I have a question for Mrs Wortmann-Kool .
How can it be that you , as a Dutch parliamentarian , do not even mention the scandal that the Dutch Finance Minister was not invited to the summit last week ?
How can it be that you , as a Dutch parliamentarian , do not even mention the fact that the Netherlands is paying so much , and how can it be that you completely betray the interests of Dutch taxpayers by pouring billions ' worth of taxpayers ' money into a bottomless pit ?
( NL ) Mr President , I have clearly stated what is necessary to restore confidence .
Mr Madlener 's simplistic solutions would worsen - rather than improve - the position not only of Dutch citizens , but also of the citizens of all our Member States .
I find it quite worrying that Mr Madlener still fails to grasp that fact .
Mr President , Commissioner , given that it will shortly be one year since the Greek reform programme was agreed , and the fact that the programme for Portugal was announced just yesterday , I think that it is important for us to evaluate where we stand today , what has been done correctly , and where we made mistakes and missed the mark .
One year on , therefore , in addition to Greece , another two countries in the euro area , Ireland and Portugal , have taken recourse to the support mechanism , as they are unable to secure the necessary financing on the markets .
The peculiarities and different problems of each country are reflected , without doubt , in the different reform programmes which , nonetheless , are underpinned by a basic philosophy : the absolute emphasis on rapid budgetary reform .
However , in the case of Greece , Commissioner , despite what has been achieved , as you have repeatedly emphasised , with the 7-point reduction in the primary deficit and a 5 % reduction in the overall deficit , the fact that the recession was deeper than forecast in 2010 has resulted in less revenue for the State .
So this is a first data point for evaluation , provided that we agree that the target of the programmes is to overcome the budgetary and economic crisis and not to create a culture of punishment leading to euro-scepticism in Europe .
The second data point for evaluation is that , despite the efforts being made , the markets are not responding .
However , the decisions by the European Union have not only failed to convince the markets ; in some cases , they have exacerbated the situation , such as the famous Deauville decision on the involvement of private individuals in the permanent support mechanism to be created in 2013 .
The conclusion is that any success the budgetary reform programmes may have risks being wiped out by the fear which the markets and rating agencies are still stirring up , even today .
We have reached the point over the past few days , with scenarios about restructuring and even bankruptcy and / or the exit of a country from the euro area still doing the rounds , that we are debating things which we would have considered inconceivable until just recently .
Commissioner , knowing your attachment to Europe , I believe that you will agree with me that the solutions we are debating today , the way in which we shall manage this crisis , will no doubt be a major chapter in European history .
Today , we are creating the conditions in which the epilogue will be written .
I believe and hope that we all feel that these are historic times and that the epilogue will not be written in black colours for the future of the European Union and EMU , but will mark a brave and decisive step which will make Europe more cohesive , more united and even stronger .
Mr President , my fellow Member just said that a year is a good time to look back over and I can bring news from Finland where it will hopefully be announced this evening that the Finnish Parliament will support the financial rescue package for Portugal .
This will hopefully be the case , but we should not start applauding yet .
We can hope that it will be the case , and my party certainly supports this move .
I will briefly look at why we in Finland are hesitating right now with regard to whether or not we should support Portugal .
One of the reasons is - and I turn here to the Council , and even though I know that the Hungarian Presidency is perhaps not the one to blame , you will have to be the messenger - that difficult decisions are constantly being taken in the form of small partial decisions because we cannot manage to resolve this problem all in one go . It is perhaps not so easy to do this either , and I understand that there is no simple and absolute solution , but the fact that we are constantly forced to take small and difficult partial decisions means that the political patience and the political will in Finland 's Parliament , for example , is beginning to wear thin .
Unfortunately , this seems to be the case in other national parliaments , too .
This is worrying in view of the fact that we probably have several difficult decisions ahead of us , including with regard to the situation in Greece , and there is a risk that at some stage , we will find ourselves up against a wall .
Therefore , the Council probably needs to consider a more ambitious strategy than this partial strategy that you are currently applying .
If you do not do so , we will not get ourselves out of this situation .
You need a new strategy because the current strategy is not working . Thank you .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the sovereign debt crisis will not be solved until the banks are sorted out , and you cannot sort out the banks if regulators ' stress tests refuse to admit that the sovereign debt crisis exists .
There is also a public confidence crisis .
Some countries bailed out their own banks at huge cost to the taxpayers , without any handouts from the EU .
I understand why the same public is now asking why they should fund bail-outs in other countries .
Last week 's proposals for reform in Portugal had some positive recommendations for improving competitiveness , but the situation in Greece seems dire .
Eurozone leaders tell us that there is no Greek debt restructuring , but since when is a delay of a repayment date not a restructuring ?
If public lenders extend their maturities , that is not just a shuffling of deckchairs on the Titanic : it is taking the public lenders below decks to sink in the ship while the private loan holders are helped away to the lifeboats .
Mr President , Mr Rehn , first of all , I would like to say that the situation is indeed getting worse , as you have described .
In the euro area , the divide between the countries which are showing signs of recovery and those which are in a more precarious position is widening .
Also , the cost of supporting the weaker countries is constantly rising .
Given this situation , I have some questions for you in your role as Commissioner responsible for economic and monetary affairs .
Liabilities between the central banks amounting to more than EUR 400 billion have accumulated in the TARGET2 accounts of the European Central Bank system .
This is due to the fact that the banks are still not being adequately financed by the capital market .
What is your view of these unplanned liabilities within the euro system ?
The major problem which is preventing us from making progress with debt restructuring is that the banking system , as Mrs Ford has also said , has not been properly reformed .
The proposal for a European restructuring system has been delayed .
When will the Commission submit this proposal ?
As Commissioner responsible for economic and monetary affairs , what is your view of this delay ?
What are you doing to speed things up ?
It has also become clear , as we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have been predicting for a long time , that the measures put in place to support Greece and Portugal will not take effect until the macro-economic conditions in the euro area improve .
These countries are still subject to a growing burden of interest .
The export and outflow of capital in some of these countries is increasing .
There is still a lack of demand among some of the European partners of these countries and among the strong countries in the euro area in particular .
Resource and food prices are also rising , at least if you disregard the most recent ups and downs .
In addition to the bail-out of these countries , and in addition to the financial aid , I would like to know which measures are being taken to relieve the burden of taxes , external demand and interest on these countries from a macro-economic perspective .
How is this being achieved ?
I would therefore like to encourage you to put forward a strong package which will improve the macro-economic conditions in these countries in the euro area .
Finally , the measures , which , in my view , run contrary to the spirit of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU , have hit the weakest countries , including Greece , Portugal and Spain , while the stronger , wealthier countries have not yet taken on their share of the burden .
Which measures will you be taking to encourage the wealthy countries to contribute to the costs of this crisis ?
Mr President , I should like to express my deep indignation here and give voice to the protests being heard in Portugal against the policies that have led us to the crisis we are experiencing , in particular , the veritable submission and aggression pact imposed on the Portuguese people by what are known as the ' troika ' : the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and the European Commission .
These bodies have been charged with implementing a shameful act of outside intervention that does not even respect the rights and exclusive competences of the Portuguese Parliament , or take into account that we are in the run-up to parliamentary elections .
These are antisocial , regressive policies that abandon development and condemn the Portuguese workers and people to unemployment , poverty , underdevelopment and extreme dependence , turning Portugal into a mere protectorate or colony of the powers of the European Union .
All this is happening , moreover , when it is already known that such measures do not solve the problem , as demonstrated by the Greek example .
Even if the real responsibilities of EU policy - and we are talking about the irrational criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact , of the policy of the strong euro , and of the ECB guidelines and statutes , which do not respect the particularities of the weaker economies - in relation to the current situation are covered up , nothing justifies applying a package to Portugal that punishes the Portuguese people in return for a loan which needs to be paid back at interest rates higher than those normally charged by the ECB .
Contrary to all the proclamations of solidarity at election propaganda time , what we have is a policy of social regression and of prolonged economic recession .
They are intending to do all of this just to favour the international banks , along with a handful of big companies and financial institutions in Portugal , and a few of their lackeys .
That is why we are saying here that the euro area itself is under threat ; that the future of the European Union could be its implosion , and that a change of policy is needed ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Figueiredo , I am afraid I have cut off your microphone .
I apologise for this but you went quite over time .
You do have a chance , however , for another 30 seconds if you agree to answer a blue card question by Mr van Dalen .
( NL ) Mr President , I wanted to ask Mrs Figueiredo , if what your country has agreed is as bad as all that , and if it is so bad to find yourselves under a real regime whereby you even have to restructure your whole economy , why not leave the euro area ?
The euro is a strong currency and there have to be prerequisites for that .
If that troubles you , you should just leave !
( PT ) Mr President , what is unacceptable is that a question like this can be asked when Europe 's leaders were unable to admit in time that their policies were responsible for exacerbating the situation of Portugal , which , as is well-known , had a fragile economy and had to be subjected to the policy of the strong euro , which serves the interests of Germany , France and others , but does not serve the interests of Portugal or of other countries with weaker economies .
That is why the Portuguese people are fighting this policy , as are the Greek people and workers across Europe .
What we need is another policy here in Europe too .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I am a baby boomer .
I was born just after the war .
From that time , we have probably had the longest period of peace and prosperity globally .
I have put a little bit of modest money away so that I can hand something down to my family when I pass on - largely because I have never spent more money than I have earned .
I have been prudent and I have worked moderately hard .
It always seems to me to come as a complete surprise to politicians how countries get in debt .
Let me explain , because I do not think you really understand .
It is because politicians consistently spend more money than they raise in taxation - more money than they can possibly raise in taxation - , most of which , in point of fact , they actually waste .
The reason we are talking about countries which are broke - and they are broke - is because their ridiculous , ineffective , ignorant politicians consistently spend more money than they can raise .
Then they borrow , and they borrow , and - worse - they then print money , because politicians and their central banks have a machine which prints money .
If you do that as a private citizen , it is a criminal offence .
You would go to prison for that , yet politicians and their central banks do it all the time .
Let me explain to you that these countries are broke .
They are broke because of their own stupid leadership and politicians .
It is immoral - immoral ! - to ask ordinary taxpayers of any country to pick up the tab for failed politicians and failed banks .
They have defaulted .
They are broke .
For God 's sake , let us all admit it .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to know if Mr Bloom is aware that Spain is less indebted than the United Kingdom , that Ireland was well below 60 % before the banking crisis , and that Ireland , by getting into debt to save its banks , essentially saved the money of the British banks .
Absolutely right .
I was not suggesting my politicians were any less stupid than anybody else .
It is an absolute disgrace , and there was not even a debate in our national parliament on actually rescuing these bust banks .
If you want to invest in bust banks , do so with your own money , not money from my old age pensioners in Yorkshire on GBP 98 a week , you scoundrels !
( FR ) Mr President , on 9 May 2010 , the EU-ECB-IMF troika triumphantly announced that it had saved Greece from total bankruptcy by lending it EUR 110 billion .
A year later , Greece plunged into recession .
Public debt soared to 150 % of GDP and two-year interest rates have reached more than 25 % per annum .
If , today , Greece is out of breath , it is because the method used to save it is not the right one .
While the Greek economy now needs a weak currency to get out of the depression , the troika is going to impose a new , even more drastic , fiscal austerity package .
This remedy will be no more effective tomorrow than it was yesterday .
The currently punitive interest rates to which Greece is subject are , in fact , preventing its private economy from undertaking any investments , whether it be in the production process or in real estate .
Greece is becoming a third-world country , ruining all hopes of reimbursement .
The new draft rescue package of EUR 60 billion envisaged last Friday demonstrates that the EUR 110 billion loan already granted a year ago must be considered a gift .
For how long and to what extent will European taxpayers be pouring money into the Danaides ' cistern ?
Pursuing this path is suicidal and will lead to the fragmentation of Europe .
There are two possible solutions : Greek debt restructuring accompanied by the restructuring of the public debt of failing States leading , ultimately , to the collapse of our banking system , or a concerted , rational and pragmatic exit from the euro area enabling Greece to catch its breath .
Europe is at a crossroads .
Is saving the euro worth the sacrifice being made by the people of Europe ?

( PT ) Mr President , the sovereign debt crisis requires a European response : a response that looks at each specific situation , that defends the euro to make it strong , and that defends the Member States .
That is why the series of proposals on economic governance currently being debated in the European Parliament are particularly important .
Parliament has been helping to ensure that positive steps towards intelligent debt management are taken .
It has been advocating a reasonable transition period ; arguing that the necessary reduction in debt should not be made year on year but using a three-year average ; advocating the need for budgetary discipline ; arguing for the need for growth and increased transparency in European policy through debates in the European Parliament ; and advocating the necessary solidarity .
This solidarity is what has just happened with Portugal .
I should like to say something to you as a Portuguese .
Portugal has a 900-year history .
Portugal is capable .
Portugal is capable of putting its public accounts in order with discipline .
Portugal is capable of reforming its banking system ; it is capable of reforming its labour market ; it is capable of making its tax system more competitive ; and it is capable of using innovative measures to reform its health and justice systems .
Portugal is capable of having a civil service that is more efficient and controlled .
Portugal is capable of having a liberalised economy that is successful and more competitive .
Fundamentally , however , Portugal is capable of participating in the European project ; of participating and of helping to resolve whatever challenges there will be in the future .
For this very reason , we are very happy in the Union and want to help it become progressively stronger .
( FR ) Mr President , in the face of crazy rumours and speculative attacks against a number of Member States , let me remind you of a few facts .
The euro is a strong currency .
In 10 years , the euro has established itself as the second most widely used currency in the world .
Thirty per cent of international monetary reserves are denominated in euro .
More than a third of international private borrowing is carried out in euro .
The euro has a purchasing power 40 % higher than that of the dollar , which means that euro area Member States pay less for their raw materials , particularly oil .
The euro is here for the long haul in all euro area Member States .
With all due respect to Mrs Le Pen , leaving the euro is simply not an option .
Any Member State leaving the euro - which is what Mrs Le Pen wants for France - would see its new currency dramatically devalued .
In the wake of the crisis in Iceland , the value of the Icelandic currency has been halved .
This 50 % devaluation of the Icelandic currency has caused the rate of inflation in Iceland to leap from 5 % to 14 % .
The only way to restore calm in the markets is to allow Greece , Ireland , Portugal and others to restructure their debt through the issue of Eurobonds guaranteed by the Union at reasonable rates .
I am talking here about the Tremonti-Juncker initiative .
In fact , Eurobonds already exist .
The European Investment Bank ( EIB ) borrows under the guarantee of the 27 Member States .
Last year , the EIB raised EUR 80 billion at average rates of between 3 % and 3.5 % .
It is rates like those that would enable Member States under pressure to overcome the crisis and to return to the path of financial stability .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , the previous speaker said that if Greece were to leave the eurozone , its currency would collapse , but in that case , it would default .
However , we know perfectly well that it is going to default anyway , so it has a choice of defaulting within the euro which merely kicks the problem down the road and it will return to bite us , or it can default outside the euro , in which case it can solve its problem .
So his solution will not work .
( FR ) Mr President , I did not get a question but a circular argument from Mr Helmer , and Mr Helmer is simply wrong .


Once again , any Member State leaving the euro would see its new currency dramatically devalued .
I repeat my example of Iceland , which is not in the euro but which has been through all that .
( SV ) Mr President , Mr Rehn , the work you are doing is absolutely excellent .
During this year , you have come up with a series of different proposals that have improved the situation , and that is something that we should all acknowledge .
I am surprised listening to this debate .
I thought this was a House for Europe , not a House for 27 different Member States .
There is a spirit of nationalism here that is frightening and that will not help to solve our problems .
It is a question of solidarity .
( The speaker speaks in English )
( Speaking to Mr Helmer , who had expressed his disagreement ) You may laugh , but you are wrong .
You are definitely wrong , Mr Helmer , because it is about solidarity .
Europe is about solidarity and we all are linked together : even the pound sterling reflects on the euro .
I am astonished .
( SV ) In Sweden , we have experienced what it means to be in serious debt .
We were a country in debt , people were in debt , but we succeeded in dealing with it .
Why should our friends in Greece , Portugal and Ireland not manage to deal with it ?
Are we special up in the Nordic countries ?
Of course we are not .
However , right now , these countries need our help and assistance .
If we do not give them this help and assistance , it will also be our downfall .
( The speaker speaks in English )
Europe is a common destiny for us all , and we have to realise that - even you , Mr Helmer .
You are a part of Europe and you can do more .
( Interjection from Mr Helmer : ' Absolutely no ! )
Mr President , currently we are celebrating the first anniversary of the Greek bail-out , but there is nothing to celebrate .
One year later , we are back at square one .
Instead of lengthening the pain and piling even more burdens on the Greek economy , it would be far better to accept the inevitable and the judgment of the markets .
There is no way to avoid default .
An orderly default has at least five advantages .
It would share the loss more fairly between Greek taxpayers and external creditors ; stop the replacement of private debt by an ever-growing proportion of official debt coming from other countries ; offer Greece more growth opportunities by alleviating debt service ; make it much easier for Mrs Merkel to ' sell ' the default to the Bundestag , because it would mean supporting German banks rather than Greece ; and , finally , isolate the debt crisis from the competitiveness crisis and save the eurozone from contagion .
Do it !
Do not throw good money after bad .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Bokros , since you have raised the issue , I am going to continue .
I believe , Mr Rehn , that we should listen to what is being said .
I believe that , when the figures are placed alongside each other , the only conclusion is that debt restructuring in Greece , and probably in Ireland , is inevitable .
I think that everyone realises that .
It seems so obvious that one might well ask how it is possible that the European Central Bank , the Commission and the Council cannot see it .
Unless you refuse to see it ?
In other words , the first option is that you decide , for ideological reasons , to say that default is out of the question , in which case that would be to deny reality .
On the other hand , you could perhaps say that it would be better to play for time , in which case I would really appeal to you because the more that time goes by , the more painful and the more costly restructuring will be .
It will , in particular , be more costly for taxpayers because the more that time goes by , the more of a burden the Greek public debt will become on public or quasi-public entities - I am thinking of the European Central Bank , I am thinking of the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) - and it is increasingly the taxpayer who is going to be asked to pay up .
You know , Mr Rehn , there has been a great deal of talk about stress tests and resistance tests in recent days .
They are mentioned in relation to nuclear power stations ; they are mentioned in relation to banks .
Yet those whose resistance is being severely tested every day are our citizens , especially the most disadvantaged among them , who perhaps bear a disproportionately high share of the burden of the response to this crisis .
Clearly , one cannot therefore say that the crisis is simply the responsibility of the banks , of enterprises , or of politicians , as some would simplistically have us believe .
I believe that this is a collective responsibility and that it would therefore be healthy if everyone contributed their fair share towards tackling the crisis .
I would like to end by stressing that , even though I might often disagree with you , we should honour the work you have been doing lately .
I am sure that your nights are not very long and I promise that , on the day you return to a more decent life , I will gladly invite you to dinner .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would have expected you to reply with honesty that the austerity programme , the memorandum being applied with religious devotion in Greece , has been a total failure .
The deficit is bigger than forecast , the debt has increased , unemployment has increased , there is even greater austerity and , in the midst of this , you , Commissioner , see in these facts the recovery of the economy and the avoidance of a heart attack , while your representative sees targets and successes .
At the same time , the aim is to apply this recipe to Ireland and Portugal .
These recipes have been a total failure .
At the same time , recent data in Europe illustrate that the German economy is growing and that its export figures are higher than at any time since the 1950s .
I think that this combination of facts , this inequality and the disparities which are appearing and operating within the European Union are the problem and one of the causes of the problem .
This being so , what are you waiting for in order to change policy ?
Tell us what you talk about at your secret meetings , because a lot of rumours are flying around .
Will you eventually change tack in order to address the problems ?

( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I have a question for Commissioner Rehn .
How can it be , Mr Rehn , that the Eurogroup , chaired by Mr Juncker , could hold a summit without the Dutch Finance Minister present ?
How can that be ?
It is an outright scandal that the Netherlands , as one of the biggest contributors to all the rescue packages , was not even invited to the meeting I refer to .
Mr Rehn , could you give me an assurance at this point that you will ensure that this never happens again ?
I have to tell the House that Greece will either have to leave the euro or restructure its debts .
That is an inevitable reality - the question is ' when ? '
I believe , and I fear that that will happen when all the guarantees and all the money has been paid out to Greece .
This is the swindle of the century !
Mr Rehn , can you give me a guarantee now that the scenario whereby Greece first refinances its debts to the maximum degree with Dutch taxpayers ' money and then leaves the euro and cancels its debts is a scenario that will not occur ?
We cannot trust these Greeks , the Greek politicians who , together with the European Commission , swindled their way into the euro with inaccurate figures and who now seem to be primarily occupied with increasing their own salaries .
These are politicians that we can never trust , so , Mr Rehn , how are you going to guarantee that Dutch taxpayers are not going to be terribly swindled once again ?
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( FR ) Mr President , for the last time , is Mr Madlener aware , when he argues against European solidarity and against Greece , that , after Germany , the Netherlands is the second largest beneficiary of the European internal market and that practically one out of every two jobs in the Netherlands is linked to activities relating to the export of goods and services to the European Union ?
Is he not therefore arguing against jobs in the Netherlands ?
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Goebbels , you must know that the Netherlands has hard work and keeping on top of its finances to thank for its strong position .
Did you know that the Netherlands has been the biggest net contributor to the European Union for years now and that the Greeks have been the biggest recipients of Dutch money for years ?
What has been the outcome of that ?
The outcome was crisis in Greece !
This is mismanagement of Dutch taxpayers ' money .
It is a disgrace that you have not grasped that fact .
Mr President , our duty is to look for the best solutions to cope with the crisis , to which end the learning process is of great value .
My feeling is that we have learned why things went wrong and how we got ourselves into the difficult situation we are in today , but my feeling is also that now we are less open to drawing lessons from the evolving reality .
In this context , I would like to raise two issues .
First , we can see great similarities between Member States with regard to public debts and deficit ratios , while , at the same time , for the same Member States , there are substantial differences between the risk premiums paid on their sovereign debt .
In my view , this is clear proof that factors other than sovereign debt enter into the picture and influence markets .
Among other things , it is foreign debt or excessive external imbalances on which markets have focused , and this clearly means that in responding to the situation , we must go beyond fiscal adjustment .
The second issue is related to the fact that those economies that are the most strongly affected by the crisis have to cope with a combination of high risk premiums and severe austerity measures .
This double challenge makes achieving debt sustainability practically impossible .
If we reject debt restructuring , then we need a better balance between punishment and assistance and the design of response packages which would make it possible to avoid pushing countries further into a debt trap .
( PT ) Mr President , Europe is mired in an unprecedented crisis that could threaten the euro area and the European project .
It is a crisis of the euro area , of which Greece , Ireland and Portugal are the first victims .
The attacks on these countries ' sovereign debt aim to weaken the single currency .
Those thinking that this is a problem for the Greeks , the Irish and the Portuguese are fooling themselves : it is not .
If there is not a robust response from the European Union that calms the markets , this pressure will spread to other Member States .
Portugal does not have a problem regarding the sustainability of its public accounts or the insolvency of its national banks .
Portugal needs to continue with the structural reforms already started , to increase productivity , and to promote economic growth .
As in the past , the Portuguese people will overcome this challenge , too , and make the necessary sacrifices , but not more than the necessary sacrifices .
We cannot understand why the European Union is going to charge Portugal higher interest rates than the International Monetary Fund .
Portugal will pay the European Union around EUR 3 billion in interest per year .
There is no need for the Mr Blooms and Mr Madleners in this Chamber , and outside it , to worry : the taxpayer will not suffer .
What is at issue is a loan , not a gift .
This is a loan that will be paid back in full , and at interest rates similar to the market rates Portugal was paying around a month ago .
In a globalised world , no country can solve all its problems on its own .
The financial crisis has already shown that something that happens on the other side of the world can hit all of us at home with devastating force .
That is why we need more and better Europe : a more united and ambitious Europe .
We are all in the same boat : if the boat sinks , no one will be saved .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( FI ) Mr President , I have good news for the Portuguese .
According to information I have just received , an agreement has been reached in Finland and the Commission 's proposal concerning loans to Portugal has been accepted , so Finland is no longer an obstacle .
As it is also my role to ask questions , I would like to ask my colleague the following : do you believe that the belttightening taking place in Portugal will allow you to achieve the kind of economic growth that will enable the loans to be repaid ?
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Finnish people and the Finnish Parliament for making that decision , which is very much in the spirit of community and solidarity that prevailed at the founding of the European Community .
Regarding your question , I was saying to you that these austerity measures will be observed by the Portuguese people and that , although it is a tough , onerous package , we will do everything to increase economic growth , create more employment and escape these difficulties .
( FR ) Mr President , the debt problem is of a magnitude that far exceeds the purely budgetary dimension .
In fact , it is policy as a whole that is being affected by the public debt crisis - the budgetary , economic , social , European , and national dimensions .
First and foremost , however , we have a political crisis on our hands .
In Finland , a party for which dissociating itself from Portugal has become a hobbyhorse illustrates the extent to which the debt problem is worrying the public .
However , it should be recalled that the rhetoric of the party of the true Finns , which advocated against coming to the rescue of Portugal , could not be more similar to that used by Germany 's main political leaders a year ago shortly before aid was granted to Greece .
The populist slogans contributing to significant electoral success , today in Finland , tomorrow in a different country , are , in fact , simply repeating the words previously articulated by very respectable political leaders .
The political centre is where the ideas tearing economic and monetary union apart are generated .
I firmly believe that the difficulties can only be surmounted if senior politicians understand that their role is , first and foremost , to calm tensions rather than fan the flames .
( EL ) Mr President , it is a rotten lie that the economic crisis is a crisis caused by debt .
It is a crisis caused by the over-accumulation of capital , a crisis of the capitalist system which illustrates that it is an out-dated system that has been overtaken by events .
The capitalist crisis in Greece , Ireland and Portugal is getting worse and will continue .
The debt and deficit in these countries are not national peculiarities ; they are the effect , not the cause .
They stem from an extensive reliance on big business : subsidies and tax relief for the monopolies , NATO spending , the destruction of industrial production and the mining , manufacturing , textile and ship-building and repair industries , the severe undermining of agricultural production and the billions of euro for large business groups .
The basic reason for this attack by the European Union , the bourgeois governments and capital on the income and rights of the working classes , the main weapon in which is in the agreement on the euro and the European stability - for which read controlled bankruptcy - mechanism , goes beyond capitalist management of the crisis and the debt .
The strategic objective of the European Union , of the bourgeois governments and of capital is not only to shift the burden of the crisis on to the workers , but to pare the workforce down to a minimum , in order to safeguard the profit margins of the monopoly groups .
Today 's awe-inspiring general strike in Greece will send a strong fighting message ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr President , you have my sincere thanks for your helpfulness and your tolerance .
I have a question for Mr Toussas .
He knows precisely how to explain all the things that are wrong , what is not right in this system , and all the things that are utterly wrong in what is happening in Europe and the Member States .
My question is , what is the alternative ?
Do you want a return to the Communist utopia , as in North Korea , in Cuba and other dictatorships ?
Is that the solution that we need to turn back to ?
Is that what you want ?
( EL ) I understand that you are unable to present proposals to resolve the acute problems faced by the workers both in your country and in the other 26 Member States of the European Union .
May I inform you that , before Greece acceded to the European Union , the Greek Communist Party voiced its opposition and informed the Greek people of the consequences .
Thirty years after the accession of Greece to the European Union or , if you like , even since 1957 , when it was founded and converted from the European Coal and Steel Community to the EEC , what we have seen is this : profits for capital , hardships for the workers .
The people will fight to resolve this contradiction .
Mr President , the eurozone imposes a single currency value and standardised interest rates on 17 different economies .
If the failing countries had remained outside the eurozone , their currencies would have fallen in value , leading to export-led expansions facilitated by low interest rates that would be set by their central banks .
The excessive currency value , and now rising interest rates , have aggravated stagnation , which has brought about falling tax revenues , cuts in services and rising government debts .
It would be in their interest to leave the zone , but the fall in the value of their currencies would then increase their debt burden .
Britain , being outside the eurozone , should be unaffected by these debts , but our previous government underwrote GBP 10 billion worth of debts under the exceptional occurrences clause of the Lisbon Treaty and the present government will continue to supply loans directly and indirectly .
Greece and Ireland will eventually default on their debts , and we will all be shown to have thrown good money after bad .
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to start by saying that I , naturally , believe that the agreement reached for Portugal is a balanced one .
It is a very tough agreement for the people , but it essentially emphasises structural reforms to increase growth and competitiveness .
I think that is very positive .
I am not taking the same attitude as others here who believe that countries like Greece , Ireland and Portugal did everything right : that they made no mistakes and did not go too far ; that they did everything right and it was only the international crisis that caused problems .
No , our governments made mistakes and had the wrong policies , but that does not mean there is not now an opportunity , in the context of the Union , to get back on track and head in the right direction again .
It is therefore important to remember that it is , in fact , necessary to say to those bodies of public opinion against supporting countries in difficulties that they are not giving money to those countries : they are lending money to those countries .
Moreover , they are lending it at very high interest rates , so they are actually doing a deal that is positive for their budgets and their people .
However , I would also say here that it is perhaps time to have a general European response by accepting Eurobonds and accepting the possibility of selling them on the primary market , to respond to the international markets .
Perhaps it is time for the Commission itself , the European Financial Stability Facility and the International Monetary Fund to review the interest rates so that they can make it possible for there to be sustained growth in these countries that are currently in difficulties , by lowering these rates .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , firstly , I would like to say to that I feel ashamed by the amount of nationalism and short-sightedness which has been expressed in this debate .
Mr Rangel , I have a question for you .
Do you feel that the interest rate which you will have to pay under the future programme should be lowered ?
Would lowering these interest rates help your country ?
( PT ) Mr President , I believe that the rate should be lower not just for Portugal , but also for Ireland and Greece .
I think that it will be extremely difficult to achieve the goals without lower interest rates , as we are seeing at the moment in the Greek case , in fact .
However , whatever the case , I think that there is a possibility and a door open here .
If Portugal is able to comply rigorously with the results of the agreement in the first few months , I think that it will be in a position to go to the European Financial Stability Facility and the International Monetary Fund and ask for a review of the rates within six to nine months .
I think that would be good news for the Portuguese people and I think it would be good news for the European Union .

Mr President , just to add an Irish voice to this debate : I , too , share the disillusionment with the extent of nationalism across this floor .
I am disappointed that the Chamber is half empty for what is the most important debate for Europe in this session .
On interest rates : let us be very clear that countries should not be charged penal interest rates .
They do not help them to recover , and they do not help debt sustainability .
In my last 30 seconds , could I ask the Commission to address the issue of debt sustainability , for Ireland and our colleagues who are in difficulty ?
Could I also ask a question about the political capacity of the European Union ?
On Monday in our Parliament in Dublin , I spoke about a sundering of solidarity in the European Union .
I do not say that with any delight .
I have said it privately to the Commissioner .
It is a real and serious problem .
I rue the day when we might be ruled by the extreme right or the extreme left .
For God 's sake , let the centre unite .
( FI ) Mr President , this debate has been useful .
This is a very serious situation for those countries in crisis , but it is just as serious for Germany , Austria and Finland , because taxpayers in these countries have suffered budget cuts and been through serious crises .
The questions have been justified , and that is why it is very important that the Portuguese issue should be made a model example of how a crisis can be held in check , dealt with , and prevented from spreading .
I think that Portugal must now first ensure that it repays the loans by selling its assets , as has been said .
It must also negotiate with its individual lenders to establish concrete proposals and ideas about how this crisis can be beaten .
Voters in Germany , Austria and Finland will not stand for it if , for example , there should be new bailouts for Greece or if this case should fail .
( SK ) Mr President , Portugal is another country in need of financial assistance from the Eurobond , but us be honest and admit that the labelling of this crisis as a ' debt ' crisis or a ' euro ' crisis is highly misleading .
It gives the impression that the euro is in crisis because certain Member States are incapable of running their affairs sensibly and have taken on too much debt .
Ireland and Portugal , however , ran their affairs in a disciplined way , and got into a crisis that was not of their own making .
It is the poorly regulated banks that were irresponsible .
It was the cost of protecting these banks that got some euro area states into financial problems .
The actual crisis is therefore rather a crisis of the European banking sector .
If we are honest , the Eurobond , or rather the new form it will take after 2013 , will surely not be enough .
The cost of protecting the euro must be reduced in such a way that we force the commercial banks to acknowledge their losses .
The next step should then be effective regulation of the financial sector .
( NL ) Mr President , the current approach to the debt crisis exacerbates the problems .
Yes , Greece , Portugal and Ireland are being offered a debt settlement , but their debts are being increased , not reduced .
This approach is a disaster - it is solving a debt problem by taking on more debt .
Mr President , Europe needs to move on from its taboo on writing off debt .
We can move forward by restructuring public debt with a partial writing off of debts in combination with enforcing the requirements of a tightened-up Stability and Growth Pact , including automatic penalties .
Obviously , this is a tough approach designed to bring about a ' shake-out ' amongst the banks , some pensions institutions and bondholders , but we need to get through this .
It is a question of no pain , no gain .
Writing off public debts in combination with enforcing strict requirements paves the way for a new future .
If we do not do that , there is only one future , which is weak countries leaving the euro area .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner Rehn , last month , the President of the Portuguese Republic asked the Commission to be ' imaginative ' , and your reply to the President of my country , with the arrogance of a colonial governor , was ' we have been imaginative with Portugal ' .
That is why I want to reply to you now .
The European Commission has been imaginative in imposing a three-year government programme and a preferred government on a country three weeks before an election .
The European Commission has been imaginative in demanding an interest rate of 6 % from that same country , and in plunging Portugal into recession for the next two years .
The only place the European Commission has not been imaginative is where it needed to be , because we all need to restructure the debt , to renegotiate the debt , and to involve creditors in the solution .
Please , Commissioner , search your conscience : resign , and Europe will thank you for it .
( DE ) Mr President , in contrast to my fellow Members who have overrun their time , in a similar way to the budget overrun , I will attempt to be brief .
Among the many clever analyses and responses , there is one question which has not been asked .
That is the question of what the citizens of the net contributors would say .
Tax rates of 50 % with a high standard of living and high levels of social services are not a coincidence .
This means that the citizens are working hard and earning a great deal .
Solidarity , which has often been referred to today , also involves solidarity with the citizens in our own home countries .
The case of Sweden has been mentioned .
The EU did not intervene here with financial aid .
Instead , restructuring has taken place , cuts have been made in social services and public services have been reduced .
In other words , a strict fiscal policy has been introduced .
We must explain this to the countries which are obviously the subject of today 's debate .
Without a strict fiscal policy and major efforts on their own part , this will not work .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will focus on one issue only because I need my five minutes for that .
In recent weeks , and today in this House , many voices have spoken in favour of debt restructuring in Greece .
It sounds very easy and neat .
However , I must say that the proponents of sovereign debt restructuring seem to ignore the potentially devastating implications for financial stability in the country itself and in the euro area as a whole , and the consequences and ramifications for economic growth and employment .
Let us think about what the consequences of debt restructuring could be .
Of course , we are talking about a counterfactual situation , as are the proponents of debt restructuring , but we have enough understanding of the channels of impact on financial stability and economic activity to make a likely and most possible scenario .
This is how it could very likely turn out .
Bondholders would take a big hit - i.e. households through their savings instruments like pension savings , as well as institutional investors such as pension funds and insurance companies .
Banks would also bear the cost .
From last year 's bank stress test exercise , we know that the Greek banks hold EUR 48 billion of government securities , Greek Government bonds .
What would happen ?
A restructuring of sovereign securities would seriously erode their capital base .
For instance , even a 30 % haircut would mean that a large part of the banking system would end up under-capitalised , while a 50 % haircut , which many have advocated , would imply that a large part of the Greek banking system would simply become insolvent .
Thus , a debt restructuring in Greece would have major consequences on the soundness of the banking sector in Greece , as well as on any banks having exposure to Greek securities .
Now , I do not love banks , nor do I do my job in the first place in order to save them , but it is a fact that such a major banking crisis would lead to a massive credit crunch .
It is not a kind of theoretical virtuality .
It is a very likely result .
A massive credit crunch .
Moreover , through rating actions , the collateral pool at the disposal of the Greek banks would most likely be wiped out .
It would melt down .
A massive credit crunch , possible bank runs , a deposit freeze and / or capital controls could well be part of the consequences .
What is absolutely sure is that the contraction of the economy would be unprecedented in Greece .
Let me recall that Argentinian GDP collapsed by almost half over five years .
Would that help Greece or Europe ?
I doubt it .
Even such a severe haircut as 50 % would not reduce the debt ratio below 100 % of GDP , assuming that the international creditors , like the euro area Member States or the IMF , were excluded from this haircut .
Greece still has a large fiscal deficit which it has to finance .
Who would be ready to lend to Greece the morning after it wiped out 70 % or 50 % or 30 % of previous investors ' financial wealth ?
Who would be ready to lend to Greece the morning after ?
Debt restructuring would cut Greece 's access to financial markets for a very long time , and the goal of the EU / IMF programme is indeed a relatively rapid return to the markets to finance the Greek sovereign debt so that European taxpayers do not have to guarantee loans to do that .
That is the goal of this exercise .
Let us recall that in the final analysis , fiscal solvency requires stabilising and then reducing the government debt ratio - i.e. achieving a primary structural surplus and achieving a debt-stabilising level .
Greece is still living beyond its means , and the key is that Greece has to start earning more than it consumes and also be able to pay the interest rates on its debt burden .
That is the primary structural surplus that Greece needs , and debt restructuring would not solve this very fundamental fact .
Therefore , at the end of the day , the main determinants over the solvency of Greece are of a political and social nature - the consistent rigour to keep the primary surplus stable at a high level of around 5 % of GDP for a long period of time .
We have examples of this .
Belgium successfully did so in the 1990s for almost a decade .
Moreover , six EU Member States have been able to maintain a primary surplus of over 4 % for at least four years , so it is not impossible .
It is certainly very challenging , but it has been done before and it is doable also for Greece if there is the political will and unity in the country .
This is the only way for Greece to avoid much worse alternatives .
We really are at a critical juncture concerning the future of Europe .
This debate is about the sovereign debt crisis .
It has implications for the euro , for the future of Europe .
You know this very well .
I must say that I am extremely concerned about the divergence in the national political debates we have heard recently , which have also been reflected in this House .
There is political fatigue in central and northern Europe about supporting the countries in trouble ; there is reform fatigue in southern Europe about carrying out the necessary reforms .
We need to find the energy together to beat this fatigue .
We need to build bridges over these divergences in order to save Europe , and we need to make the necessary decisions to avoid another , even worse crisis , and to enable the whole of Europe to recover from this extremely serious financial crisis that we have experienced in the last years .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to reflect briefly on two trains of thought .
Although , undoubtedly , the crisis of the banking system contributed considerably to our current economic problems , it would be a mistake to conceal that most of the problems arose prior to the crisis from a lack of fiscal discipline in numerous countries , from economic policy that did not strengthen competitiveness , and from the absence of coordination in European economic policy .
It is therefore clear that a comprehensive European answer is needed and two important elements of this , which are also top priorities for the Hungarian Presidency , are the European semester and implementing the reform of economic governance .
Implementing both priorities has reached an important , critical stage .
As regards the European semester , we are committed to successfully concluding this on time .
The Member States ' stability and convergence programmes , as well as the national reform programmes , are planned to be discussed at the Ecofin meeting in June , and I hope that at last , these programmes will mean a real breakthrough in each Member State 's fiscal and economic policy .
Intensive work on the package of six proposals is going on in the trialogue .
In connection with this , the Hungarian Presidency will announce the most important points of Parliament 's proposals at next week 's meeting of finance ministers , and at this discussion we will ask for a mandate from the Council to reach a successful and speediest possible agreement still in June regarding the six legislative proposals .
A responsible and flexible attitude is required of both the Council and Parliament , and I firmly believe that in today 's situation , the agreement would send a remarkably positive message to the markets as well .
Furthermore , it would reflect the ability of the European institutions to cooperate responsibly and without delay when Europe is in huge need of this .
Concerning the Portuguese programme and the three adjustment programmes in general , first , I would like to welcome the parliamentary agreement on financial policy .
We all know that this is extremely important from the aspect of the functioning of the European Financial Stability Facility .
At the same time , I wish to point out that it is also clear in the economic policy programme compiled by the Troika in relation to Portugal that the programmes devised for Greece , Ireland and Portugal alike adapt to the characteristics of each country and are not formulaic in any way .
For Greece , the stress is on putting the budget in order .
For Ireland , the consolidation of the banking system can be regarded as the key element .
Now for Portugal , the most crucial parts are perhaps structural reforms , and labour market and commodity market reforms .
As we are all aware , in the case of Portugal , it is extremely important to put the economy on a higher growth path in the medium term and to strengthen competitiveness .
I believe that , although implementing economic policy programmes related to credit agreements means serious efforts for the Member States , at the same time , this is also an opportunity to face up to long-standing structural problems and to find solutions and answers to these within a short period , which , in the medium term , could lead to sustainable and higher growth in these countries .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The euro is experiencing depreciation at a time when there is talk about Greece needing to receive a second loan from the European Union .
We must ask ourselves whether the situation in Greece and in other European states in difficulty is not a result of the actions taken by financial speculators , based on the tactics of ' divide and conquer ' .
Just recently , Portugal became the third state which needed to ask the European Union for loans .
The financial speculators have forgotten the problem of the banks which were difficult to save and are focusing their attention on European states in difficulty .
The low public debt credit rating has made it impossible , therefore , to obtain loans to pay back the debt .
I think that a European credit rating agency is required , which will move away from financial speculation .
On the other hand , it is imperative that Eurobonds are issued to demonstrate the willingness to save the euro .
Owing to its scale and the associated constraints , the debt issue is more than just a real problem for countries like Portugal : it constitutes a central element of the violent social , economic , political and ideological offensive under way , the true causes of which are obscured .
The most recent expression of this offensive is the unlawful intervention in Portugal by the ' troika ' of the International Monetary Fund , the European Commission and the European Central Bank .
This is an intolerable extortion of national resources from the Portuguese workers and people into the pockets of financial capital .
The EU - thereby revealing its nature and true objectives - mediates this extortion process , whilst creating the institutional conditions for it to be implemented and deepened .
The process of foreign intervention under way is very revealing of this .
It incorporates the fundamentals of the antisocial measures implemented in other countries , like Greece and Ireland , as well as those included in the ' Euro Plus Pact ' imposed by the European powers .
When it comes into effect , it will exacerbate the national situation , worsening the economic recession , unemployment , poverty , social inequality and national dependence .
When it is implemented , this veritable submission programme will , as demonstrated by the situation in other countries , exacerbate the conditions that supposedly motivated this intervention : in other words , the difficulties in tackling the unbearable and growing costs of the public debt .
The cause of the sovereign debt crisis is speculation on the indebtedness of Member States that have come to the rescue of the banking sector , which is directly responsible for the profound crisis we are experiencing .
The banking sector has shirked all its responsibilities , especially its financial responsibilities , and is making record profits , while European taxpayers and workers are being asked to tighten their belts .
As for the sacrosanct markets , they are now setting the tone .
Commission and governments have just one obsession : to reassure them .
The whole of last weekend was filled with misinformation on debt restructuring and Greece 's exit from the euro : rumours spread by those who have wagered billions on a default they are trying to create in the first place .
Debt restructuring would , it appear , be a catastrophe - for private investors .
At the same time , it was announced that the Banque Nationale de Paris ( BNP ) , for example , would lose much less than the EUR 6 billion in profits expected this year and that , without the exorbitant rates of interest , Greece 's deficit would be 1.5 % of GDP and not 8 % .
The speculators are stuffing themselves on taxpayers ' money and are clearly set to bleed them dry .
It is time we stopped this unhealthy circus .
One thing is clear to all of us .
The effects of the economic and financial crisis can still be felt everywhere and it involves numerous issues .
It goes without saying that the EU must respond to the crisis .
I have a few thoughts on the stress tests which were carried out on the banks .
A total of 91 major European banks were tested and 7 failed .
I have one major criticism in this area , which is that the consequences of a country going bankrupt were not evaluated and this remains a possibility when we look at Greece , Ireland and Portugal .
The most recent stress tests focused on the hard capital ratios , but the liquidity criteria should also have been included .
It is obvious that these results must be published in order to achieve the required level of transparency .
Efficiency of the European agencies linked to employment , working conditions and training ( debate )
Τhe next item is the Commission statement on the efficiency of the European agencies linked to employment , working conditions and training .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank this House for putting the issue of European agencies on the agenda .
The Commission attaches great importance to the European Union agencies ' efficient functioning .
Part of this is related to the governance arrangements which apply to all of them .
As you are aware , the agencies ' functioning and governance are currently being discussed within the interinstitutional working group involving the Commission , Parliament and the Council , on the basis , inter alia , of a multi-agency evaluation carried out for the Commission in 2009 .
Indeed , the time has come to shape a new overall approach to EU agencies , improving their overall coherence , effectiveness , accountability and transparency .
The ultimate aim of the interinstitutional working group is , through a step-by-step approach , to develop a general agreement between the three EU institutions on the various issues at hand .
We hope this can be achieved by the end of this year or the beginning of next year .
Cooperation with Parliament has been very positive so far , and we trust that we can count on Parliament 's support for the next steps .
As you know , EU agencies are legally autonomous bodies whose governance rules are laid down in the funding regulations .
In general , agencies are overseen by a governing board whose membership may vary according to the nature of the agency .
Three of the agencies in the field of employment and education for example - Eurofund , OSHA and Cedefop - have tripartite governing bodies with representatives of both sides of industry , the Member States and also the Commission .
I wish to reassure you that this House has access to a lot of information , either because this information is in the public domain or because Parliament , as part of the budgetary authority , holds hearings with the directors of agencies , on the annual work programmes and on budgetary discharge , in the Employment and Social Affairs Committee .
Each of the agencies - Eurofund , OSHA , the European Training Foundation and Cedefop - has a specific role to play .
For example , the European Training Foundation and Cedefop , although both working on vocational education and training , have different geographical scope .
The former works outside the EU , the latter inside the EU , and they have different objectives .
The European Training Foundation assists essentially the neighbourhood countries with reforms of education and training systems , while Cedefop promotes information gathering and research on the vocational training policies of the Member States .
The Commission is keen to ensure synergies between the two agencies , notably through exchanges of information , joint work programmes , the joint organisation of conferences and seminars , and joint projects .

Mr President , Mr Andor , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to extend a warm welcome to the members of the Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) group from the Wesel district assembly who are in the gallery .
I would like to say to Mr Andor that we are pleased to hear him thanking us for our cooperation on the issue of agencies .
However , it is both sad and regrettable that the Council representative has once again left the Chamber , because the fact that we have made so little progress in the interinstitutional working group on agencies is primarily the fault of the Council , which is holding back from working with us to introduce improvements in this area .
Therefore , the Commission should be aware that we are on its side .
We must exert greater pressure with regard to the agencies .
We are currently looking at four agencies which reflect the fundamental problems of all the agencies , in other words , the overlap of responsibilities , for example , between the European Agency for Safety and Health ( OSHA ) and the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Eurofound ) and between OSHA and the European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) , the European Railway Agency ( ERA ) and the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) .
There is also a significant overlap between the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) and the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Cedefop ) .
Given Europe 's financial problems , why is it that we cannot bring ourselves to take some fundamental measures in this area and to combine those agencies whose responsibilities are very similar , such as the agency responsible for vocational training within Europe and the agency for vocational training outside Europe ?
There are a number of good arguments for doing so .
We have problems with the size of the agencies and , therefore , with their efficiency .
We have supervisory bodies with more members than the agencies have employees .
These are all things which damage the reputation of the European Union every day , because everyone who looks at the situation puts their head in their hands and says : ' You cannot seriously mean this ' .
Most importantly , some agencies have not reached the critical mass to enable them to work efficiently .
Also , this House has provided too much money and too many staff members .
In some agencies , such as OSHA , we have seen a budget increase of 105 % and a staff increase of 69 % over 10 years .
Eurofound had a budget increase of 39 % and a staff increase of 46 % .
This is why I am calling urgently on my fellow Members to introduce changes during the next budget debate .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( EL ) Mr President , the previous speaker spoke about overlaps in the competences and remits of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin and the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training in Thessaloniki , in Greece .
If I remember correctly , both organisations were founded in 1975 .
I wonder : is it possible that two organisations were founded at the same time for the same purpose ?
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Rapti , yes , that is possible , because , of course , an overlap has emerged in the meantime between the actual areas of work .
By the way , I did not make this up myself .
It was brought to light in the Commission study , which refers to the overlaps .
In addition , surveys of all of those who make use of the agency 's work also contain many references to the overlaps .
This is where the information comes from .
I will be happy to make these documents available to you .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the last few years , I have been following the work of our agencies , particularly that of Bilbao and Dublin , and I believe that they are doing work that is both very worthy and , in terms of cost benefits , also extremely efficient .
At the same time , we benefit from enormous transparency , and there is no doubt that they are working closely with Parliament .
Therefore , I am surprised that shadows of doubt have been cast about their existence and about their work and I am shocked that , as always , some of its members , instead of having a political vision , have a vision that is accounts and nothing but accounts .
It is true that accounts are very important : it is very important to know what the costs are , but we also need to know the benefits , the cost of preventing accidents at work , but also the costs of failure to prevent accidents at work .
We need to know the costs of training , but also the costs of failing to train or failing to anticipate the changes that our workers and industries need to make .
Commissioner , I believe that rather than problems with the agencies , some of your Members have problems with Europe .
You , like Ulysses returning to Ithaca , must not listen to the songs of the sirens , because they want to lure the ship on to the rocks and for the ship of Europe to sink .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , we in the ECR Group want to see more effective control of the EU budget .
On behalf of taxpayers , we demand real added value for money spent at EU level .
Especially in these times of economic stringency , we want a tougher attitude towards spending in general : not more spending , but better spending .
Applying this logic in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I am questioning the efficiency of the four agencies which we have been discussing : Eurofund , ETF , OSHA and the improbably named Cedefop .
I recently myself visited ETF in Turin and also heard a presentation from Cedefop while I was there .
There is indeed , as earlier speakers have said , considerable overlap between their programmes , and I believe that their management and administration , at least , could usefully be merged .
I am therefore asking the following questions .
Does the Commission apply efficiency and performance criteria to these agencies ?
If so , may we see the criteria ?
Secondly , how do the agencies perform against the criteria ?
Can the Commission show Parliament an analysis of the agencies ' performance ?
Thirdly , given the considerable functional overlap , has the Commission considered merging them ?
We have heard about synergies ; we want to see them .
Who sets the objectives and strategy of the agencies ?
May we see them ?
More generally , there seems to be considerable overlap between reports on employment matters produced on these agencies by the Commission and by the Policy Department of the European Parliament .
We ask : is this duplication worthwhile ?
( DE ) Mr President , the EU has four agencies in the field of employment , working conditions and vocational training ; namely , the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Eurofound ) , the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) , the European Agency for Safety and Health ( OSHA ) and the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Cedefop ) , with an annual budget of around EUR 15 million to EUR 20 million .
I have looked at the websites of these four agencies .
The focus is on activities such as a photo competition on the subject of risk prevention , a competition for practical solutions , whatever they might be , and the joint organisation of the European Day of Solidarity between Generations .
These are all earthshaking activities , none of which seem to have any concrete output .
The areas covered by the agencies overlap .
There are overlaps between the agencies and also with the Directorates-General of the Commission , with departments in Parliament and with national bodies .
Obviously , this situation cannot continue .
We must prevent duplication of effort by merging the agencies .
Inefficient agencies must be closed , because the taxpayers will definitely not understand why millions of euro are being wasted on photo competitions within this proliferation of agencies .
( FR ) Mr President , the synergies existing between these four agencies require us to take a closer look at their objectives .
While their objectives have been established on paper , the discharge procedure leaves us less satisfied as to their effectiveness .
The external auditor has pointed the finger at weak budgetary planning , the lack of a clear link between objectives and budgetary resources , as well as carry-overs and cancellations of significant appropriations .
To take the example of Eurofound , the Court of Auditors notes in its 2009 report that the Foundation has not established in its budget a specific heading for the different programmes financed by assigned revenue .
For me , the problem is that we are no longer sure how EU contributions are used before the agency 's balance sheet is examined two years later .
These weaknesses in budgetary planning do not therefore give us the guarantee of specific value for these four agencies .
In response to this situation , we can think about coordinating their work better .
For example , why not form a single governing board for these four agencies ?
The interinstitutional working group has been working on these problems for a number of years .
What response can it give us ?
( EL ) Mr President , the question pleases me , because I like evaluation , I like control .
I also like studies that provide data which can help us do our job more efficiently in the European institutions for the benefit of European citizens .
Why , when the European institutions call for an impact assessment before saying hello , do we have a problem with these two organisations that have been working since 1975 , carrying out research and studies into work , education and training ?
A good question .
Except that its purpose is not economic or financial , it is political .
It is a question that comes back time and again in different ways and for different reasons , and the fact that it has come back now , when Europe is in crisis , when the workers are suffering , when education is suffering , shows that it has a different purpose .
We have found out how to smack and we are slapping everyone we can .
Is Greece suffering ?
Let us attack the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training , because it is in Thessaloniki , even if it was founded in 1975 .
What I am trying to say is this : overlaps between competences are one thing and cooperation is another thing , especially the cooperation needed to get things right in Europe .
( DA ) Mr President , I know these four agencies very well and I have been following their work for many years .
I think that we should be very open in the way that we approach this issue .
It is not simply a question of overlapping tasks ; there would clearly be synergies and the opportunity to produce better quality work if we allowed them to work more closely together .
My fellow Member from Greece , Mrs Rapti , mentioned that there were political undertones behind the desire to amalgamate agencies , and she said that we must not interfere with agencies in Greece .
However , the fact that our agencies are spread out geographically and located in different places in Europe must not be a barrier to us having an efficient system .
What is most important is that the agencies deliver , that the tasks we need them to do are accomplished and that they are accomplished as cheaply and as efficiently as possible .
That is what you should work to achieve , Mr Andor .
Therefore , be open in your thinking on this matter .
( PL ) Mr President , agencies dealing with employment issues play a particularly important role in view of the economic crisis currently affecting Europe .
It is therefore worth examining in more detail the effectiveness of the measures they carry out .
There is no doubt that these agencies should help Europeans to acquire skills that they will be able to use on a rapidly changing and ever more competitive labour market .
We should therefore implement measures which will , firstly , result in greater flexibility in the European labour market , for example , mutual recognition of workers ' qualifications by Member States .
Secondly , the agencies should play an active role in creating programmes which take into account the economic and social challenges facing the European Union , including the demographic challenge and the overburdening of the pensions system .
Finally , we should carry out research to identify the real problems in the European labour market .
To sum up , the measures taken by the agencies dealing with employment issues should be targeted , above all , at helping EU citizens in the face of not only the economic , but also the demographic crisis .
( DE ) Mr President , it is very significant that the Member who asked the question has left the room during the discussion .
The arguments and questions put by some of the previous speakers once again demonstrate a highly revealing populist mindset .
We are in the midst of a crisis and , as usual , savings are being made in areas which affect the workers .
I think that this is a very one-sided approach .
I would like to look briefly at the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) .
It is important because of its cooperation with the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) in the EU 's partner countries .
It enables the European social model to be exported to acceding countries and provides help with developing education , vocational training and further education programmes and with creating secure jobs .
Two weeks ago , I was in Belgrade and , in meetings with education and training providers , I was once again assured of the importance of the agency .
The same thing happened in meetings in Turkey .
The ETF plays a very important role in helping the acceding countries to enter the EU labour market .
If we take a more far-sighted approach , the Arab spring is also very important .
We do not want large numbers of refugees to come to Europe , so we must offer people support in their home countries .
We must provide education and help the countries to develop training programmes and facilities .
( PL ) Mr President , as shadow rapporteur for the report on cooperation in the field of vocational education and training , I have followed the activities of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training with particular interest .
Matching vocational training to the needs of citizens and the labour market is one of the key factors in increasing employment levels and the competitiveness of the European Union .
We cannot therefore underestimate the role played by Cedefop .
The report for 2010 confirmed my beliefs regarding Cedefop 's effectiveness .
Evidence of this can be seen , inter alia , in the steady rise in the number of people using its publications and the Europass portal .
However , I believe that it is vital to increase Cedefop 's involvement in structural measures aimed at vocational training , including the introduction of a system for assessing the effectiveness of training .
I also believe that the agency has superb potential to draft an attractive proposal in this respect .
( PT ) Mr President , I am not seeking to call into question the work and efforts of the workers , experts and specialists of the four existing European agencies responsible for employment , working conditions and training .
Nevertheless , greater coordination and synergy in the work carried out is certainly necessary and possible to make its benefits clearer .
They carry out some important studies giving us greater insight into problems regarding working conditions , training , the actual quality of jobs , and even the lack of democracy in workplaces .
However , there is a need for the European Commission to then take specific actions to respond positively to these problems .
That , Commissioner , is the challenge we are setting for the European Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I asked for the floor , because I can see that I am not taking up anyone else 's speaking time , in order to raise three issues , which I think will help the debate .
Firstly , in order to ask if a study has been carried out into the money we would save if these four organisations were closed down .
The question is not , of course , addressed to the Commission ; it is addressed to the absent member who asked the question , who is no longer here , who would appear not to want an answer .
The second is that the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) uses the data provided by these organisations to saturation point and the third and final issue is to remind the House that discharge for all four organisations was approved just yesterday .
However , no discharge was approved for the Police College based in Britain .
Now as it appears , Ms Rapti , the fact that I made this exception made other Members of the House want to take the floor as well .
We are already over time .
If you really want the floor , I will now have to give it to you but please do not just ask for the floor just to express some kind of disagreement with the process .
Ms Gräßle , you want the floor for one minute ?
If you want to speak to make a point of substance , go ahead .
( DE ) Mr President , if you had explained when Mrs Rapti took the floor what the consequences would be , we could have made more progress .
Mrs Rapti , this approach has brought about exactly the situation that we now find ourselves in and the problem of the agencies working inefficiently , which we urgently need to resolve .
If we want to retain the agencies , we need to change them .
I can only ask you to join us in our efforts .
We cannot simply leave things as they are because the agencies are so inefficient and because they are wasting money rather than making money every day .
I would like to mention once again that the funding for the four agencies we are talking about amounts to EUR 90 million .
That is a lot of money .
I am not sure whether the services that the agencies provide are really worth EUR 90 million .
That is the point I would like to emphasise .
We owe this to our citizens and our taxpayers .
I have to justify myself every day to German taxpayers and explain that we are getting value for money .
I believe that there is plenty of room for improvement .
( DE ) Mr President , when we look at the development of agencies in Europe , it gradually becomes clear that we are suffering from ' agencyitis ' .
There are no other areas where four agencies are working in parallel .
Elsewhere , the job is done by one agency .
When we consider the situation as a whole , it seems as if each country essentially wants its own agency .
If you will pardon me for saying so , we cannot allow this to happen .
We should not only be discussing whether a merger should take place .
We should also be considering which tasks the Commission itself can take responsibility for and whether an agency is needed at all .
This means that we should gradually move to thinking about which agencies we can close down .
I would like to ask the previous speaker , who took the floor twice : Where are the specific efficiency measurements ?
How many jobs have the agencies actually created ?
Where is the turnover which justifies ongoing funding of EUR 90 million per year ?
When I have the answers to these questions , I will be able to support the continuing existence of these agencies .
Otherwise , I would like to see them closed .
( PL ) Mr President , I believe that it is extremely important for us to have agencies carrying out effective measures relating to the labour market and employment and , of course , agencies need to be held accountable for their results .
Let us not forget that every third European Union citizen has no professional qualifications .
Matters relating to monitoring of the employment sector , labour market potential and vocational training generate an enormous amount of data , which it is no longer possible for any one Member State to evaluate on its own .
We should therefore hold agencies accountable for the effectiveness of their work , but we should remember that the results of this work may now have an incredible impact on the labour market , by linking all vocational training to jobs and professions which are already showing signs of being in short supply in the future European Union .
Today , we have to import a large number of workers from other countries for jobs which require a narrow specialisation , such as doctors and nurses .
These are the problems the European Union is facing , and we should therefore appreciate how effective these agencies ' measures are .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I believe that we need to discuss all issues like this without any taboos .
If we find weaknesses or waste , we have to address them .
However , it is also very important that we do not misrepresent reality and we do not overstate the weaknesses we find just so as to make a strong point .
I regret that some of the colleagues who spoke have actually left , but I would like to answer them very specifically .
For example , I very strongly reject the notion that some of these agencies just do PR and work of a very superficial nature .
They actually do very concrete analytical and policy work , including the exchange of experience , and help deliver European policies , in these particular instances , in the area of employment and social issues .
I think these agencies are instrumental in delivering the Europe 2020 strategy and progress towards the headline targets we have agreed .
I very much agree that developing skills and vocational training is one of the key challenges we are facing , as was stressed in the discussion .
This is one of the key structural causes of unemployment in the European Union , and we need the contribution of these agencies more than ever .
It is true , however , that we have to see whether the costs are justified or not , and we need to approach this on a very concrete basis .
In principle , the efficiency and performance criteria of an agency are set out in its annual work programme , together with an indication of the ways in which such criteria are to be addressed .
An agency 's annual work programme has to be approved by its governing board , and is presented to the relevant European Parliament committee .
The Commission representatives on the governing boards of agencies take the need for quantitative and qualitative performance criteria very seriously and make every effort to ensure that they are applied .
On the question of how the agencies perform against the criteria that are set , I have to say that it is the role of the governing board of each agency to assess its performance against those criteria .
As a rule , agencies carry out external evaluations of their work programmes at regular intervals , and these take such performance indicators into account .
Agencies usually report on the results of external evaluations in the director 's annual activity report , which is submitted to the budgetary authority .
As part of the budgetary authority , Parliament may also request agencies to justify their performance .
Agencies are also subject to evaluation by the Court of Auditors in connection with the annual discharge procedure , the results of which are discussed in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Commission representatives on the governing boards of agencies make every effort to ensure that the recommendations stemming from external evaluations , and those from the Court of Auditors and the Commission 's internal audit service , are followed up appropriately .
I addressed the question of the functional overlap between two agencies - the ETF and Cedefop - in my introductory speech , but I would like to stress again that the contribution of these agencies can be crucial , especially in the context of increasing employment in line with the 2020 objectives .
The ETF , particularly in the light of the recent changes in the Mediterranean area , can play a very strong role in bringing prosperity to the regions neighbouring the European Union .
I have one more point to make concerning Parliament 's capacity to see the development of strategies .
The objectives of the agencies are defined in the Financial Regulation which , as you know , is published in the Official Journal .
An agency 's strategy is usually set by the director in agreement with the governing board , and these strategies are presented to Parliament each year and are reflected in the annual work programme .
The four agencies concerned presented their annual work programmes to Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs at the end of January this year .
Finally , I would like to say that I also believe it would be useful to involve the Council Presidency in such discussions .
I can assure you I will follow this up with them , and I am sure I will find a common language with the Presidency on this issue as well .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 19 : 25 and resumed at 21 : 00 )

Innovation Union : transforming Europe for a post-crisis world ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Merkies , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on Innovation Union : transforming Europe for a post-crisis world .
Mr President , Commissioner , you are an innovator , I am an innovator , we are innovators , we can all be innovators .
How can we be ?
The answer is as researchers , scientists , policy makers , workers on the shop floor , consumers and citizens .
It is the citizens who are key to innovation - they make or break it .
Yet what can we , as policy makers , as politicians , do to accelerate that innovation ?
Innovation is the only way out of the financial and economic crisis , as innovation will provide the solution to the problems that affect us all - such as the ageing of the population , climate change and the scarcity of raw materials - and will also put an immediate end to the financial and economic crisis .
Through innovation , we hope to be able to link all these things together , give the economy a vigorous boost and , at the same time , move towards a sustainable society .
This will not happen on its own , of course .
A change of mindset is required - a changing of the concept of society and of how we need to get to work in politics and in business and industry .
So , what are the specific measures that we could take ?
We need more focus and less fragmentation .
We need to do away with our narrow-mindedness when it comes to innovation and in policy .
What do we want to achieve ?
Innovation is not just a question of one building , one ministry , one programme .
Innovation needs to be something that runs through every area of policy .
That therefore has to be the political mindset , too .
Preferably , we need a holistic approach .
Why do we have so many programmes already ?
Bring these together wherever possible and actually start to simplify things , for once .
That is the mission for us , as politicians .
Cut the red tape .
As politicians , we have a constant tendency , if we want to achieve something , to throw a new layer on top , additional regulation , an additional programme , an additional funding option .
Maybe the solution is not the ' additional ' in this case ; maybe it is just ' less ' or ' instead ' .
We thus need less control-freakery in funding applications and - something that is very important - to offer service to those who come to us for funding and promotion , to provide a one-stop shop for applicants , new business founders , SME operators and , where appropriate , for regions and research bodies .
This means not merely checking funding applications but , where appropriate , also seeking out suitable partners or networks for collaboration .
There needs to be a great deal more venture capital and , in that regard , instead of EUR 1 billion in the next funding period , we really need to aim for EUR 5 billion , as that will provide the banks with just the little bit of support they need in order to grant loans to SMEs .
We need a cheap and simple patent and workable rules to protect intellectual property .
We need a true European internal market where innovations are better able to succeed through access to a market of 500 million citizens .
At the moment , that market is much too compartmentalised .
Up to now , innovation has predominantly been seen as a high-tech product .
That is not necessarily the case - it can also relate to social innovation .
Europe has been struggling for years against an innovation brain drain - creative people who would rather head to the United States because they believe that it is easier there .
If we are honest , the truth is that that is sometimes the case .
Inflexible personal liability rules , the lack of financial support and high thresholds in order to enter the European market are all barriers that ensure that innovation has not , hitherto , seen great success in Europe .
The EU must dare to reward - not punish - courage , entrepreneurship , curiosity and creativity .
We need European versions of Steve Jobs .
Let us merge where we are strong ; let us in Europe bring together the spirit of research , Einstein and Steve Jobs .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Ms Merkies , for this excellent report .
I want to thank the shadow rapporteurs on the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) , as well as the members of the seven committees that delivered their opinions to ITRE .
Their support for all the various aspects of Innovation Union will be crucial to its success .
Innovation has been placed at the heart of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
I would like to take this opportunity to illustrate in concrete terms what Innovation Union will mean for different people .
We will encourage and support better collaboration between business and academia through the creation of knowledge alliances to develop new curricula that address innovation skills gaps .
For Europe 's researchers , we will take measures to boost cross-border cooperation and remove obstacles to research and mobility , completing the European Research Area by 2014 .
Ultimately , as Ms Merkies put it , we have to merge Albert Einstein and Steve Jobs and keep him or her in Europe : we must be seen to be attractive and dynamic , and unfettered by unnecessary red tape .
For our small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and entrepreneurs , Innovation Union is working to create conditions on intellectual property rights ( IPR ) , standard setting and access to finance that will be much more conducive to innovation .
On 13 April 2011 , we presented two legislative proposals on IPR , under enhanced cooperation , which will reduce the cost of patents by up to 80 % .
A single European patent will be valid in 25 Member States and , if you want to build a start-up or you need access to finance , the Commission will ensure by 2012 that venture capital funds established in any Member State can function and invest freely elsewhere in the EU .
Innovation Union will also champion the best examples of public sector innovation , and the private and public sectors can learn from each other 's best practice .
Public procurement represents 17 % of the EU 's GDP , an enormous potential market for innovation .
So we encourage Member States and regions to set aside budgets for public procurement of innovative products and services .
Finally , what about the average taxpayer ?
Well , Innovation Union will make the best use of public money .
This means prioritising smart fiscal consolidation , despite severe budget constraints .
Investment in education , research and innovation has the potential to create more wealth and jobs than it costs , and investment in innovation will help us tackle the great challenges that society faces .
That brings me to the partnerships which will provide a framework for aligning instruments and resources , bringing all the key actors together .
They aim to cover the whole innovation chain , from supporting excellent R & D to making sure that we have the conditions in place to bring the results of that R & D to the market successfully .
We are delighted that Parliament gave such strong support on 11 November 2010 to the concept of the innovation partnerships .
Parliament 's President has been invited to nominate four members to the steering board , and we look forward to that .
Last but not least , Ms Merkies mentioned social innovation , which has been discussed by ITRE .
The Commission is committed to launching a European social innovation pilot that will provide expertise and a networked virtual hub for social entrepreneurs and for the public and third sectors .
Let me stop there , because I think tonight is all about hearing what the Members of Parliament have to say , so that after the debate , when we go away with the report , we will be able to respond to those comments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis has particularly emphasised the necessity of innovation in the economy of the European Union and therefore , the Commission 's proposals for the ' Innovation Union ' are particularly welcome .
A successful innovation policy must rest on three pillars : political support , finance and orderly legislation .
As we emphasise in the opinion of the Committee on International Trade , the overarching objective of the ' Innovation Union ' must be long-term development and competitiveness based on technology , knowledge and the development of education .
In increasing investment in research and development to 3 % of gross domestic product , we must carry out structural reforms to secure its effective application and accessibility for small and medium-sized enterprises .
An important aspect is entrepreneurs ' understanding of innovations .
These do not only include high technology and discoveries , but also social , business , management , marketing and other innovations , which demand ever more effective application of knowledge , and more active collaboration with universities and research centres .
It is important to identify the strong aspects of research , while avoiding excessive prioritisation , where everyone is researching one and the same thing .
European patents currently cost 15 times more than US patents , hence the reason why we must develop the European patent more quickly and reduce its cost .
Valuable inventions are being made in many of the new Member States but due to lack of funding , the researchers are forced to sell them to other countries and companies for a few thousands , whereas their real worth can be measured in millions .
As regards patents obtained with public funds , it is important that universities and private persons be able to share in intellectual property created in this way .
The European Union must reinforce protection of intellectual property in order to safeguard our technology and know-how from piracy and fraud , especially by concluding agreements with third countries .
For their part , governments must draw up programmes for developing innovation .
We may not be able to overtake China and India in the quantity of research , but we can definitely offer quality and better conditions for implementing ideas . Thank you .
Mr President , we on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have argued that innovations are absolutely crucial to economic development and improved employment , now that Europe is looking for a way out of the economic crisis .
R & D investment tends to drop in periods of economic crisis , even though it has been proved that those companies and Member States that invest the most during those periods are the ones that gain the greatest comparative market advantage .
They are also the ones to recover fastest from recession .
That is why it is extremely important for the Member States to meet the Europe 2020 target and invest at least 3 % of GDP into research and development .
The Committee on Employment stresses the importance of innovation policy being viewed broadly , not merely in the form of technical innovation , but also - more than has previously been the case - in the form of social and servicerelated innovation that helps resolve challenges facing society , such as ageing , healthcare , and changes in the environment , climate and energy efficiency .
A good example of this is the pilot project known as the European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing .
Information and communications technology ( ICT ) is important in all innovative activity .
ICT skills depend on improvements in the quality of training , support for lifelong learning , and the opportunity for those already in employment to update their own knowledge and skills continuously .
Most of the initiatives that will make innovation possible come from the business sector , and so closer cooperation with universities and research centres is essential .
On the other hand , the commercial exploitation in the EU of research findings in universities is inadequate or too slow .
That is why we need business incubators linking the business world and universities , whose task it would be to promote the commercial exploitation of research findings .
The Committee on Employment considers it absolutely essential that a European research area be created , with obstacles to the mobility of researchers being eliminated , and advanced European research infrastructure being created .
We should therefore prevent the brain drain from Europe to other places - if anything , Europe should be an area that attracts researchers from elsewhere .
Mr President , Commissioner , the possibility of strongly stimulating the economic and social development that is so necessary in our times is , in fact , integral to innovation .
We can go even further and say that innovation constitutes a necessary means of helping respond to many of the problems and challenges facing humankind today .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I sought to uphold this idea by drawing attention to some of the main challenges we are facing in the following areas , to cite but a few examples : the scarcity and efficient use of resources , waste recovery and treatment , food quality and security , demographic change , new epidemics , and conservation of nature and biodiversity .
I sought to uphold the fact that innovation should be guided , above all , by the criteria of defending the public interest , improving people 's quality of life , promoting social welfare , and preserving the environment and the balance of nature .
It should be a key element of public policy in such areas as the environment , water , energy , transport , telecommunications , health and education .
I drew attention to the fact , acknowledged by the 2009 European Innovation Panel , that the economic and financial crisis is having a disproportionate impact on a number of countries and regions , thereby undermining the objective of convergence .
The constraints currently imposed on the Member States could result in increased restrictions on investment in science , technology and innovation , particularly in the most vulnerable countries .
Instead of the announced ' Innovation Union ' , the result could be a veritable innovation divide between the countries and regions that innovate most and the rest .
Unfortunately , the first draft opinion that I tabled ended up being diluted by amendments adopted in committee .
Where there was - and should be - public interest , development , cohesion , progress and social welfare , what has ended up predominating are so-called business opportunities , competition , and the harnessing of innovation for business purposes .
While that is also the dominant vision in the Commission communication , it is not our vision .
This is not the vision of the future that we need .
Mr President , the key point , in the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , is the creation of an Innovation Union with an enhanced social profile predicated on job creation .
Innovative goods and services need to be adopted , which will target both the private and the public sector , so as to facilitate the implementation of administrative procedures , strengthen the public administration and reduce bureaucracy and the inflexibility of the public sector .
Furthermore , the adoption of innovative solutions is closely bound up with pre-commercial procurement , which resolves issues which the market cannot cover or where the solutions proposed are uneconomic .
In the private sector , we must encourage small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as micro-enterprises , which are having particular difficulty adapting to the market , to increase the use of innovative products , on the one hand , and create innovative solutions , on the other .
Special mention also needs to be made of micro-enterprises in regional and rural areas , which are struggling to survive due to the lack of funding , so that we can find ways of encouraging the use of innovative solutions , thereby improving their viability .
At the same time , environmental innovation programmes need to be encouraged , so as to plug the gaps which exist in efforts to deal with climate change and promote environmentally-friendly solutions .
In addition to strengthening innovation , we need to look at how it can directly benefit the citizens of the European Union .
The use of innovative solutions should result in lower costs for enterprises and should enable consumers to enjoy cheaper and better products .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - Mr President , I would say to the Commissioner that , in recent years , innovation has become a symbol of a policy instrument that can fix all our problems .
This means that there are huge expectations and that we must deliver .
Of course , for a successful implementation of ideas , governance matters very strongly and a governance framework for innovation must be based today on pragmatism and must be delivered with a sense of urgency , and also must be at the service of the policy content .
Europe , we all agree , has to innovate or it will lose out to competitors .
Every link in the European innovation chain must be strengthened and innovation policy must be focused towards challenges .
That is what I understand the Innovation Union is offering .
Today , we run the risk that , not only companies , but also governments might decrease investment in innovation .
That is the logic of the crisis and the logic of national budget cuts .
EU policy responses and EU budgetary instruments must move firmly against that logic .
In Europe , innovation is not just a concept that can be limited to specific innovation centres .
It needs to be applied across the entire European territory .
Europe is simply too small to afford an innovation deficit anywhere on its territory .
Research and innovation are clearly not the same thing and we agree with you very clearly .
Governance for innovation should therefore do more than just support research and development policy .
Promoting innovation-led growth is not about increasing excellence in R & D infrastructure .
Important as they are , it is , first and foremost , about mobilising talents and mobilising new ideas .
Governance for innovation must mean establishing new partnerships enabling efficient innovation systems that mobilise intellectual and entrepreneurial capacities , detecting also sleeping innovators - of which we have many in Europe - through a business environment that is conducive to innovation , and particularly for SMEs , covering all sectors of the economy .
To conclude , let me say that we do not yet have a fully-fledged European model for innovation , but what is clear is that it must be rooted in a well-orchestrated , concrete , strong and joint public / private effort .
I trust that the Innovation Union will take us all the way forward towards such a model .
Mr President , the report by Mrs Merkies - whom I thank for the work she has done - is Parliament 's first important contribution to the Commission proposal on the Innovation Union initiative .
In recent years , major countries around the world have tenaciously pursued the objective of concentrating their competition policies on certain key sectors , which have generated growth and development by aiming at innovation .
The high-tech sector is a good example .
Europe , too , recognises the need to pursue projects aiming at economic and industrial growth , by focusing resources and investment on innovative policies , without abandoning the path it has followed in recent decades of playing a leading and guiding role in economic and social development .
The main thrust of this report shows the need for a cross-cutting approach , promoting innovation in all areas of business , the economy and society in general .
Small and medium-sized enterprises - the mainstay of Europe 's economic performance even in difficult crisis situations - are picked out as places where innovation occurs every day .
Today , these abilities should be recognised , rewarded and put at the service of the growth and development of the whole continent .
It is also made clear that innovation and research are two sides of the same coin .
Innovation may derive from research , but it can also be a wide-ranging ability to change things for the better in all areas of daily life .
Succeeding in this will be a challenge for Europe .
We may not manage to create a Silicon Valley straight away , but perhaps we can establish a Stanford University .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Merkies , on her excellent work , because she has unpicked the content of the report and concentrated on the more relevant aspects for our group , such as social innovation - understood as innovation by workers and the public - the incentive provided by the public procurement of innovative and green products and services , and the need to improve the access to finance on the part of SMEs .
This allows me to concentrate and comment on a specific aspect of the report : the need to develop indicators .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we understand innovation simply in terms of new products , processes and services that result in an increase in economic activity , it is essential that we equip ourselves with the instruments to measure our innovation capacity precisely in economic terms and that we do so on the basis of parameters , such as private investment and R & D , employment or the number of innovative companies .
We have to establish indicators that reflect the capacity of innovation to generate growth , employment and an increase in GDP , and which allow us to compare our situation , in terms of intensity , with the economies of our competitor countries .
I would like to end with a few words as a member of a delegation that opposed the launch of enhanced cooperation on the unitary Community patent and to say that we opposed it , because we believe that the enhanced cooperation instrument may directly affect the internal market , territorial cohesion and the right of citizens of all Member States to have maximum legal security .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( BG ) Mr President , Europe is currently faced with a comparatively new but very serious danger of lagging behind or even of a decline in terms of global competition in the field of science and technology .
Such a development would put our prosperity , economic progress and social status under serious pressure .
Put in simpler terms , Europe is under threat of turning into a mediocre actor on the global scientific and economic stage .
Europe urgently needs innovation now .
I congratulate Mrs Merkies on her fine report .
I am also delighted with the excellent ideas from Commissioner Geoghegan-Quinn .
This guarantees success because the Innovation Union is primarily a strategy for the European Union 's economic development .
We require the following for us to succeed in this .
Firstly , we need to have better access to credit and financial support ; we need more investment in scientific research and development ; clear rules offering long-term prospects in terms of innovation ; simplified procedures for accessing European and national support programmes ; and cheap , simple European patents .
Mr President , today , we are discussing innovation strategy in plenary for the second time .
In many of our debates on the standing of European countries on world markets , we regularly remark on the importance of boosting the competitiveness of the European economy .
The EU 's position on world markets will , in future , be greatly influenced by the success of innovations and the speed of innovation cycles .
European states clearly operate at a very high level in research projects .
The long-term problem , however , is the slow implementation of this knowledge in practice , due to complex bureaucracy .
The fund for science and research is one of the largest EU funds .
It must therefore be our aim to simplify the bureaucracy involved in the transfer of research results as much as possible , and thus to provide maximum assistance to innovation , thereby strengthening the competitiveness of the EU .
We must think how to deal with the commercial exploitation of the results of research projects within the framework of innovation measures .
If we complicate the implementation of European research in the commercial sphere , we will find it hard to speed up the innovation cycle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , research and innovation policy is one of the three main pillars of the polices of the European Union .
I would also say that it will increasingly become a strategic tool that is absolutely essential for our future .
Why ?
Because we have the good fortune , or the challenge , of living at the dawn of a change of civilisation .
Think about this .
We need to ensure the conditions of a decent existence for all , not only here and now , but elsewhere , too , and for future generations .
This , in itself , is already a major challenge .
On top of this , however , for the first time in the history of mankind , we need to do this within the physical limits of the planet .
This , of course , radically transforms the context .
Our conviction is that Europe can be a world leader in this profound transformation , not only of our infrastructure and organisations , but also , and more importantly , of our way of producing , consuming and living .
For us , it is by being right up there among the leaders that we will best ensure the competitiveness of the European Union .
This gives me the opportunity to say that competitiveness is not an objective in itself .
Our objective is to be in a position to meet the challenges which , let us not forget , threaten the very existence of mankind on this planet .
If we are among the best , our competitiveness will , however , be assured .
A great many things have been said with which we agree .
There are just two points I would like to raise .
Firstly , we need to maximise the impact of each euro spent .
This requires better alignment between the different EU policies and between what is done at the level of the European Union and what is done at the level of the Member States .
This means that we need to progress from a logic where the general rule is subsidy and exemption , lending and risk sharing , to a logic where catalysing private investment by using public funds is a major objective .
The best way of doing that is not always by contributing non-repayable money .
Finally , we must have the courage to put an end to a number of huge white elephants , such as the ITER project which , in fact , gobbles up a substantial amount of European research money - EUR 7 billion out of EUR 60 billion - just imagine !

We need to put an end to that .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank Ms Merkies for all her efforts and her coordination during the period in which this report was being negotiated among the political groups .
I believe that she has done a very good job .
I have three points to make .
I am happy to see that the rapporteur has taken on board the role of broadband .
The digital world and information and communication technologies are engines of innovation , and high-speed broadband should be an essential precondition for all European innovation partnerships .
Secondly , in the run-up to the FP8 , we should further strengthen the monitoring and ex-post evaluation of results of EU-funded research and innovation activities .
Thus , we see that Ms Merkies has quite correctly included in her report a paragraph calling on the Commission to develop an integrated indicator system that would allow better monitoring and assessment of progress and the measurable impact of innovation policies and programmes in the EU .
In conclusion , a few days ago , the President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy , stated that Europeans are not innovative because they are depressed .
That is , indeed , an innovative assumption , but I think it is a matter of character .
We need to encourage a culture of learning , curiosity and risk-taking .
( DE ) Mr President , we are facing major societal challenges : the economic crisis , the ageing population , the scarcity of resources and the need to maintain our international competitiveness .
This makes it all the more important for us to promote innovation , which can counteract these problems by providing creative ideas and solutions .
This is not just about introducing technical innovations , but also socio-political innovations .
For example , in order to deal with the problem of the ageing population , we need so-called classic innovations , on the one hand , such as new drugs , and , on the other , we should be thinking about innovative models for society , pensions and healthcare systems .
We need to create an environment today which promotes the innovations of tomorrow , including investment in research and development , protection for intellectual property , in particular , using patent legislation , and the encouragement of creative skills , starting in school classrooms .
Finally , I would like to mention a particular problem relating to the use of resources .
Innovations should ultimately ensure that products last longer .
This will be of benefit to consumers and the environment .
Unfortunately , there are also innovations which have the opposite effect .
Products are developed with deliberate weak points which shorten their useful life and increase consumption , such as laptops and smart phones .
The Innovation Union must help to combat this .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to give my sincere thanks to Mrs Merkies for her hard work .
I would also like to thank the many Members who were involved and the Commission for its support .
We are largely in agreement on this issue .
Over the years , we have adopted a large number of programmes and papers here , from the Lisbon strategy to Europe 2020 , and many more .
We have constantly said that the future of Europe will depend on whether we succeed in resolving the question of innovation .
We all agree that this involves all aspects of education , training and research , and that the entrepreneurial side is also important .
Nevertheless , it is true , as a previous speaker has just said , that other regions of the world are obviously able to mobilise talent and ideas more effectively than we can .
Therefore , we need to stop for at least a second or two to think about the reasons for this .
Is it because we are providing too little funding or because we cannot find the right way of exploiting the potential that is there ?
This is what Mrs Merkies referred to in her speech .
I would like to mention briefly one other issue .
I was part of a delegation to California and one evening , we met with young entrepreneurs and people who wanted to start new companies .
I will never forget that evening .
Those young people 's eyes were shining , they were full of enthusiasm and they and others believed that they were capable of achieving something .
They only asked for one thing .
They wanted help for everyone who aimed to start up a business , so that they were given a chance , had the freedom to act , and did not spend all their time grappling with red tape .
I will not forget this , because it was a very , very important signal for me .
How can we increase the effectiveness of our investments in research ?
I believe that the contributions made by the European Research Council ( ERC ) and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology ( EIT ) in the area of research are interesting and exciting and could produce good results .
The questions concerning venture capital and people can probably best be answered if we as politicians do not attempt to evaluate all the questions , to come to a decision and to draw up guidelines .
Perhaps only a few regulations are needed .
As Mrs Merkies has said , less is often more .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , Mr Reul , thank you for your speech .
How do you think that we can incorporate these ambitions within the framework of the Innovation Union into all the work that we do in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , into all the other documents that are still to come , into the common strategy framework , into all the research funding and into future programmes ?
How can the Commission ensure that , ultimately , a single thread runs through all these policy elements so that we actually attain the objectives set in this Innovation Union ?
( DE ) Mr President , I still believe in the things that are good and positive .
In the spirit of the young people we met in California , I would like to say that we can achieve this .
However , perhaps we do not need to impose regulations covering every detail .
( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on this report .
It is a very fine result .
In the 2020 strategy , we acknowledged the fact that , if we are to maintain our level of prosperity in Europe , we need to increase our productivity .
We therefore need to focus on innovation .
However , it is important that we do not restrict innovation to research and technology .
If we take innovation seriously , we must , first and foremost , invest in the human element .
Innovation involves creative processes that can be taught and that should be included in the teaching methods used in the Member States , because we need workers with good suggestions for improvements to the job and solution models to tackle the new tasks .
However , this means that we need to educate and provide further training for our workforce .
We are also faced with the huge task of teaching businesses how they can best utilise the innovation potential of their workers .
Worker-driven innovation is not only good for businesses , it is also good for job satisfaction , and it can help to reduce stress .
I would like to call on the Commission to enter into talks with the two sides of industry to discuss how we can best promote worker-driven innovation in Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , of course we are all in favour of innovation , particularly when it comes to science and industry - and I say this not only as a politician , but also as someone who once worked at a university , since I was a lecturer before I became a politician .
In reality , however - and a few speakers have already mentioned this - we are losing the race for innovation against countries such as the United States and the Middle Eastern countries .
This is why we are calling for our cooperation on innovation to be extended to include non-EU countries as well .
I am very pleased by the adoption of the amendment I tabled , which has been included as paragraph 167 and which calls for cooperation with the countries participating in the Eastern Partnership , and I hope that paragraph 71 will be similarly amended .
This paragraph does admittedly refer to the Mediterranean countries , but it should be extended to include all countries involved in the European Neighbourhood Policy .
( EL ) Mr President , Mrs Merkies has produced an excellent report and I congratulate her .
Of course , we also have the EU 2020 strategy , we have numerous efforts and numerous reports on innovation and youth employment on paper , which we need to put into practice .
Young people in Europe are unemployed at a rate of 9.6 % in terms of general unemployment , but this rate exceeds 20.2 % for young people aged 19-27 and , of course , these people are in despair .
Work is not just a livelihood ; we have to understand that and we have to give young people the opportunity to work because , in doing so , we give them their self-esteem .
Every citizen must have the opportunity , of course , to develop innovative action , by taking part in the innovation programme , and to change Europe .
Commissioner , the Commission communication refers to partnerships in the innovation sector .
How does the Commission intend to promote closer participation by the regions , what means will be used , and what funding will be provided ?
( DE ) Mr President , the major challenges faced by the Innovation Union include the ageing population and maintaining healthcare systems .
In order to ensure that the systems are sustainable and stable , they must be considered and discussed in their full context .
It will only be possible to find successful solutions by looking at the interrelationships between the systems .
By 2050 , the ratio of EU citizens of working age to those over the age of 65 will fall from 4 : 1 to 2 : 1 .
As a result , spending on pensions and healthcare is certain to rise .
However , focusing only on pension legislation and increasing patients ' contributions will not allow us to achieve our objectives .
Successful solutions will also have to consider the failings of our education and labour market policies .
It will be essential to invest in training and to change the direction of our training policy in order to counteract a situation in which a growing number of jobs in highly specialised industries cannot be filled , while an equivalent number of low-skilled people of working age are relying on benefits .
As part of our labour market policy , we will have to coordinate our family and equality policies , instead of seeing them as contradictory .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her excellent work .
Europe needs a sustainable and competitive economic model that responds to the major social challenges of today , and that ensures more and better jobs .
The ' Innovation Union ' initiative introduces a strategic European innovation policy that is integrated and oriented towards companies and people .
The concept of innovation must go further than technological innovation : it must be associated with products , but also with processes , services , movements , systems and organisational structures .
In particular , social innovation aims to find new and effective solutions for pressing social needs .
In addition , young people are the engine of innovation : we therefore need to implement policies that promote young people 's access to the labour market .
It is also essential to create proper support mechanisms for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The success of innovation policy depends on the existence of a simple , efficient , unbureaucratic system for science and higher education .
The proper financing of these two areas is a necessary condition for developing innovation .
Therefore , given the target of 3 % of gross domestic product for technological research and development , I call on the Commission to consider the possibility of establishing an effective EU-wide system for governing this target , in the light of what is happening with economic governance .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when we set ourselves the objective of strengthening our capacity for innovation and investment or the competitive advantage to be found with the United States and China , we speak of economic development , certainly , but specifically , we also speak of creating jobs .
For that reason , we must give ourselves the means to strengthen innovation .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Merkies on the one-stop shop , the funding strategy , and the recognition of necessary risk-taking by researchers .
Her report points in the right direction and proposes a context that is favourable to small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which are essential to the success of the European Union .
Innovation means attractiveness and competitiveness of the territories , and the involvement of the regional and local authorities is essential in terms of committing appropriations , reducing disparities and enhancing the active role that citizens must play .
It is directly on the ground that the measure proposed in this report will contribute effectively to the achievement of the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
( CS ) Mr President , Europe and innovation .
I would like to say a little here about what my colleagues , Mr Migalski and Mr Tošenovský , were just talking about .
Where are we , essentially ?
The US is ahead of us , Japan is ahead of us , and Brazil , India and China are hot on our heels .
I see the Innovation Union programme as a programme coming at one minute to midnight .
In all likelihood , this is the last opportunity we will have to get a grip in the area of innovation , and to prevent those countries from catching up with us .
Any failure in this area by Europe as a continent will have fatal consequences - as all the other Members have said - for the competitiveness of Europe , for the quality of life of its inhabitants and , ultimately , also for the values which Europe represents for the world .
I am therefore pleased that the European Parliament has managed to initiate specific legislative measures , such as greater cooperation over the introduction of a European patent .
I also consider the area of standardisation very important in relation to the introduction of innovations into practice , as well as their application by small and medium-sized enterprises .
( PL ) Mr President , in the speech I made here in Strasbourg last November , I highlighted the significant differences that exist between the old and the new European Union Member States when it comes to financial support for the research and development sector .
In the long term , this will result in substantial imbalances in the development of the individual European Union Member States , and in the phenomenon given the ugly name of ' brain drain ' by journalists , which is mistakenly referred to as intellectual mobility in the report .
In order to guarantee sustainable development in Europe - and I would emphasise the word sustainable - the EU must earmark more funding for the development of innovation and research projects in the new EU Member States , under the heading of sustainable development .
It is also worth encouraging the individual governments to increase the sums allocated from the budget each year to research , and also to set a minimum percentage of the budget which must be used for projects of this kind .
A further key issue is the funding of innovation in the SME sector , upon which we should place much more emphasis .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the main challenge is to do things differently - in a much less fragmented way , to have much less parallel activity from the Member States and the European Union - and also to invest in a better-targeted way .
I believe that businesses and the citizens are watching on .
The report , and your proposal for the Innovation Union , generate expectations .
Indeed , we should also expect a lot from it , but I still want to highlight a couple of points on the instrumental side , in particular , including those of the European Union .
First of all , we need to ensure that funding is made easier and there need to be more subsidies and incentives for venture capital .
Secondly , we already have the funds , but they are ring-fenced and separately governed : the regional funds , the agricultural funds and so on .
We need to move to a multi-fund approach .
Will you agree with this in the forthcoming regulations ?
What kinds of proposals will this be covered by ?
My next point is that we have just seen that investment in research and development largely ends up in the twelve ' old ' Member States , so further distribution is required .
A re-balancing is needed .
How can you support businesses and citizens in the ' new ' Member States in this regard ?
Finally , I wanted to say that this is a process that we would like to help you consider .
How will you now conduct the dialogue ?
It says in your communication that , at the end of 2011 , you will hold a convention and take some other action .
I have already had the opportunity to speak with you a couple of times , including in the form of a dialogue , at the knowledge for innovation summits in this House .
How will you organise that from here on in ?
We want to see more of you .
In fact , I have a lot of faith in that .
You currently coordinate such things in the Commission and that did not happen in the past .
Along with Mrs Merkies , we will keep a close eye on you .
( RO ) Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Merkies for the excellently drafted report .
To ensure that the Innovation Union initiative contributes to sustainable development , the education system needs to be modernised , the rules on accessing existing funds need to be simplified and converged , forecasts need to be made about the skills required , partnerships between universities and businesses need to be encouraged , along with standardisation , and intellectual property needs to be protected .
However , broadband access is an absolute prerequisite for Innovation Union , given that it improves the level of citizens ' involvement .
We call for more funds for innovation , but I think that , for consistency 's sake , as we have also done in other cases , we must avoid prejudicing through this report the future of the cohesion policy , the common agricultural policy and the multiannual financial framework .
I hope that this amendment will receive majority support tomorrow .
Finally , we call on the Commission to transpose the Union 's innovation policy into an action plan with specific objectives and measurable targets .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mrs Merkies on her excellent work .
I believe we have to invest more in innovation , research and knowledge , and we have to do so more boldly .
Innovation must not be swallowed up by research .
Innovation and research are not the same thing , and I welcome the fact that the report points out this strategic distinction .
The report sets some important objectives : it targets ordinary people and workers through social innovation ; it introduces measures to facilitate access to credit and finance for small and medium-sized enterprises ; and , above all , it establishes an increasingly close and direct relationship linking together businesses , research centres and our universities .
Facilitating and simplifying life for small and medium-sized enterprises through a one-stop shop and focusing on talent , creativity and innovative ideas are essential conditions for growth and development .
Europe must take innovation policies seriously if we want to find a way out of the crisis and build a better future for our younger generations .
( RO ) Mr President , at the moment , research and innovation are the privilege of the most developed Member States , which is detrimental to the European Union .
The European Union must take this factor into account and foster the balance of potential innovative capabilities throughout the whole EU .
Support must be given to new Member States to develop their research infrastructure by allocating additional resources , as Commissioner Quinn promised not so long ago .
This is the only way we can be sure of preventing the gap between the east and west of the European Union from widening in terms of research and innovation , thereby enabling us to achieve our aim of creating a proper Innovation Union .
An idea is being promoted for structural or agricultural funds for financing innovation and research .
I think that this notion is neither feasible nor fair .
A realistic solution is to create specific instruments which will be earmarked only for research and innovation .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Merkies , this strategy is important to all European countries , especially those whose economies are not competitive enough .
It is essential to the creation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Jobs are being created more actively today .
It is essential to universities and laboratories , whose survival depends , in part , on their relationship with productive sectors .
It is essential to the financial system , which will find a new market in innovation as the classic manufacturing model becomes exhausted .
Innovation is top of the European agenda and , as it is a pillar of the Europe 2020 strategy , it will have to be served by new financial instruments so that it does not succumb to budgetary constraints in the current situation .
Finally , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Merkies , on her important contribution to a more innovative Europe with a more knowledge-based economy .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to add to the many congratulations my group colleague has already received for drafting an excellent report .
The European Union is at a difficult crossroads .
On the one hand , we urgently need to address problems caused by the crisis while , on the other , we need to adopt measures now , so that we can find an adequate response and implement the long-term commitments we have made to counter challenges like climate change , energy security , food security , our ageing society , and so on .
In today 's global context , innovation policy has a huge impact on all areas of life and , in future , it will become the main pillar of economic , cultural and social development in the European Union .
Hitherto , this policy has been fragmented and more oriented towards academic and scientific research , rather than transforming innovative ideas into real or adapted products or services that would stimulate growth and job creation .
I support the comprehensive approach to innovation policy and believe that together , we must establish a strategic and integrated European Union innovation policy that is geared to practical adaptation .
( SK ) Mr President , innovation is one of the main driving forces of European competitiveness , without which it would be impossible to achieve our set strategic objectives .
For example , there is a pressing need for innovation in the areas of public health and environmental protection .
The Union and the Member States must therefore provide financial or tax incentives to businesses and individuals , in order to focus on scientific and technical research and development in areas that are less lucrative but highly beneficial to the public .
In my opinion , we are still allocating relatively small amounts of the budget to research and I would therefore also like to emphasise the need for financing instruments in this area in future EU budgets .
The area of European research would also be supported by the introduction of a single European patent which , besides protecting the intellectual property of innovators , would also have the potential to reduce lengthy and costly bureaucratic processes , and avoid repeat applications from one entity in all Member States .
( RO ) Madam President , achieving the Europe 2020 strategy target of increasing research and development investment to up to 3 % of GDP could create 3.7 million jobs and boost annual GDP by up to EUR 795 billion by 2025 .

To achieve this , however , we will need 1 million additional researchers at a time when many of them are attracted at the moment by non-European countries where there are mechanisms to remove the bottlenecks preventing ideas from reaching the market .
The fragmentation of research systems and markets , the underuse of public procurement to stimulate innovation , the precarious nature of funding and the slow standardisation process are the problems which European Union countries are still faced with .
However , we hope that they will be taken seriously if we want the Innovation Union programme to be one of the successes of the Europe 2020 strategy .
This is the only way we will be able to achieve sustainable growth in Europe and resist the ever-growing pressure of globalisation .
( RO ) Madam President , the Innovative Union initiative promotes a strategic European policy geared towards business .
Particular attention must be focused on the objectives set in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Innovation must be guided by public interest , improving quality of life and promoting social well-being .
This means that globalisation and research are key factors in external competitiveness and economic growth .
Additional factors include active commitment from SMEs and the involvement of European citizens .
The Commission should focus on technologies which underpin smarter , sustainable systems .
All the strategies linked to adapting the EU to post-crisis conditions must be aimed at creating sustainable jobs .
In this respect , Member States must promote stable economic models based on creativity .
( RO ) Madam President , in a Europe without borders , and with an ongoing globalisation process , innovation can and must play an important role in enhancing social cohesion by improving the quality of services provided , no matter which sector they are from .
However , better services also require an improvement in vocational training .
Therefore , I feel it is beneficial to initiate specific vocational training programmes , with a focus on innovation and encouraging creativity , aspects which can be nurtured , taught and enhanced at different stages of the training process .
The European Commission must encourage and support Member States so that they include , to a larger extent , as part of the components making up national education systems , elements such as innovation and creativity , and encourage improvement in cooperation between education systems and the business world by developing new curricula and doctoral programmes , including at cross-border level .
( GA ) Madam President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on this topic .
Madam President , it is incumbent on us to sell the message to third-level educational institutions , research organisations and , indeed , private sector companies concerning the opportunities that are available under the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) for Research and Development .
We must , at all times , highlight the benefits that can accrue to small and medium-sized companies under what is the largest publicly funded research programme in the world .
Support for research and innovation is vital for peripheral regions within the Union if they are to stay competitive in an increasingly globalised world .
From an Irish perspective , the FP7 is helping to develop research that is , in turn , creating jobs and delivering new goods and services for our people .
EUR 270 million has already been drawn down by Irish organisations in the agriculture , food , fisheries , health , energy , transport and ICT sectors .
In conclusion , I say that this is vitally important , particularly during these very difficult economic times , both in Ireland and throughout the Union .
( PT ) Madam President , at a time of serious economic and social crisis , like that currently being experienced in a number of European Union Member States , a debate on innovation in all fields of knowledge and in all economic and social areas is welcome .
However , it is necessary for this innovation to be guided by criteria of defending the public interest , improving people 's quality of life , promoting social welfare , and preserving the environment and the balance of nature .
In this context , it is essential not to forget unemployment , which already affects around a quarter of young people , many of whom have been through higher education ; not to forget that jobs are increasingly insecure , especially for women and young people ; and not to forget the growth of poverty and social exclusion .
It is therefore time to go from words to actions , and to demand the necessary budget and policies that recognise the true value of people , their creativity and their capacity for innovation , and that respect workers ' dignity .
Madam President , a recent GE survey established that 85 % of key people believe that innovation is the way to future prosperity for the European Union .
It is one thing to establish it , but another thing to make it a reality .
That is the challenge facing us .
I had the privilege of drawing up the draft opinion for the Committee on Culture and Education on the Innovation Union and I emphasised a number of points .
One was the need to avoid duplication .
This was prompted by an answer given by the Commissioner in her hearing , when she pointed out that one particular strain of salmonella was being researched by 40 different institutes - a clear case of a lack of joined-up thinking , and a waste of money .
We also need productive cooperation between the various stakeholders .
I saw a very good example of that at Santiago de Compostela University , which tracked research all the way until a new company was founded .
Thirdly , we need to develop the European patent .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the Members who took part in the debate .
I think everybody here agrees that we need to improve the conditions for innovation .
Most of the speakers talked about jobs .
That is what Innovation Union is all about .
It is about taking the very basic blue-sky research that we do so well in the European Union , and translating it all the way to the marketplace so that we provide the jobs here , and they are not provided abroad .
A number of speakers raised the role of the regions .
This is really important and we need to develop synergies between research and innovation funding , on the one hand , and structural funds , on the other .
Indeed , Ms Merkies underlines that point in her report .
All the regions of Europe should play to their strengths .
I will go in a couple of weeks ' time to Debrecen , in Hungary , to the ' Week of innovative regions of Europe ' conference , where all the regions will come together to talk about the concept of smart specialisation .
Some of the less advanced regions can obviously gain from the networking and know-how that is fostered by research and innovation programmes while , of course , using structural funds to build up the research infrastructure facilities that they require .
Mr van Nistelrooij raised the matter of the Innovation Convention , and I would like to say that this is well advanced .
As part of the preparation , we have invited Mr Reul , the Chair of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , to talk about the committee 's representation at the heart of the Innovation Convention .
Obviously , we have also invited representatives of the Member State governments , business leaders , stakeholders of all kinds , policy makers and so on .
We think this is very important because one of the things I consider essential in relation to innovation is that we should have a ' living document ' : in other words , that we will have the opportunity on a regular basis - in Parliament , internationally at the Innovation Convention , and also at Heads of State or Government level - to monitor progress and to insist , where the progress is slow , on speeding it up .
That is very important if this initiative is going to be successful , to create the kind of jobs we want and to deliver what we expect it to deliver at the end of the day .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to thank colleagues and innovative citizens for all their very valuable contributions .
It was a very inclusive process .
We are in unison here : we want to boost economic growth and move towards a different , sustainable social model .
We want to stimulate SMEs and start-ups ; we want to update our skills in lifelong learning ; we want social innovation .
We want the money actually to be spent on research and development , not to be kept in the pocket .
We agree that research is not a synonym for innovation ; innovation stands on its own , though it might derive from research .
Both are extremely important , but innovation needs to get an extra push .
To clear up the issue of funding coming from the agricultural funds or the structural funds : the intention is not that we move funding from the CAP or the structural funds to the innovation funds , but that we pay attention to the horizontal aspect of innovation .
We need innovation in agriculture and in regional policy too : we need it everywhere .
So where do we go from here ?
Let us not end with this one report .
We cannot let it end here .
Let us take this onwards , together with the Member States .
Let us really try to get a different mindset .
Let us spend the money , but let us change the policy .
Let us change our economic model , move towards a sustainable model and create jobs .
The report said that innovation is not only a product , process or service , but also a movement .
So let us be innovators here today .
Let us start a movement : a movement for innovation .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Innovation means the successful implementation of ideas in practice .
We must not allow the Innovation Union to remain merely an exciting idea , a political objective .
In the Committee on Budgets , we are working on firmly implanting the Europe 2020 flagship in the European Union 's strategy through an independent financial framework .
The Innovation Union is able to play a role in transforming the crisis-laden economy of Europe , which will be guided by sustainable job creation .
If 3 % of the EU 's GDP can really be earmarked for research and development by 2020 , 3.7 million new jobs will be created , which would increase annual GDP by some EUR 800 million by 2025 .
We must treat it as a fact that the key to and , at the same time , the only effective tool for the European Union 's economic recovery is research and innovation .
This is why we must unanimously support Member States devoting 1 % of their gross domestic product to research and technological development .
Willingness to take risks is a prerequisite for successful innovation , but this does not mean a risky investment for Member States now .
The return is guaranteed .
In order to maintain European competitiveness , a change of approach is needed , the key drivers of which are enhancing innovation potential and encouraging more people in Europe to become entrepreneurs .
This is why we revised the Small Business Act , making it consistent with the Single Market Act , which is able to show synergy with the Innovation Union as well .
Our measures must be harmonised , because this way , efficiency is also increased many fold .
Innovation , competitiveness , sustainable development , creativity , efficiency - these are all fine words which fit in very well with current political , economic and labour market trends , but are there any concrete measures or real projects behind these words ?
Those who hear them will certainly react positively to their use , and they will help to promote the ideals they represent , and to gain support for them .
Let us not forget , however , that these slogans must be backed up by practical measures , and that the appropriate legislative decisions must be taken and laws implemented which will contribute to the achievement of the objectives which have been mentioned , namely , the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Europe and Europeans hold enormous potential ; our task is to put in place the appropriate conditions for this potential to be exploited fully .
As a member of the Committee on Culture and Education , I support the ' Innovation Union ' initiative .
I would stress the role played by education , vocational training and social research ( into the fight against poverty and social exclusion ) within the framework of this initiative .
It is important to simplify the administrative procedures involved in submitting applications for EU programmes in the field of scientific research and innovation in such a way as to make it possible for more enterprises and scientific institutions to take part in them .
Simplified procedures will also ensure that public funds are used more effectively and efficiently , and that the administrative burden is reduced .
Innovation policy should go hand-in-hand with policy in the field of vocational training and the labour market .
New products and services are intended to help increase employment levels and promote the forecasting of future trends and the qualifications needed on the labour market .
In view of the fact that women account for only 30 % of European researchers and only 13 % of directors of European research institutions , I would highlight the need for the ' Innovation Union ' initiative to take account of future guidelines as regards a more balanced representation of women and men in scientific disciplines .
I would also call for such guidelines to be implemented effectively by the Member States .
ILO Convention supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the ILO Convention supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers , by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - B7-0305 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am delighted that , in advance of the next General Assembly of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , we can debate this welcome initiative of the ILO proposing to the Member States of this organisation a convention supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers .
Commissioner , on behalf of the entire Parliament , I would like to thank you for agreeing to conduct this debate in the run-up to this conference .
We believe this is best practice .
As we know , domestic work officially accounts for between 5 and 9 % of all employment in the European Union .
Looking at what we have collectively endorsed with the Europe 2020 strategy , it is clear that what are termed local jobs , namely , those that enable us to take care of our elderly citizens and those that enable women with young children to get back into work , correspond to situations that enable this domestic work to develop .
I believe that , within the European Union , it is essential that we support this welcome initiative of the ILO , since the development of our societies is fraught with tendencies - we know what they are .
Global demand for domestic services will go on increasing , but we cannot , on the one hand , welcome the adoption of a decent work agenda by the ILO and , on the other , leave an entire section of the labour market totally unregulated and unprotected by any legislation .
The European Union must set an example .
I know that , at times , we have a tendency to think that the conventions of the ILO are perhaps not for us .
No .
We , too , must lead the way on this point .
In the area of domestic work , I believe that the ILO offers us an excellent opportunity for shedding light on the operation of some of our labour markets , since domestic work is too often precarious work , undervalued and undeclared .
I will tell you quite simply .
I understand that some of you have expressed concern about the recognition or regularisation of illegal migrants , but I am also concerned with the battle we have to fight in each Member State against undeclared work .
In the area of domestic work , we know how these practices have , unfortunately , developed .
We hope that , next June , on the basis of a tripartite negotiation , the 100th session of the International Labour conference will set this convention and this recommendation in motion .
We believe that they are essential for transforming what is too often a relationship of exploitation into a legal relationship .
We hope that the legal recognition of domestic work can be achieved .
Those who work with our elderly citizens and children must enjoy the freedom to associate and rest time and must not be victims of harassment and arbitrariness .
We must also ensure that this tool , which we are proposing to the ILO , will enable us to define , in this area , what we mean by the notion of decent work , whether with regard to the question of working hours , the question of paid leave , or the question of housing conditions .
I would like to know how the European Commission intends to approach these negotiations and this draft convention , and on the basis of what mandate it will act on behalf of all of us , so that tomorrow , in the area of domestic work , the European Union can set an example and that we , too , can give expression to the values of the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I welcome today 's discussion on a new ILO instrument for domestic workers .
It is an important contribution to the second round of discussions on the new international standards which will probably be adopted in a few weeks ' time at the 100th session of the International Labour conference .
As you know , the European Commission is a firm supporter of the ILO 's decent work agenda .
The Commission closely monitors and facilitates coordination among the Member States and has worked for the speedy ratification of a number of important instruments adopted in the last decade .
There are many reasons for developing new standards in the area of domestic work .
For instance , there are a large number of domestic workers across the world , many of them belonging to vulnerable groups .
Their precarious status and the fact that they often fall within the informal sector are also very important issues .
In the European Union , employment in this sector is very likely to expand , given population change and higher female participation in the labour market .
That is why it is crucial to raise domestic workers ' professional profile and improve their image .
Let me now look at the practical issues raised by the question and first explain the Commission 's role in the ILO negotiations on a new convention and recommendation on decent work .
The institutional context needs to be borne in mind .
The new instrument will be an international agreement .
The Commission will therefore fulfil the role conferred on it by the Treaty with due regard for the special features of the ILO , where the European Union has observer status only - unlike the Member States which are members .
That is why the Union cannot ratify ILO conventions itself .
The Commission followed the discussions actively and facilitated coordination among the experts of the Member States during the first round of discussions at the ILO in 2010 .
It has analysed the instruments as they developed during the negotiations in the light of EU legislation .
The Commission was attentive , in particular , to any sections of the draft convention that could affect freedom of movement for workers .
As the new ILO Convention will comprise matters of EU competence , the Member States need to comply with the EU acquis .
In the next and final round of discussions in June , the Commission will continue to play an active coordination and facilitation role by working with Member State experts .
My departments have been in contact with the social partners and a number of NGOs that have approached the Commission , and have had exchanges with the rapporteur for the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee on the professionalisation of domestic work .
Secondly , there is the question of the role of Europe 2020 in ensuring that precarious domestic jobs are transformed into decent sustainable jobs .
We need to bear in mind the sector 's potential in terms of job creation and reconciling work and family responsibilities , and thus its role in meeting the objectives of the employment strategy .
However , we must not forget the need to ensure that domestic jobs - not all of which should be regarded as precarious and undervalued or underpaid - are indeed decent jobs .
What is more , the fight against undeclared work , which is widespread in the domestic work sector , is an integral part of the Europe 2020 strategy as the first annual growth survey has confirmed .
Ways of moving from informal or undeclared work to regular employment will be covered by the guiding principles on enabling conditions for job creation which the Commission announced in the communication on the Europe 2020 flagship initiative , ' An agenda for new skills and jobs ' .
We will be putting forward those guiding principles next year .
A number of Member States have useful experience in working to reduce the informal sector and precarious employment , for example , by introducing service voucher systems .
Thirdly , there is the question of amending the current framework legislation on health and safety at work - Directive 89 / 391 / EEC - and on combating discrimination - Directive 2000 / 78 / EC .
It is worth pointing out that the definition of domestic workers in the draft ILO Convention is very wide .
It not only covers persons working in private households , but also for them , as well as persons employed by employment agencies .
Domestic servants are excluded from the definition of workers in the framework directive on health and safety at work .
However , the EU legislator seems to have intended that the concept of domestic servants be interpreted narrowly , so not all domestic servants under the Convention are excluded from the scope of the EU health and safety at work acquis .
Lastly , EU occupational and safety and health legislation provides minimum requirements and does not , therefore , prevent any Member State from introducing more stringent measures at national level .
Consequently , the Member States are free to include domestic servants within the scope of their national legislation .
For the time being , the Commission has no plans to amend the framework directive on occupational safety and health .
Nevertheless , the Commission considers that the current ILO initiative is a good opportunity to reflect on the situation of domestic servants in Europe .
I would add that Directive 2000 / 78 / EC establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation does not exclude domestic workers , so no amendment is needed for the ratification of the ILO Convention .
The Commission issued a report on the application of the directive in 2008 and will continue to follow its implementation in the Member States closely .
The fourth point concerns ways of informing domestic workers of , and strengthening , their rights .
Although not all domestic workers are low-skilled and do not all work in precarious conditions , they are a vulnerable category and the Commission encourages the Member States to ensure they are properly protected by developing and enforcing their labour rights .
The Commission expects the problem of undeclared work by non-EU nationals to be dealt with in part by the Employers ' Sanctions Directive 2009 / 52 / EC , which the Member States have to transpose into national legislation by 20 July this year .
The directive will help to end the exploitation of illegally staying third-country nationals by some employers who pay them inadequate salaries and impose unsatisfactory working conditions .
One step forward would be agreement on the proposal for a directive on a single permit which provides for a common set of rights for third country workers residing legally in a Member State .
Let me now turn to the fifth and last point regarding the Commission 's role in promoting exchanges of best practice involving policy on domestic workers .
In this connection , I want to mention a private project which the Commission is currently implementing at the request of this House , and which seeks to encourage the conversion of precarious work into work associated with rights .
Following a call for proposals issued under the pilot project in 2010 , the Commission is co-funding a project that focuses on the consequences of the economic and financial crisis for precarious domestic , migrant and young workers , and on Member State measures to improve their rights .
The project encourages exchanges of best practice , in particular , involving precarious workers ' collective representation .
A second call for proposals , to be issued this year , will relate more specifically to action to improve the rights of the poorest workers , including domestic workers .
The pilot project will also involve a study to gain a better understanding of precarious work in 12 Member States , and to promote its conversion into employment relationships carrying more social rights , in particular , by looking at what the Member States can do in practical terms to encourage this transformation and identify a core of basic social rights .
A case study of the situation of migrant domestic workers in Italy was carried out recently in connection with a project on decent work and industrial relations cofinanced by the Commission .
Lastly , the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work and the Senior Labour Inspectors Committee have called for sector-wide information and awareness-raising campaigns on the protection of workers ' health and safety .
Madam President , the European People 's Party is very pleased by today 's debate .
I believe thanks are due to Mrs Berès for initiating it , enabling us to join the ILO initiative , on the one hand , and , on the other , making us think about all that needs to be done for a category of workers whose conditions we often do not know about and , when we do know something , it tends to be depressing .
We also believe that the draft decision which has been published deserves support , and we think that those elements are particularly good which underscore and highlight that the aim here is to create decent working conditions and regulated employment in a field where , indeed , mainly migrant workers are concerned , particularly in certain countries , in a totally unregulated and uncontrolled manner , and very often in the form of a kind of modern slavery .
We have already mentioned that there are black holes in labour law regulation .
This was discussed in connection with atypical contracts .
Obviously , this could be a subsequent step towards being able to guarantee minimum working conditions and other rights linked to employment , and I agree with the Commissioner that of course , we ought to put our own house in order first .
While welcoming the ILO initiative , what we ourselves can do is to call on the Member States of the European Union to do all they possibly can in their own labour law regulations in order to expose this black hole and regulate it accordingly .
Madam President , Commissioner , the first thing that I wish to say is that all the socialist delegates subscribe to the words uttered by Pervenche Berès , Chair of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and we are very pleased about the position just taken by the Commissioner on this initiative of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) .
The socialist delegates appreciate enormously the work that the ILO has been doing since it started .
We believe that it has made an invaluable contribution to the history of humanity and also of Europe .
There is , too , no doubt that this new initiative on domestic work is very important , because there is a very large number of people who do this type of work and because it also very much affects women and immigrants .
We , the socialist delegates , believe that it would be very good if , at the next meeting in June , this draft convention and recommendation were to be approved and if Parliament , the Commission and the Council were to be active - not just passive but active - so that Europe measures up to what it says and its actions reflect its words .
If we do this , we will be helping - at least - to extend the Decent Work programme .
We will be helping the world and many people , but primarily we will also be helping ourselves to be decent and to respect each other as an institution and as Europeans , but also so that our continent maintains its social model , which is impossible to maintain if we are an island of protection and rights within a world of misery and lack of protection .
Perhaps , Commissioner , it is also time for the Commission , the Council and for all of us to reflect on Europe because not everything is resolved here , either .
In Europe , there are contractual forms that affect immigrants and women in this area of domestic service which are very precarious and contain major loopholes .
I would be pleased if , in the heat of this debate and deliberation , we were to understand that there are certain loopholes that must be closed in legislation in the EU and also in many Member States .
We have problems regarding the health and safety of these workers .
We have problems in many countries regarding the legal forms according to which the work is developing .
Furthermore , we also have a major problem in the fight against abuse and discrimination against immigrants , many of whom work in European families .
We have many initiatives in hand at the moment .
Commissioner , now would be the time to enhance our ethical commitment to assist the ILO , to help ourselves , and to perform work which is worthy for the future of humanity .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I think it is important for us to have this discussion in the light of the upcoming adoption of an ILO Convention on Domestic Workers .
I believe that we in this House should commend the ILO for its excellent work .
Domestic work - family caring , for example - takes place exclusively in the family home .
Traditionally , of course , in the EU , it was women 's work , although that is changing .
Migrants and people from more marginalised communities are also more likely to work in a domestic situation .
The value of domestic work is not included in our GDP calculations and , for that reason among others , domestic work is very often invisible and is certainly undervalued .
Without any doubt , this leaves domestic workers in a precarious position , and very often they have to rely on the goodwill of employers .
This is simply not acceptable .
As we say in the resolution , it leaves domestic workers more likely to face discrimination and , indeed , multiple forms of discrimination .
The importance of this ILO Convention is that it will provide legal recognition of domestic work as work .
Following on from that , domestic workers should be in a stronger position to exercise their rights .
I think it is crucial that domestic workers have a right to core labour standards .
That , of course , includes access to social security , health and safety protection and maternity protection , as well as provisions on working and rest time .
Because domestic work takes place largely within the family home , there can be issues of privacy involved .
We need to find innovative and workable solutions to ensuring the health and safety of domestic workers and , in the overall context , to ensure that their rights are fully respected .
One solution might be the use of model contracts .
In the canton of Geneva , for example , there is a model contract which is automatically entered into by all employers and employees : it deals , inter alia , with issues such as the minimum wage , family allowances and holidays .
I believe that contracts of a similar type operate in Belgium .
They give greater security to domestic workers , simplify matters for employers and eliminate grey areas and ambiguities .
I also want to say that I am very happy to support the amendments from the Green Group where they talk about the inclusion of au pairs and undeclared work , but come forward with practical suggestions to ensure we are proactive in ensuring access to the open labour market for domestic workers .
Finally , I want to support the author of the resolution , Ms Berès , when she says that the European Union should lead the way on improving conditions for domestic workers .
Commissioner , I was interested in your words on occupational health and safety and , even though you do not foresee extending the directive , I think your comments leave some scope for flexibility in ensuring better health and safety conditions for domestic workers .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I , too , would like to congratulate Ms Berès for taking the initiative on this oral question and resolution .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for his answer .
It is all too rare that we get a very specific response from Commissioners to questions in an oral question .
My group very much welcomes the proposal from the ILO for the Convention and the recommendation on domestic workers .
We are aware that at least 20 of our own Member States have already commented on the draft and been actively involved in this .
We look forward to early ratification by those Member States and , indeed , some interesting implementation .
People have talked very much about how this group of workers is particularly vulnerable .
A lot of the work is done behind closed doors ; it is invisible .
Often , the workers themselves are isolated , and access to trade unions is often very difficult in this situation .
Quite often , if you are taken on as a live-in employee , you can be seen as being on call 24 / 7 .
We know in this House that on-call working is a very controversial issue and something that we do not particularly welcome .
As has been said , domestic work is often undervalued , or seen as traditional women 's work that ' anybody can do ' , but we have also made the point that a lot of it is actually quite skilled .
It can quite often involve nursing care and various aspects of child development .
Domestic workers often occupy a real position of trust .
While many employers value that , there are only too many who do not .
For example , in the UK we have seen a recent case of somebody actually ending up with a prison sentence on a charge of trafficking for domestic servitude .
The young woman involved lost four years of her life to her employer , who received a nine-month sentence .
So we need to look at how we identify that form of trafficking .
Migrant female workers are very vulnerable indeed .
We have come across cases , for example , of workers entering the country with diplomats and having their passport taken away ; people in that situation have virtually no freedom , have no access to assistance and do not know about their rights .
I want to raise one issue concerning Article 17 in the proposed Convention , which is about the role of agencies .
I think this is something that we really should be looking at at European level because , increasingly , it is being seen as a weak link in many of the issues that we are facing .


Madam President , Mr Andor , ladies and gentlemen , I understand from what you have said , Mr Andor , that the European Commission is obviously taking notice of this subject .
I also conclude that it is being handled with too much restraint .
It is not the case , as Mr Őry emphasised previously in this discussion , that we know too little about what domestic workers in Europe do .
On the contrary , we know so much that there is an urgent need for regulation .
Between 5 % and 9 % of all employees work in private households .
This is the worst paid group of employees in Europe , with the fewest rights and the largest proportion of illegal workers .
Action is urgently needed in this area and this includes the European Commission .
The situation we currently find ourselves in will not be improved by the free movement of workers .
For this reason , the initiative in this International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) Convention is very welcome and deserves our support .
I would like to comment on four points .
Firstly , there are gaps in the definitions in the ILO Convention .
If domestic workers cannot work occasionally , sporadically or not on an occupational basis in this sector , then the opportunities for circumventing the legislation are already in place .
Secondly , there is an urgent need for mandatory employment contracts in this area .
Thirdly , we must have not only sensible , generally binding minimum wage regulations , but also equal employment rights .
Fourthly , these workers must be covered by a statutory social security obligation , in particular , given that this is a minimum wage sector .
I am pleased that Mrs Berès has called in her statement for a campaign to introduce standard working conditions .
This is a good thing .
We must ensure in future that work which does not pay a living wage is outlawed by society and is no longer tolerated .
Madam President , according to a report from the International Labour Organisation , domestic work represents around 5 % of the total number of jobs .
It is a kind of invisible form of employment , which is not carried out in factories , shops or offices , but in the homes of private individuals .
Women account for 90 % of the workers , and do not work in a collective , but alone , in houses .
The aim of their work is not to produce added value , but to provide care or services similar to the tasks which women usually carry out free of charge in their own homes .
The work is therefore financially undervalued and is often not considered to be normal employment under labour law , as a result of which workers are exposed to unauthorised and unfair treatment .
The work is very often undeclared , and workers who come from rural areas or from abroad have low qualifications , do not know their rights , and become vulnerable individuals .
Undeclared work deprives workers of social protection and deprives society of social security contributions .
If we do not want domestic work to remain undeclared , we should turn this work into a proper profession and overcome the usual stereotypes , which often present such work to us as valueless .
We should therefore professionalise it .
For that , however , we need to introduce new measures into the employment systems of individual Member States , including specific regulations in the area of tax , social security , and employment and civil rights which take into account the specific nature of work performed in this way .
There are generally financial reasons behind the current tendency to provide and perform undeclared domestic work , because undeclared work is more advantageous to both parties than officially registered work which , besides tax and deductions , burdens both parties with extensive bureaucratic demands .
The aim of Member State measures should therefore be to amend or even eliminate the advantages of undeclared work , so that domestic work becomes a specific form of dignified employment .
( FR ) Madam President , I would first of all like to thank Mrs Berès , Chair of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , for allowing us to have this debate in the run-up to the conference of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , and Commissioner Andor for agreeing to conduct this debate between Parliament and the Commission .
I would first like to highlight an initial point .
Many have discussed our knowledge , or our lack of knowledge , of this world of domestic work .
Simply , when we say , with some hesitation , that domestic workers account for between 5 % and 9 % of all workers , that means that we do not know the world of domestic work .
The ratio is 1 : 2 .
I therefore call for our provisions to enable us , at European level , to gain a better understanding of the world of domestic work so that we can guarantee it better .
The second point I would like to make is that , while we have established the Europe 2020 strategy and we know that , in this Europe 2020 , low-level jobs will be particularly under threat , we have to do everything here , in this world of domestic work , to ensure that specialisations are absolutely recognised .
Mrs Lambert said just now that a lot of domestic work is quite skilled , and we must identify such work and promote it and promote the skills involved .
The third point is that Europe cannot be founded on values of human rights and social rights and develop the relevant EU acquis without also developing the protection of wages , the protection of working hours , the protection of health , knowledge of the demands of domestic work , and without providing domestic workers with a certain number of guarantees .
I wish to sound a word of warning , which is that this should not lead to the integration of workers that are in a totally illegal situation .
We also need to know how to prevent the values we defend from being hijacked .
( PT ) Madam President , I am in full agreement with what has been said by my colleagues from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament who spoke before me .
I should like to congratulate the Chair of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mrs Berès , on this initiative which enables us to debate a very important subject .
I would also thank you for your involvement , Commissioner , and for the sensitivity you have demonstrated .
Domestic work is economically and socially important , but it is work that is poorly paid , routine and undervalued by society .
It has already been said that domestic work is mainly carried out by women , who are subjected to all kinds of discrimination .
In fact , on the subject of discrimination , I should like to mention that , in my report on the revision of the Maternity Leave Directive , I advocate the inclusion of domestic workers within the scope of the directive .
Domestic workers are currently excluded from the Maternity Leave Directive and from any European legislation guaranteeing the right to maternity protection , and they are not even covered by the Health and Safety Framework Directive .
This is unacceptable discrimination that must be put right .
This International Labour Organisation Convention is therefore welcome and should be supported , in order to dignify domestic work and give these women the rights that other women have .
( EL ) Madam President , a series of studies being carried out by the Member States illustrates that domestic workers face various problems , including low wages , discrimination , a heavy workload , conduct unbecoming on the part of employers and even sexual harassment .
These problems are compounded by the fact that they are not treated as employees and therefore have no protection under international conventions or EU case-law .
The term ' domestic worker ' therefore urgently needs to be changed to ' domestic employee ' and the question of contracts and terms of employment urgently needs to be regulated .
Approval of an ILO Convention on domestic workers would be a first step in plugging the existing gap , by safeguarding rights in connection with their employment , pay rises , the adoption of criteria for employers or even by clarifying that domestic employees need not necessarily stay in the employer 's home .
As part of this endeavour , the European Union , in cooperation with the Member States , should seek to amend existing legislation , so as to cover domestic employees and , most importantly , to encourage cooperation between the Member States and exchanges of best practices .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Andor , ladies and gentlemen , in Germany , domestic workers are not covered by employment protection legislation .
They are also not included in the European framework directive .
The reason for this is that the state is not allowed to monitor compliance with regulations in private residences .
There are similar obstacles in other Member States .
A total of 15 of them have not included domestic workers in their employment protection laws .
However , these workers do deserve special protection .
I am therefore in favour of adopting the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) Convention , but I do not think it would be sensible to incorporate large parts of the convention into EU law .
This would prevent the national parliaments from making independent decisions on the ratification of individual ILO conventions .
Nevertheless , I would like to thank the ILO working groups for their excellent work .
There are still a few problems , for example , in the definitions .
Article 1 should cover not only domestic work , but also household services .
The article concerning rest periods is also problematic .
Every employee must be given one rest day per week , but this does not have to be in the same week .
The Member States must come to individual agreements on the time periods , because a certain amount of flexibility is needed .
The ban on payments in kind which are directly related to work , such as uniforms , tools or protective equipment , seems to me to be incomprehensible .
I suspect that what is meant is that they must not be deducted from pay .
In other words , we need a ban on deducting payments in kind from wages .
Once these inconsistencies have been resolved , I believe that we should sign the ILO Convention on domestic workers .
Thank you very much , Mrs Berès , for your initiative , and thanks to all of those who have said that they want to attempt to make progress on behalf of people who , as we all know , deserve protection .
( RO ) Madam President , I welcome the initiative to adopt a supplement to the International Labour Organisation Convention through the recommendation on domestic workers .
I should mention that they account for 9 % of the total workforce , but do not enjoy the same social guarantees .
Failure to declare these activities is detrimental to both the workers and the state , which cannot levy taxes on them .
I think that this category of worker is particularly vulnerable to abuse from employers .
In many cases , domestic workers are immigrants without papers , which prevents them from contacting the authorities whenever they are exploited .
I call on the Commission to adopt as urgently as possible a package of measures intended to protect and provide them with information .
Close cooperation is required between national authorities and European institutions , with the aim of improving working conditions for this category of worker .
( RO ) Madam President , the ageing population is increasing the demand for domestic care services .
As a result of the economic crisis , the unemployment rate has risen to roughly 10 % , with the youth unemployment rate even reaching 20 % .
In many Member States , economic recovery programmes have entailed a reduction in health budgets , which has also lead to many employees being made redundant in this sector .
Failure to declare domestic care or cleaning services deprives these workers of the chance of a decent living and , especially , a decent pension .
Given that the workers in these sectors are mainly women who are generally responsible for their own family , both in terms of raising children and looking after elderly relatives , I would like to ask the Commission whether any statistics are available on domestic workers at EU level and the level of each Member State .
I would also like to ask what measures the Commission is intending to take to ensure not only the necessary flexibility but also the respect for the rights of these workers .
( PT ) Madam President , I consider the debate we are having here important , as well as the initiative from our Chair of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the need to acknowledge the value of domestic workers , the majority of whom are women providing domestic help , cleaning and catering services , and who are commonly victims of serious exploitation and discrimination , which is even worse when they are also immigrants .
It is , therefore , of the greatest importance to tackle this problem .
I also believe that a new International Labour Organisation convention and recommendation could be of significant help and should be adopted , if possible , at the 100th International Labour conference .
There can , therefore , be no doubt that the Commission 's role - your role , Commissioner - in encouraging the Member States , and also in drawing greater attention to the exact content of the convention , could be very important .
However , I also challenge you to give your full attention to Union legislation to guarantee labour , salary , maternity and illness protection , and social security rights for domestic workers , both male and female .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to refer once again to Mr Andor 's speech .
He asked very cautiously whether the European Commission has powers and responsibilities in this area .
I believe that it has more responsibility , in particular , with regard to freedom of movement .
Posted workers immediately come to mind .
One example of this is Berlin , where the unions have set up an advisory centre for posted workers .
The largest group of workers who contact this centre , not only from Berlin but from throughout Germany , are nurses who are employed as domestic workers , sometimes in appalling and highly precarious working conditions .
This is one way of circumventing minimum working conditions .
Some of these people even have bogus self-employed status .
This is why we have tabled this amendment .
The majority of these people are workers from other EU Member States and from third countries .
This demonstrates that the Commission certainly does have a responsibility to take action and to introduce minimum standards in this area .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this discussion highlights the pivotal role of the ILO in the world of labour .
I believe that we have to continue our close cooperation with the ILO because its work in this field , and in others of course , applies very much to the European context .
But the discussion also showed that many of the employment and social policies we are dealing with apply to domestic workers , although they are regarded as constituting a separate group .
Skills development , health and safety , decent wages and social security , the development of contractual arrangements - and I could continue this list , of course - are all aspects which have to be covered in the context of domestic work , and indeed the European Union must be a leader globally as well .
We need to work very closely with Member States , because many possibilities for action can be found at Member State level , and we continue with the exchange of best practices in this area .
As I mentioned in my introductory statement , we are currently implementing a pilot project , at the request of Parliament , to convert precarious work into decent employment , and two calls for proposals have been launched already .
The second , issued earlier this year , is specifically a call for action to strengthen the rights of poorest workers , and there will be a study to better understand the phenomenon of precarious work as well .
Concerning the question on health and safety legislation and how it applies to domestic workers , the Commission at this moment does not plan to extend the scope of the Health and Safety Directive but we now have an opportunity to think about new rules on domestic workers as a group .
It is important to note that Member States can , of course , introduce more stringent national rules .
They can , for example , include domestic workers in national rules and go beyond the minimum requirements .
To conclude the debate , I have received one motion for a resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 May , at noon .
Antibiotic resistance ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on antibiotic resistance , by Paolo De Castro , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - B7-0304 / 2011 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we have an important chance to tackle the growing problem of antibiotic resistance in animals responsibly and with commitment .
This is a strategic issue for the agriculture sector and , in particular , for the future of the European animal husbandry system .
The data show that around 50 % of the antibiotics in Europe are prescribed for animal use .
If used properly , antibiotics are a useful tool that helps farmers keep their livestock healthy and productive and safeguard its welfare .
Therefore , we are not here to demonise antibiotic use in animal husbandry , but we want to ask the Commission to provide a concrete response for the more efficient and effective use of antibiotics , in order to reduce resistance in animals .
In our resolution of 5 May 2010 on the EU Action Plan for Animal Welfare , this House underlined the link between animal welfare , animal health and public health , and urged the Commission and the Member States to address the difficult problem of antibiotic resistance in animals in a responsible manner .
In particular , we called on the Commission to collect and analyse data on the use of all animal health products , including antibiotics , with a view to ensuring the effective use of such products .
A year later , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which I have the honour to chair , is here to ask the Commission to implement all relevant initiatives to resolve this long-standing problem , which can also have consequences for human health .
What is needed , Madam President and Commissioner , is a tangible commitment from the Commission that it will use the data collected to put the results obtained into practice , not only encouraging research and monitoring activities , but also ensuring more effective use of antibiotics as an important tool for fighting animal diseases .
On that front , I would point out that some studies show that low-energy animal feed could lead to a higher incidence of diseases and , hence , more antibiotic use .
It would therefore be desirable to review the ban on the use of animal meal for non-ruminants , in line with the opinion of the European Scientific Veterinary Committee .
These are the requests made in the resolution adopted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 12 April this year and which will be put to the vote in this Chamber tomorrow .
It has been hard work for the last few months , and for that reason I would like to personally thank Mrs Paulsen , the shadow rapporteurs and all the parliamentary groups for their invaluable contributions to establishing a common text on this issue .
The future competitiveness of European animal husbandry may depend on how this problem is managed , and its cross-cutting nature calls for commitment and responsibility , through a coordinated approach and a shared political will .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first , I would like to emphasise that the Commission is fully aware of , and correspondingly concerned by , the threat to public health posed by antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) .
In reply to the first question , in 2009 , the Commission asked the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) to take a lead in collecting comparable data on the use of antimicrobials in animals .
The project , the European Surveillance of Veterinary Antimicrobial Consumption ( ESVAC ) , started in the third quarter of 2009 .
The EMA has worked together with the Member States , EU agencies and relevant stakeholders to develop the system .
Findings from the data available from 10 Member States will be published as soon as possible .
Twelve additional Member States are voluntarily starting to collect these data .
The aim is to broaden the system to cover all EU Member States .
A further aim is to have data on a more detailed level - at animal species level , for example .
Why do we need these data ?
We need them in order to adopt a science-based approach : only on the basis of this type of data can scientists properly assess the true risk of AMR attributed to the use of antimicrobials in animals .
Turning to the second question , I can assure the honourable Members that the Commission is aware that the control of AMR requires a multi-disciplinary approach .
Therefore , the Commission consults its own services , Member States ' relevant agencies and other stakeholders on an ongoing basis , for example , through meetings and public consultations .
The Commission is working on AMR in close collaboration with its relevant agencies , in particular , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , the European Food Safety Authority , the EMA and the European Union Reference Laboratory for AMR .
In reply to the third and last question , I would like to announce that the Commission is developing a five-year strategy on AMR .
This strategy will adopt a holistic approach and will contain concrete proposals for further action to address the issue of AMR in relation to public and animal health .
The strategy will be based on the Council conclusions and recommendations on AMR and on the outcome of the consultations I have already mentioned .
Work on the revision of EU rules on veterinary medicinal products and medicated feeding stuffs is ongoing .
New tools and instruments to tackle AMR are being considered , for example , as options in the impact assessment .
Based on the evidence gathered , the Commission will decide the details of its legal proposal .
Our objective is to present this Commission strategy on 18 November 2011 , which will be European Antibiotic Awareness Day .


Madam President , Mr Andor , firstly , I would like to thank the chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr De Castro , for his initiative and for the question to the Commission on this important issue .
Mr Andor , after listening to your speech , I would first of all like to ask you to move from theory to practice , because we need to take concrete action .
Antibiotic resistance is a subject which we must take seriously and which , hitherto , has had too little attention paid to it in the context of animal husbandry .
Antimicrobial agents are undoubtedly very useful when properly used .
They help farmers to keep their animals healthy and productive and also ensure high levels of animal welfare .
In order to make sure that antibiotics remain effective in combating disease in animals and in humans , we must take a coordinated approach at an EU level .
In recent weeks , we have held intensive discussions on this subject in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and we have considered it in detail .
The joint resolution was adopted by the committee on 12 April with a large majority : 34 votes in favour and 2 against .
The excellent cooperation with all the shadow rapporteurs from the different groups has resulted in a very balanced and well thought-out text , which we must adhere to , and I would ask you to do so , during the vote in plenary tomorrow .
The report is balanced because it focuses on animal welfare , the problems of antibiotic resistance and cost-effectiveness as far as the farms are concerned .
Therefore , I would once again like to thank everyone involved in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and also Mrs Paulsen for the fruitful cooperation .
I would now like to see the Commission take action .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the consequences of using antibiotics to treat animal diseases are well known and increasingly worrying .
It is an area that is already subject to fairly demanding standards , to which the European Parliament has also been dedicating attention , and on which many positive initiatives are being realised , such as the network for collecting data on antibiotic resistance .
However , these initiatives are still not enough .
I therefore call on the Commission not just to improve the monitoring mechanisms , but also to adopt the measures necessary for wider-ranging data collection , and for the series of incentives encouraging best practices in this area to be included in the common agricultural policy legislative package that is being drawn up .
The text of the resolution tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , whose most important recommendations received broad support , as my colleague , Mrs Jeggle , has just confirmed , deserves detailed analysis by the Commission .
Above all , the recommendations need to be translated into concrete measures to better defend public health and the image of the quality of European products of animal origin .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we have done a fantastic job in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
It is rare for a politically mixed gathering to be as much in agreement as we were this time .
Antibiotic resistance is , in fact , the biggest threat to both animal and human health that we face .
At one time , infectious diseases were the most common cause of death in children , young people and young animals .
In this regard , do not forget that both animals and people are mammals .
We have the same immune defences and we have the same sensitivity to stress , which means that if we do not feel well , our immune defences are impaired and we need antibiotics because we will be more susceptible to serious infections .
We considered this with regard to human medicine .
We took measures , we tried to tighten up our use of antibiotics and to understand what could happen .
Do not forget that if we lose antibiotics as a weapon , we will be back to the time of our great grandmothers when what we currently think of as trivial infectious diseases , such as a small child 's ear inflammation , could once again become fatal diseases .
This is not something that is particularly easy to deal with in this respect and we should be taking it seriously .
As I said , I am extremely pleased .
There are , of course , some details of this resolution that I would have liked to have more of or that I would have liked to be different , but the main thing is not that all of the commas are in place ; what is important is our collective will to start the process .
That is what I hope the Commission will take on board , because I believe that we will get an almost unanimous ' yes ' tomorrow .
I hope so , and I hope that this will be a strong signal that makes you sit up and listen . Thank you .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for bringing this issue up .
I share his concerns at the level of antibiotic resistance being found in bacterial infections of livestock .
I agree with him that there should be growing concern that there is evidence of overspill to the human population , where we are finding that the efficacy of many once-reliable antibiotics has declined significantly , thereby putting human health at risk .
So I support the intent of the debate .
I also agree that the important first step must be to work closely with the various agencies and the pharmaceutical industry in order to monitor and assess the problem .
I want to state , however , that , contrary to popular opinion , this is not exclusively a problem brought about by intensive agriculture .
The random use of antibiotics in agriculture is - or has been - common to all farming , be it large or small .
Indeed , I would go further and say that large-scale producers today are usually vertically integrated under contractual terms with the processing sector , and that the prophylactic use of antibiotics is usually prohibited or restricted under quality assurance schemes .
However , it is clear that there must be some measure of control , and I look forward to hearing details of the Commissioner 's strategy in due course .
There are three points that I want to make .
Firstly , any measures taken must be based on sound scientific evidence ; secondly , they must be proportionate ; and , thirdly , they should not place a further burden of regulation , and thereby cost , on the agricultural and veterinary industries .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a very serious issue .
It is of great importance not only for animal husbandry in future , but also primarily for human health .
We must not forget this .
This is ultimately not a problem for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
However , as has once again become clear , we do not have enough data .
Only 10 Member States have provided information and that is too few .
We need to deal with this subject rather more quickly and we need accurate controls .
We are paying too little attention to one factor in this context and that is intensive farming , both in large-scale buildings and in certain regions .
We need to look at this and we can do something to prevent it .
By restructuring our agricultural policy , we can make sure that the focus is on good animal welfare , that animals live in conditions suitable for their species , and that the animals are strong and robust , on the principle that prevention is better than cure .
What we also need , and this is a job for the Commission , is a long-term plan to reduce the use of antibiotics in agriculture .
The main impact of antibiotic resistance is on workers in the agriculture industry , in other words , farmers and their employees .
These people already have huge problems in this area .
Another cause for concern is the suspicion that antibiotic resistance is being transferred directly via foodstuffs .
We need to look carefully at this in the interests of the health of the European population .
There is an urgent need for action here .
It is important to make it clear that 50 % of all antibiotics are used in animal husbandry , which is far too much .
Therefore , we must ensure that this figure is reduced in the long-term interests of agriculture and of public health .
( RO ) Madam President , World Health Day , celebrated on 7 April , had as its theme this year antibiotic resistance , regarded as a global threat to public health .
Every year , 25 000 people die across Europe from causes associated with antimicrobial resistance .
Animals and food of animal origin could play a role in the development of antimicrobial resistance in people .
This is why the resolution being debated today is an important document .
The most important word in any discussion on this subject is ' caution ' .
It is not antibiotics which are bad , but their uncalculated and immoderate use is dangerous .
Antibiotics must not be demonised , but used with caution in both people and animals .
The measures proposed by this resolution on providing more information to vets and farmers must therefore be implemented as vigorously as possible .
With regard to imposing a ban on the use of antibiotics as additives in animal feed , this must be subject without fail to international agreement .
A recent study highlights that in the United States , almost half of the samples of meat tested in stores contained Staphylococcus aureus , half of which were resistant to at least three classes of antibiotics .
This demonstrates the widespread use of antibiotics in animal husbandry , and I must say that European farmers have had enough of being the only ones to adopt and comply with the rules at the risk of a drop in their incomes .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Andor , ladies and gentlemen , we must do everything we can to counteract the spread of antibiotic resistance .
We are in complete agreement on this .
This involves the responsible use of antibiotics in human medicine and in animal husbandry .
The European Union must take determined action .
We must not allow 25 000 people to go on dying from infections caused by resistant bacteria every year in the European Union alone .
Antibiotics must not be used routinely or preventively .
We must ensure that antibiotics are used responsibly in all the Member States .
It is of the utmost importance that every possible effort is made to keep livestock healthy from the rearing stage onwards , until they are fully grown .
Ensuring that animals are healthy is the best means of avoiding infection and the use of antibiotics .
The way the animals are fed is decisive in this respect , but the husbandry is also important .
We should also be open to the use of alternative methods , such as homeopathy and phytotherapy , in livestock husbandry .
We need more research and more information in Europe about these alternative approaches .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my home country , the Netherlands , is champion of the world .
Not at football , alas - we just missed out on that last year - but in the use of antibiotics in cattle breeding .
No other country in the world uses as many antibiotics in cattle breeding as the Netherlands .
There are very serious consequences to this , and they are not limited to this usage in the Netherlands ; 25 000 people die as a result of bacterial infections in Europe every year , as other Members have said .
They reach people via meat .
90 % of the chicken meat in the Netherlands contains resistant ESBL bacteria , and last month , it even came to light that resistant bacteria had been found in vegetables after being passed on via manure and the soil .
Madam President , this really has to change .
A country like Denmark has shown that things can change and that , with sound , strict measures , you can maintain a strong and healthy cattle-breeding sector whilst using far fewer antibiotics .
The Commission has stated previously , and again this evening , that it will put forward more far-reaching measures in November .
They will then be fleshed out in 2012 .
I want to urge the Commission to really give this a high priority and not allow it to depend on the Member States , which are too slow to put the right measures in place .
Madam President , it is very clear that there is cross-party agreement on concern around antibiotic resistance .
However , given what the Commission has just said - that we have data from 10 Member States and that it is not yet available to us - we really are talking about concerns about which we do not have detailed facts .
We need that information .
I would like to see a league table of Member States ' usage of drugs per head of animal population , so that we can actually look at countries which adopt best practice and benchmark them against others that are not .
I do not mean to point the finger , but rather to allow those Member States who might be overusing antibiotics to improve their animal husbandry practices .
It is also right to say that farmers do not use antibiotics willy-nilly ; they use them when animals are sick .
Antibiotics are costly and therefore , farmers do not just use them as they would give an animal a drink of water .
We need to be a bit balanced in this debate .
Let us get the information .
We look forward to the strategy in November to help us avoid this growing problem for the European Union and its animal and human population .
( DE ) Madam President , I am very grateful to the author of the question , the chair of our committee , for putting this subject on the agenda .
The use of antibiotics in animals involves closely linked advantages and disadvantages .
The medicines which help animals to remain healthy can , if used improperly , represent a major risk for people .
Therefore , we need to take a coordinated , integrated and , above all , scientific approach , because we will have to continue using antibiotics to treat animals in future .
At the same time , we must also reduce the risks for people .
This report meets precisely these requirements .
I hope that the Commission will take up Parliament 's suggestions , wishes and demands .
Most importantly , as many previous speakers have said , we need an analysis of the current situation by all the Member States in the interest of animals , of European agriculture and , in particular , of the citizens of the European Union .
( SK ) Madam President , I would like to point out one fact which links veterinary medicine to human medicine .
All other European congresses of microbiologists , when they spoke of resistance to antibiotics in humans , spoke of the so-called methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus .
This is a scourge for which those of us in human medicine no longer have an effective antibiotic : we do not know how to cure it .
Up to 25 000 people die from it every year .
Do you know how it came into being ?
Simply through the irresponsible use of antibiotics in veterinary medicine .
Tonnes of antibiotics are literally stuffed into animals .
In the case of animals that are dosed preventively , it is added to their food , and it thus also weakens man and his ability to combat the infections he gets , despite being in hospital , through hospital strains .
I would like to urge the Commission to speed up the gathering of research from all Member States , but also to support new research into antibiotics that would be effective for humans and would save lives .
( SK ) Madam President , the penetration of the food chain by products from the chemical and pharmaceutical industry is an inevitable consequence of the intensification of agricultural output .
The human organism thus becomes the natural victim of the efforts of food producers to produce as much food as possible , as cheaply and as efficiently as possible .
We must therefore start to monitor the use of modern chemicals and pharmaceuticals in agriculture very closely and , in the interests of protecting the health of our citizens , also assess very purposefully , systematically and permanently the consequences of using these substances .
Only the high quality permanent monitoring of food products will enable us to recognise early on the risks or threats which new technologies pose to the current population .
We may be talking today more about antibiotics and the growing resistance to them , but we must take note of the issue and assess it more comprehensively .
I also hope that the Commission will regard concern for food safety as a coherent strategy .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission strategy on antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) , which we plan to present in November , will provide further ideas on how the Commission , together with the Member States and stakeholders , could tackle AMR in all sectors involved .
Some of these actions may require changes in legislation .
Others may not .
The key is to select the right tools for the task in hand .
I fully agree with you that this is not only , or chiefly , an animal farming issue .
This is why our aim is to reduce the development of antimicrobial resistance attributed to the use of antimicrobials in animals .
There are various tools here : education , awareness-raising campaigns and so on .
By the same token , we believe that data has to be collected to promote better understanding of the problem .
The Member States do actually show interest in providing data , which is encouraging .
And yes , we do have a timetable for action .
Preparatory work is ongoing , including impact assessment , the revision of rules on veterinary medical products and so on .
Legislative proposals , as I already mentioned , will follow in 2012 .
The Commission very much welcomes the valuable input of Parliament and looks forward to continued collaboration with Parliament , Member States and stakeholders from all sectors , with the common aim of protecting the health of citizens throughout the European Union .
To conclude the debate , I have received one motion for a resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 May , at noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Antibiotic resistance in livestock and domestic animals has become a problem in recent years .
In order to tackle this growing problem , I call for increased research and better controls on its effects in the food chain .
If used correctly , antibiotics are an effective tool , but I call on the Commission to introduce concrete measures to make their use more efficient so as to reduce animals ' resistance to antibiotics , as this is a problem that impacts on the entire food chain .
It particularly affects levels of antibiotic resistance and so has human health repercussions .
To achieve this , the budget for the Food and Veterinary Office ( FVO ) and the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) must include the funds required to increase field work and to effectively monitor this problem .
Finally , given the importance of this problem , I call on the Commission to draw up a plan for tackling it at EU level that takes into account the full extent of this problem of combating antibiotic resistance , above all , the link between animal health and antibiotic use , and the link between animal and human health .
We are absorbing antibiotics in our food , which is resulting in increased resistance .
This is one area of medical progress which is gradually being ruined and we have known about this for a long time .
Mr De Castro referred to the measures that have already been taken .
I support the proposals made in the resolution .
There are two aspects of this which I would like to focus on .
Regulations alone are not enough .
In the dioxin scandal , we have seen how easily they can be undermined , if individual ' black sheep ' behave in a very negligent way .
Of course , we must have regulations and we need to introduce monitoring systems , but that is not the entire solution .
In the medium and long term , the solution is to make the use of antibiotics largely superfluous .
We can achieve this firstly by investing in research and networking expert knowledge , secondly , by passing this knowledge on to farmers and vets and thirdly , by providing information to consumers .
We must make clever use of market forces , because it is consumers who decide in the long term how their food is produced .
According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , there are 400 000 patients in Europe infected with multi-resistant strains of bacteria .
I therefore welcome the resolution of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , in which I support , above all , the demand for the proper collection and analysis of comparable data on the sale of preparations for veterinary use , and the subsequent use of these preparations on animals .
The collection of this data should be mandatory for all EU Member States .
If the EU adopts strict measures on the use of antibiotics with agricultural animals , we can also expect changes to legislation in third countries , particularly because of the financial losses that would be caused by a restriction on meat exports to Europe .
For example , 74 % of all antibiotics used in the US are applied in animal husbandry , for preventing diseases or boosting the growth of healthy animals .
Half of all meat products inspected in shops in the US contain dangerous bacteria ( MRSA ) .
This problem has been known in the US since 2008 , and there has been no fundamental solution to date .
Non-pathogenic multi-resistant strains of bacteria also represent a risk in view of the possibility of transgenic transfers and , according to the latest research , shared resistance .
The emergence of new , multi-resistant strains of bacteria may deprive future generations of the possibility of making effective use of antibiotics .
A scenario such as this could have catastrophic consequences for human health .
Resistance to antibiotics represents an enormously serious problem which must be resolved immediately and effectively .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Statement by the President
Given the tragedy that has struck the region of Murcia and specifically , the town of Lorca , I should like to express , on behalf of the Presidency , our solidarity with that community and with all the victims , several of whom have been killed .
The President will convey , on behalf of Parliament , a message of solidarity and condolence to the victims and to the community affected .
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
European fisheries sector crisis due to rise in oil prices ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
EU-Mauritania Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Public procurement ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Report : Zver - Youth on the Move : - a framework for improving Europe 's education and training systems - Report : Honeyball - Early years learning - Report : Schaake - Cultural dimensions of EU external actions - Report : Sanchez-Schmid - Unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries - Sarajevo as a European Capital of Culture in 2014 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Zver , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on Youth on the Move - a framework for improving Europe 's education and training systems ,
the report by Mrs Honeyball , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on Early Years Learning in the European Union ,
the report by Mrs Schaake , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions ,
the report by Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries , and
the oral question to the Commission on Sarajevo as a European Capital of Culture in 2014 by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education - B7-0215 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , first of all , may I say that , during the sitting this morning , we will see real evidence of the work of our Committee on Culture , Education and Young People .
I am rapporteur for a dossier , a very important report on Youth on the Move , which is based on a communication from the European Commission .
At this point , I would like to thank my colleagues for giving me the opportunity to prepare this report and I would also like to thank the European Commission , which has prepared this report and which has included the problems faced by young people amongst the fundamental priorities of the EU 's 10-year development plan .
When drawing up this report , I worked with many stakeholders , especially representatives of young people , both from Member States and the rest of Europe , for example , with the European Youth Forum .
We have had quite a few meetings and conferences .
I also worked with the Committee on the Regions and the Committee on Economic and Social Affairs , so the report is a product of many exchanges of opinion during the period of its preparation .
I would also point out that , at the time when this report was being adopted , my fellow Members from other political groups showed quite a constructive stance .
In that respect , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , in particular , who have done a good job and , as a result , we have before us today the report in its present form .
I would like to point out that , according to various studies , young people who avail themselves of the opportunity to study or work abroad perform better in school , they are more successful and more competitive in terms of job hunting , and , moreover , in terms of their integration into society .
However , politics alone cannot guarantee good schools , good education or good jobs for young people . What it can do , though , is create favourable conditions to help young people achieve these things .
Those conditions are most certainly linked to the modernisation of school education systems .
Europe , and Member States in particular , are facing the major challenge of improving , during this decade , vocational education and training , for example , and making it more attractive and improving its quality .
The European economy very much needs vocational qualifications in the next decade .
By as early as 2020 , I estimate that as many as 50 % of all jobs will require education and training of this kind .
Therefore , vocational education and training remains one of the priorities of our policy , as well as of the policies of Member States .
However , continuing the reform of the Bologna Process is even more important .
European universities should be even more in touch with the economy and society at large .
European universities will become more competitive when they pay even greater attention to the needs of the market , the economy , and when they also manage to find additional sources of funding .
It is a fact that , in Europe , we have too little funding for higher education .
The European countries , Member States of the European Union , are underinvesting in students , and this is quite a big problem .
Obviously , as part of this priority , the European Union has also set other targets which must be achieved : to reduce the dropout rate , which , at 16 % , is unreasonably high , so we need to reduce it to 10 % .
Similarly , we will need a more highly-educated labour force in this decade if Europe is to retain its competitive edge over other parts of the world .
Since my time is up , I will take two more minutes later , after the debate , to provide further information .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am very pleased indeed to have the opportunity to present my report on early years learning in the European Union , which is an extremely important aspect of education that we have not really given much attention to before now .
I would particularly like to thank Commissioner Vassiliou and her cabinet with whom we have worked very closely on this , and also the Hungarian Presidency , which had early years learning as one of its priorities .
This has been a very fruitful partnership all round and has allowed us to do the work reflected in this report .
I would also like to thank all the shadows from the other political groups .
We have worked extremely well , as Mr Zver said , on his report , and we adopted the early years learning report in committee unanimously , which just goes to show that there is support across the political spectrum for this .
We know why really : one of the main reasons is that early years are so important .
Early years intervention can make all the difference to children 's life chances , not only as they go through the educational system , but also later on in life .
The research which has been done , most of which I am afraid is not within the EU , shows that , if you give children support and what they need when they are young , it helps them in later life : it cuts down on crime , improves health and cuts down on unemployment , therefore benefiting all of us .
The children themselves will , in most instances , achieve better at school , they will get better grades , they will have high employment levels and better employment and their family relationships will be better - as will their health .
So we have everything to do on this and it is all beneficial .
Within the EU , there are a variety of types of provision for early years and in my report , we have said that we want to respect and maintain that .
Each Member State does it differently , because early years has grown up within their own systems .
It is made even more complicated by the fact that the age when school children start statutory education also varies from Member State to Member State .
So we have not been looking at a ' one size fits all ' solution , but we have looked to establish values and principles and guidelines for Member States to develop a European framework of shared goals and shared values and shared entitlements .
So that is what this report is about : it is actually about setting the framework .
In order to do that , we have , of course , started with the child .
We have advocated a very child-centred approach to early years education and care , with the best interests of the child at the heart of this .
We have drawn on research from around the world , and my report looks at the following issues : engagement with parents , which is very important for early years for young children ; staff and the quality of services and qualifications required ; and integrating early years services with the rest of the education systems in Member States .
So we have covered these key areas , and these are what we should be focusing on in future .
Staff qualifications are extremely important and they are very lacking in this area .
There seems to be a view that anyone can look after little children , while that is actually not the case .
We need to think hard about qualifications , and qualifications which can be transferred and recognised across the EU .
We also need to look at access , so that all of those who need early years education services can get hold of them .
I have finished my four minutes and I want to keep some time for the end of this debate , so I would just like to end by saying that in this time of austerity and times of economic difficulties , we must make sure that early years is still on the agenda and we still do what needs to be done in this important area .
rapporteur . - Mr President , before highlighting a few elements of this elaborate report on the role of culture in the EU 's external actions , I want to sincerely thank my colleagues from the Committee on Culture and Education for their constructive collaboration and for unanimously adopting our joint work in the committee vote .
Of course , civil society and other stakeholders have also provided very helpful input .
Culture has intrinsic value in our liberal democracies .
It enriches peoples ' lives .
The EU is well known for its cultural diversity and , at the same time , it is a community of values which apply equally to each citizen .
These European values , such as respect for human rights , democracy and fundamental freedoms , are also represented by our cultural products .
Cultural identity , values and the EU 's position on the global stage are intertwined .
European interests are served when cultural aspects are strategically devised through cooperation and partnership , both through cultural programmes and when cultural aspects form an integral part of economic , foreign and security and development policies .
Through the sharing of literature , film , music and heritage , doors of understanding are opened and bridges between people are built .
The EU also has important experiences to share when it comes to overcoming conflict and building stability through shared interests and mutual understanding .
In the development of the External Action Service it is important to mainstream and streamline the role culture has , and should have , in the EU 's external actions .
It should be a vital and horizontally integrated element among the broad spectrum of external policies which make up the EU 's foreign policy , from trade relations to its enlargement and neighbourhood policy , and its development cooperation and common foreign and security policy .
Culture also has economic value .
Europe 's cultural industries contribute to European entrepreneurship , innovation and business , and the EU 's diverse cultural landscape makes it the most attractive tourist destination in the world .
Knowledge and international skills are crucial to education and employment , as indicated in the EU 2020 strategy , but culture can also be considered as a vehicle which helps to foster democratisation , freedom of expression , inclusion , development , education , reconciliation and much else .
This very wide variety of aspects of cultural relations vis-à-vis third countries has led to a fragmentation of policies , which needs to change to a more coordinated and coherent EU strategy .
We have chosen to emphasise the organisational and policy frameworks that are needed for the optimal coordination of culture in the EU 's external actions .
The filling in of such content should not be governed and regulated to too great an extent ' from the top down ' .
European citizens are best able to benefit if the EU acts as a global player on the world stage .
This requires funds to be used more efficiently , and we have to be aware of Europe 's competitive position and the struggle to attract tourists , talent , artists , business and students .
We must speak with one voice and be aware of the competition from cultural programmes by China and the United States , to name just two .
But there is no need to reinvent the wheel .
The EU has a number of best practices from the Member States , as well as from different cultural institutions such as the Alliance française and the British Council .
Another aspect that is very prominent in our 21st century is the ever-larger role played by the new technologies , both in culture and in international relations .
People depend increasingly on the Internet for access to information and can only express themselves freely when this information , and their communications , are not censored .
The right to cultural development and other fundamental rights is increasingly facilitated by these technologies .
Access to cultural content happens through new media as well , and the opportunities for global connectivity around European cultural goods and content should be celebrated and facilitated , for example , through Europeana or websites of museums and festivals .
It is important that the EU develop a strategy for Internet freedom .
I will come back to some of the concrete recommendations of this report in the last part of my intervention .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following on from Mrs Schaake , I would like to begin with a few words about the important report that she has drawn up .
The cultural dimension of the EU 's external policy cannot be overestimated .
We therefore need - as she has already said - a coherent EU strategy for culture within EU external policy .
Cultural diplomacy has an important role to play when it comes to building successful relations with third countries and , in many countries , there is a network of national institutes for culture , EUNIC , that we can make use of .
There are many , many people who have linked in to the network and stand ready to help .
I am now pleased to turn to today 's second subject , which has also already been addressed by Mr Zver , namely , the subject of Youth on the Move , which , of course , is a flagship initiative of the Europe 2020 strategy .
This flagship initiative is designed to encourage actors in the field of training and education to give more attention to these policy areas .
We need better-qualified people .
We need people who have experienced Europe thanks to improved mobility opportunities .
We need to unlock the potential of our young people with the aid of our successful programmes .
All of this has a major role to play in the competitiveness of a knowledge-based society .
When it comes to lifelong learning , our existing Comenius , Erasmus , Leonardo and Grundtvig programmes have given many people wonderful opportunities to discover Europe in its diversity , gain experience for themselves and improve their language skills .
Moreover , in this context , the significance of the Youth in Action programme and of the European Voluntary Service should not be underestimated .
Today 's debate must also send a signal to the Commission that we must continue these popularly well-received programmes and opportunities in the next generation of education and youth programmes , too , and that they must be well funded in keeping with their significance .
Every euro that we spend in this area repays the whole of society not that many years later .
I will now turn to another subject , namely Sarajevo .
Sarajevo has a special place in European history and culture .
By naming the city a European Capital of Culture in 2014 , we could send an important signal for the multi-ethnic character of the city and the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina , which could also give the political class in that country cause to rethink their ideas .
What is more , this is a city that makes it abundantly clear how badly Europe failed and how important it is to act together .
There would be significant symbolism in such a step , as Sarajevo was the scene of the assassination that brought about the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 .
That is the reason for the date of 2014 - one hundred years after that historic event .
During the Bosnian war , between 1992 and 1996 , Sarajevo suffered the longest siege of a capital city in modern warfare history .
Allow me to remind you of one day in Sarajevo , 28 May 1992 .
The cellist , Vedran Smajovic , clad in black , was playing Tomaso Albinoni 's Adagio .
His stage was the ruins of the devastated national library in Sarajevo ; his audience consisted of a small group of people who had remained , despite the siege of the city , and who were listening to his music .
For 22 days , he played in various locations in the ruins of Sarajevo .
It was a requiem for the people who had been killed in those dark days .
I was moved , and I was full of admiration for the brave and heartening behaviour of the cellist and his audience .
What these people expressed through their behaviour , in the face of the horror and the loss , connected me forever with the city of Sarajevo .
The cultural life of the city has never stopped .
The winter festival took place even under the most adverse of circumstances .
People of all nationalities head there each year .
Every year , there is a winter festival , a kids ' festival and a film festival .
From Korea to Australia , Bulgaria to Sweden , film makers head to Sarajevo ; co-productions take place .
The city has retained an intercultural character , to which it tends - even as the political surroundings harden more and more into ethnic trenches .
For that alone , this city deserves the chance to demonstrate its immense intercultural potential .
Sarajevo wants to apply for this title in connection with a derogation , and has already undertaken extensive preparations .
We all know well that , if we adopt our proposal today , we will be asking for a derogation from the decision of the European Parliament and the Council .
However , if this House were to demonstrate its backing for the candidacy of Sarajevo today , I would put my trust in the judiciousness and far-sightedness of the Council , as our arguments are actually irrefutable .
Particularly at this point , Bosnia and Herzegovina and the city of Sarajevo need a sign that all is not lost and that Europe also supports their efforts .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in our debate this morning , the issue is not simply about an economic model or a legal system .
We are talking here about culture and civilisation .
What place does Europe want to give to culture ?
What influence do we want for our works and our creation ?
The digital revolution , linked to globalisation and growing trade , compels us to rethink our cultural and economic model .
With the Internet and digital media , what do we want Europe to be moving towards ?
Politics is the art of anticipating , preparing what we would like so that we do not have to put up with what we do not want .
The American film maker James Cameron spent on his film ' Avatar ' the equivalent of the European Union 's ' culture ' programme for the 2007-2013 period .
Will we be the consumers of cultural products that do not belong to us anymore , dependent on multinational oligopolies such as Google , iTunes , Amazon or Hollywood , without being able to defend our assets ?
This morning , we are thinking about the challenges faced by culture in the globalised world of the 21st century .
The European Commission , with the publication of its Green Paper last year , has at last taken stock of the potential of our creative and cultural industries .
The European Union has a cultural heritage and cultural assets , as well as an extremely dynamic and lively film industry .
The MEDIA programme is celebrating 20 years at the Cannes Festival this year and is supporting 20 of the competing films as well as festivals , performing arts and large exhibitions , which are taking place throughout the year and across Europe .
Furthermore , despite the recession , the sector of creative and cultural industries has been consistently making progress in the last decade .
The figures speak for themselves .
In 2003 , this sector generated a turnover of EUR 654 billion .
It contributed 2.6 % of Community GDP and accounted for 3.1 % of all jobs within the European Union , or 5.8 million people .
In 2008 , it already represented EUR 860 billion , 14 million jobs and nearly 7 % of GDP .
That is more than the automotive industry and the agri-food industry put together .
The dual nature of these industries , which are , at the same time , economic and cultural , makes them important levers for sustainable , intelligent and inclusive growth for Europe - in short , the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
As well as being economic assets , they sustain and enrich cultural diversity .
They contribute to social cohesion , to making regions attractive and to the European Union 's influence in the world .
It is time to give impetus , at Community level , to a real momentum that would unlock their potential and stimulate their development .
Thus , I wanted to explore many lines of action to support the growth of these industries .
These measures have several strands .
Firstly , putting education and training at the heart of our strategy .
On the one hand , Europe must encourage creative talents from a very young age , raise young people 's awareness of culture , and develop partnerships between universities and companies .
On the other hand , it should enable those in the culture sector to be trained with regard to new technologies , entrepreneurship , and should stimulate the exchange of best practices and the transmission of know-how .
Secondly , it is essential that we adapt copyright to the digital era .
Indeed , the current procedure for acquiring copyright is too fragmented , too complicated .
The third vital component of our strategy should be the protection of creativeness .
Intellectual property is a precious asset .
Creativeness that is undermined is creativeness that is doomed to disappear .
Creators ' mobility must be encouraged .
The European Union must work to introduce a European status so that they can enjoy fair working conditions and social protection .
It must facilitate the purchase , distribution and circulation of works , adapt taxation , for instance , with reduced VAT for cultural goods , and lastly , help with funding .
Private investors are too often reluctant when it comes to funding SMEs .
The opportunities offered by public funding , particularly the Structural Funds , are not fully exploited .
Creativity and culture must be considered as crucial aspects in our policy and , in this respect , Europe owes it to itself to promote them .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , of course , you understand that I will take a bit longer than five minutes to reply to the five reports .
I would like to thank Mr Zver for his report on Youth on the Move .
We really appreciate his efforts , as well as those of his co-rapporteurs , in dealing with this very important topic .
As the report makes clear , the key objective of Youth on the Move is to help young people in Europe to gain the skills and experience they need to succeed in today 's increasingly internationalised knowledge-based economy .
Our goal is very much to create an environment in which every young person will be able to realise their potential .
This is why the Commission has launched actions to support Member States in improving the quality and relevance of education and training from early childhood through to higher education .
This is why we have set out measures to strengthen further the mobility opportunities available to young people and it is why my Commission colleague László Andor and I have placed so much emphasis on improving conditions for young people moving into the labour market .
To achieve this , as Mr Zver 's report makes so clear , sustained investment in education and training at all levels is necessary and , of course , Europe must play its part .
That is why I am arguing so strongly for increased resources for the new generation of education , training and youth programmes for the period after 2013 .
I want to take this opportunity to respond directly to two points in the report .
Firstly , I would like to reassure you on our approach to improving the transparency of higher education systems .
As the report argues , our ultimate goal is to improve the information available to prospective students and others on various aspects of institutions ' activities and performance .
We want to develop a tool to overcome the shortcomings of existing university rankings by including a wider range of factors .
We have no intention of publishing league tables of universities .
Secondly , in the light of the call in the report for steps to remove barriers to mobility , I would highlight the fact that a Council recommendation designed to encourage Member States to do precisely this is due to be adopted by the Council in the coming days .
It will mark a further step in our ambition to extend mobility opportunities .
In conclusion on Youth on the Move , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the honourable Members once again for their support .
On the subject of early years learning , I would like to thank Ms Honeyball for her report and for the constructive approach she has taken to the issue of early childhood education and care .
Education and care for young children , which are widely accessible , inclusive and of high quality , help first of all to reconcile family and working life .
Secondly , they are the foundation for lifelong learning , social integration , personal development and employability later in life .
Investing early is much more effective than intervening later .
The Commission therefore very much appreciates Parliament 's approach , focusing on the long-term benefit of investing in early years learning .
The Commission shares the view expressed by Parliament that a more child-centred approach is needed .
Besides the number of places available , we must also address the question of quality at European and national level .
I am thinking , for example , of staffing and staff quality , the integration of care and education , and active engagement with parents , who are the first educators of their children .
The Commission welcomes the call for more European research in the field and for more efficient use of the existing financial tools , such as the structural funds and the lifelong learning programmes .
We also welcome the strong emphasis on the need to identify and exchange good practices at European level .
Turning to the Schaake report on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions , I congratulate Ms Schaake for this excellent own-initiative document .
It rightly underlines the role of culture not only as a bridge between peoples but also as a fundamental element in promoting our values in the world .
At the same time , it calls for a more strategic approach to cultural cooperation between the EU and third countries .
The report also makes interesting suggestions on how the European External Action Service could take up the challenge of developing truly European cultural diplomacy .
In this regard , Ms Schaake , I would mention two particular points in your report .
Firstly , let me underline the relevance of your recommendation on a coherent and comprehensive strategy for cultural diplomacy at the level of the EU institutions .
Secondly , let me refer to the idea of providing the European External Action Service with a real cultural diplomacy dimension .
One of the aspects of this effort would be the establishment of cultural attachés in major capitals around the globe .
The creation of such postings would allow increased coordination both between the present cultural attachés of Member States ' embassies and between those national institutes of culture with a local presence , particularly via the European Union National Institutes for Culture ( EUNICs ) network .
I had the pleasure of meeting EUNICs in both China and Brazil recently and I heard from them how much they need cooperation and coordination in order to promote our culture in the countries where they serve .
As regards our emerging strategic partners around the globe , we have witnessed recently how culture can become an integral part of our external relations .
I am more committed than ever to advancing further this very important dimension of our European agenda for culture .
I now come to the Sanchez-Schmid report on unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries .
I would like to thank Parliament and , in particular , Ms Sanchez-Schmid , for this very good report .
I am pleased to see that there is a strong convergence of views between your report and our analysis .
We agree that the cultural and creative industries are a powerful motor not only for jobs , growth and export earnings , but also for social inclusion and cultural and linguistic diversity , as well as intercultural dialogue within the European Union and beyond .
As you rightly say in the report , these industries have a vital contribution to make to the Europe 2020 strategy and must be given a more prominent place in the EU for the years to come .
We also share the view that their potential is not fully developed .
If we want these industries to develop fully , we have to make progress on various fronts : skills adaptation and capacity building , access to funding , improving the business environment , support for cross-border circulation and new distribution models , maximising these industries ' potential for regional and local development , promoting their spillover effects in terms of innovation , and promoting a creative Europe on the world stage .
This conclusion also emerges from the consultation launched by our Green Paper , which prompted reactions from 350 public authorities , the general public , civil society bodies and companies active in the field of culture across Europe .
I am pleased to see that our Green Paper has sparked , in Europe and within the European institutions , a very rich debate on the right environment to put in place to meet the specific needs of creating entrepreneurship in order to seize the new opportunities offered by globalisation , digitisation and cultural diversity .
I am firmly convinced that our joint efforts will help to create a better environment in which these vital industries can play an important role in the discussions on EU funding mechanisms post-2013 and implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Finally , I am very happy to see Parliament 's enthusiasm - and , in particular , that of my good friend Doris Pack - for the European capitals of culture and Sarajevo 's interest in holding the title .
The Commission , of course , shares your view of the historic and cultural importance of Sarajevo .
The city symbolises some of the darkest episodes in recent European history but also carries our hopes for a better future .
In the face of repeated conflicts , Sarajevo has retained its multicultural spirit .
Let me say a few words about the rules governing the European capitals of culture .
In 2006 , Parliament and the Council adopted the decision on which the initiative is based .
This legal text lays down all the rules concerning the selection of the cities , and you know better than I do that a decision of this nature can be changed only through a new initiative following the ordinary legislative procedure .
The decision states that the initiative is open exclusively to the 27 Member States of the European Union .
As an integral part of the decision , a chronological list indicates , for every year until 2019 , the two Member States which are entitled to hold the title .
Two cities have already been selected for 2014 , and the Council is about to confirm the two cities for 2015 .
The decision lays down the procedure for awarding the European capital of culture title , and the rules leave no scope for the Council to designate a city outside these procedures .
The Commission is fully and solely responsible for implementing the decisions adopted by Parliament and Council .
A derogation from the decision on the European capitals of culture in relation to a matter as fundamental as its geographical scope would simply break the rules that we have been asked to follow .
I believe it would be particularly difficult to justify an exception so soon after we have all agreed the rules of the initiative .
Parliament and the Council adopted the current decision less than five years ago .
That was the moment , surely , to make the case for the participation of non-Member States or to make provisions for exceptional cases .
However , at that point , it was decided that the participation of non-Member States would not continue beyond 2010 .
Looking to the future of the European capitals of culture , the Commission is currently working on renewal of the initiative beyond 2019 .
We launched a public consultation and are conducting an evaluation of the current scheme .
We will then prepare a proposal , which we expect to adopt at the beginning of 2012 .
As part of our preparatory work , the Commission is exploring the idea of candidate countries joining the initiative after 2019 .
I would also inform you that a number of cities in other third countries have already shown an interest .
Allow me to finish by underlining once again how much I appreciate Sarajevo 's place in European history and its cultural significance .
While the capitals of culture action is not available , the EU can offer other types of support for Sarajevo , in 2014 and beyond , through our cultural programme .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - Mr President , I have abandoned my prepared text because I have to say something about the proposal to have EU cultural attachés .
I could not believe I was hearing it : I have to say that this proposal from the Commission is one of the most bizarre and ludicrous ever to come out of a body which is celebrated for its bizarre and ludicrous proposals .
EU cultural attachés will simply mean more highly paid non-jobs for favoured EU civil servants paid for by the contributing countries .
I have to also say that it is grossly insensitive of the Commission to make this ludicrous and expensive proposal for unnecessary cultural attachés at a time of universal economic hardship .
Perhaps , for once , you will forget your own gold-plated salaries and gold-plated pensions and think of the reality of what these initiatives cost .
Mr President , let us get back on topic .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to thank everyone who worked on this report .
In the committee , all the groups pursued the unanimous objective of making education and training possible for every young person in Europe and supporting their entry into a career , while no young person should fall by the wayside .
I did not base my opinion for the committee on the Commission report , as I found it too unspecific .
It was important to me for very specific tasks , too , to be listed in the report .
In some cases , I was unable to support the positions taken in the report .
In the view of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , one important aspect is the transition from school to career .
It is a core interface .
This transition must take place without time spent waiting around .
We also found it important that young people 's entry into their careers should not be associated with social dumping and that it must not take place under conditions of dumping .
We felt that the role of traineeships was important .
They are important and they are necessary , but their abuse must be avoided and forbidden .
We would like to see an initiative for a European qualifications framework laying down minimum standards for traineeships .
I will close with a request of Parliament and the Commission to ensure that the Youth in Action programme does not suffer financial cuts or even abolition in favour of the Youth on the Move programme .
The work of youth associations is important for social engagement and helps young people progress , both in terms of substance and personally .
That is also a major advantage for later working life .
Mr President , first of all , I shall deal with the cultural and creative industries .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I wish to highlight the important role that culture and creativity play in the European economy and in reaching the targets of the Europe 2020 strategy , for a society based on knowledge and innovation , as well as the potential new jobs they represent .
In this report , particular attention is paid to the working conditions in the sector , in particular , irregular income and insecure working relations , which call for an in-depth debate in order to take account of specific aspects , for instance , by fighting against discrimination in terms of remuneration , and to improve the match between job held and level of qualification .
We want to make it easier for young people and the most vulnerable to access culture and creative content , and we want to encourage mobility and promote cultural diversity as well as the use and spread of free software and open standards .
Finally , we wish to stress the role of lifelong training in this sector , which is experiencing rapid changes .
I now turn to the ' Youth on the Move ' scheme .
Things are tough for young Europeans : whether accessing employment , education , accommodation , social services , they undergo what is tantamount to the ordeals of a social initiation ceremony .
We need to restore their confidence in the future by providing adapted and ambitious answers .
I welcome the fact that this text does not consider the inclusion of young people only through the lens of employment , but also through the lens of education and training .
In this respect , I should like to stress the request , which I support , put to the European Commission , for a Green Paper on youth participation .
Our report also highlights the idea of mobility , which should be accessible to all , and I welcome that .
Today , mobility essentially concerns students , but it should be encouraged for everyone , young workers and young people who are doing vocational training .
It would be regrettable to categorise young Europeans as either an educated elite , multilingual and confident in the future , or as young people left behind on the grounds that they do not have a Masters degree or because they are only doing manual work .
I am especially delighted that in this text , we called for abolition of the discriminations linked to age , regarding access to the social protection scheme .
I am asking for it here and , of course , I think that the minimum income scheme is a key element in guaranteeing young people 's autonomy .
Our report insists on the main desire of young people to be autonomous , to have access to healthcare in particular , and to have decent accommodation at a reasonable price .
We all know that the young person who has no option but to work as well as study is heading towards failure in his / her studies .
Finally , I am delighted that , in this House , it has been recognised that work placements should no longer be jobs in disguise , fully-fledged jobs .
Work placements must attract sufficient remuneration and social protection .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe all of us are aware that we are facing very turbulent times in Europe , both economically and politically .
Our solidarity is being threatened , as nationalist and populist movements are in the ascendant , as demonstrated by one of our British colleagues a moment ago , a member of the nobility , at that .
Ladies and gentlemen , the current trends pose a threat to the future of the EU and to the prosperity and well-being of Europeans .
We have been elected to provide an answer to that .
Commissioner , where necessary , that answer can and must also come from the cultural sector .
We must definitely invest a lot more in the creation of a common European public space .
Education , as has already been pointed out in this debate , could make a very important , if not crucial , contribution to that end .
We firmly believe that we can make much better use of the cooperation between entrepreneurs in the cultural sector , on the one hand , and academia , both higher education - universities and higher education colleges - and secondary education , on the other , and that they offer a lot more opportunities than we are currently utilising .
Commissioner , you have just said it yourself : this is a sector with a major potential for our economy and employment , which is why we must take specific , stimulating measures , such as reducing the tax on online projects , because the current system , certainly the VAT rate , is out of step with the times and is absolutely unfair .
Furthermore , entrepreneurs , managers of small and medium-sized enterprises in the creative sector , need better access to financing opportunities , because we currently have too little know-how and too little access to bank finance .
This report puts forward very specific proposals in that respect and , Commissioner , we are counting on both the Commission and the competent national and regional authorities to pick up the gauntlet and start implementing this proposal .
Mr President , the position of the cultural and creative industry forms part of the European strategy for innovation and the EU 2020 strategy , and is closely connected with measures aimed at the more effective use of monuments , museums and gallery collections , or urban and rural units in tourism and related activities .
The digitisation of historical and cultural content represents the main opportunity in this regard .
Digitisation should increase the access of the general public to materials that are essential for study , cognition and education , and strengthening cultural identity .
Investment in these areas brings an almost guaranteed return , not only in the area of tourism , which is surely a significant component of many regional economies , but also in foreign policy .
It pays to develop awareness of the deep cultural traditions of European countries and , at the same time , to promote individual villages , towns , regions , Member States and the EU itself in a global context .
In the new programming period after 2013 , we should therefore continue the funding of cultural projects from the European structural funds , strengthen the twinning programme for cooperation between local authorities and retain the independence of the community programme for projects in this area with the title of ' Culture ' .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , for her excellent work on this report .
I am very pleased and very proud of the fact that the Committee on Legal Affairs submitted our opinion on which we were in total agreement and I find it gratifying that the majority of our views are included in your report .
We look forward to broad support in this Chamber .
We are at a point in time when digital technology and the Internet are creating both huge opportunities and enormous challenges for Europe 's cultural and creative sectors .
We must hold on to the foundation for defending intellectual property and , at the same time , take the necessary steps to be able to release the potential and creativity in modern technology .
Europe 's cultural practitioners , technical innovators and , above all , Europe 's citizens deserve a well-functioning internal market , where creative content can flow freely and generously across our borders and where cultural practitioners are secure in the knowledge that they will receive remuneration for their work .
I would also like to thank the rapporteurs for including the proposal put forward by the Committee on Legal Affairs to provide increased access to books for those who are blind or sight-impaired .
I hope that this will be able to help these people to an even greater degree to experience the pleasure and strength that literature provides .
The freedom of speech must be available for everyone . Thank you .
This brings us to the end of the round of speakers on behalf of the committees concerned , and I cannot resist the temptation to point something out .
In speeches such as these , delivered on behalf of the individual committees , it is my belief that the speaker must make an effort to represent the committee on behalf of which he or she is speaking .
There have been speeches in this debate which would have been perfectly legitimate if they had reflected the views of individuals , but which are totally inadequate when they are delivered on behalf of a committee which I am quite convinced has not felt represented by the words we have heard .
I believe this matter should be taken into consideration at least by Parliament 's Bureau , because we cannot allow some of the things we have heard here today to be said on behalf of committees representing so many members of Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , all the rapporteurs who presented reports this morning , as I believe that these reports allow us to lay the foundations for the Europe of the future .
This morning , we are working on future generations , from children to our young people , whom we must guide into the world of work by means of the important flagship initiative entitled Youth on the Move .
This morning , we are discussing expanding the Union towards the Balkans through culture , as well as developing cultural and creative industries .
At a time of great economic crisis , it is important to emphasise that the only sector not making a loss - in fact , its turnover is actually increasing - is the cultural sector .
We would like culture to play a part in the external actions of the European Union , and not only , Lord Dartmouth and Mr Kuhn , through well paid officials , but rather by constructing a better process for peace , stability and understanding between different cultures .
Today , though , we must also seek to strengthen our programmes for culture , education and young people .
For millions of Europeans , programmes such as Erasmus , Lifelong Learning , Comenius , Leonardo , Youth in Action , and many others besides , are not just labels but a symbol of the European Union 's existence .
For many people , they mark the beginning of a European spirit , the first time they came into contact with colleagues and people their own age , really helping to strengthen the Union , and even more so given the new responsibilities for sport that the Union has assumed following the Treaty of Lisbon .
We need to invest in all these programmes but , above all , we need to believe in them .
Nobody is denying the importance of milk quotas , investment in industry and protecting the environment ; but it is culture that will allow us to build Europe , and we will have to do this not with words , but with programmes and actions that we are able and willing to put into practice .
Mrs Vassiliou , the chords played by that violin in Sarajevo , the one Mrs Pack told us about , resonate more with our Europe than with a multitude of regulations .
This is how Europe will be built , and at times it may even be necessary to bend those regulations a little .
Mr President , I am delighted that the European Parliament has finally devoted one entire morning of its plenary session to culture and education .
Education is one of the key issues in a time of crisis , and we must not forget that educated young people are our future .
I welcome the Commission 's Youth on the Move initiative and the fact that it has not forgotten about young people .
Investing in education is the solution to the perennial problems of the EU , even in a time of belt-tightening .
I would like to congratulate the European Parliament rapporteur for Youth on the Move , Mr Zver .
I think his report is extremely good , particularly as it is the work of an entire committee sharing the common objective of benefiting young people .
The mobility of young people in the EU , and particularly the facilitation of this mobility , is important for European identity and European citizenship activities .
As you all know , however , I was very critical of the original Commission initiative , and I would therefore like to emphasise several points which we have managed to include in this report .
It is surely important for us not to stop investing in mobility and youth programmes , such as the current Erasmus and Leonardo programmes , and the Youth in Action activities .
This is surely one of the ways in which we can achieve the objectives we have set in our Europe 2020 strategy .
I also consider it very important to support lifelong learning and activities that are not just for young people .
I would definitely like to emphasise equal opportunities for all , not only in terms of gender equality , but also for disabled or otherwise disadvantaged people .
It is surely important to recognise informal education as another very important means for improving skills which young people can use in their future lives .
The dialogue between Member States and between regions is also very important , and I am delighted that we have managed to include a number of comments from the Committee of the Regions as well as other organisations , such as the European Youth Forum , for example .
There are so many of these that I could carry on speaking not just for two minutes but for 10 minutes , but I would like to end with one sentence .
I would also be delighted to support - as one of the original authors - the initiative on Sarajevo , as it is very important for us to show the people of this region that the EU is here for them .
Mr President , I am pleased that this morning 's plenary is devoted to cultural matters : it is very important to speak about them , not just on one morning but more broadly .
Nevertheless , it is good that we are dealing with these issues .
It is something of a challenge to bundle all these reports together and give evaluations of them , but perhaps I can express a few views on them .
Concerning Mr Zver 's Youth on the Move initiative , it is very probably true that this mobility programme has proven to be a success story , and his report , to its credit , goes a lot deeper into the matter .
I believe that it could lead to many success stories being documented in European history and on the subject of youth in the future .
It is important to ensure that we have Europewide educational programmes in which young people can participate , and that multiculturalism can be strengthened as a result .
It is also very important to consider what Mrs Honeyball says in her report on early childhood education and care ( ECEC ) .
I would prefer to speak of early education and care rather than early years learning , as a person 's growth process is important .
People must be allowed to grow , and education is just one part of that process .
If we can bring our children and young people up to be good human beings and wellbalanced members of society , that is a huge challenge .
Obviously , the home has a crucial role here , but , as the report points out so well , it is also vital to ensure that those working in the ECEC field have a role to play and that there is a process of mediation , something which children and young people particularly need today .
Regarding Mrs Schaake 's report on the EU 's external actions , I think that we need a greater understanding of culture when we are laying down foreign policy .
That is very important .
There are many unfortunate examples of situations where ignorance of cultural backgrounds and the cultural context has led to failures in foreign policy , and that is why it is very important to make culture an integral part of the European External Action Service .
I would like to finish by saying that my opinion regarding the Sarajevo initiative , which Mrs Pack brought up today , is that it is quite true that five years ago decisions were taken on capitals of culture , but , as in science , a paradigm always has to be challenged anew .
Now perhaps is the time to do so regarding this particular issue , to some extent at least , and try to find a solution where a change might be made with respect to Sarajevo .
I believe that it could produce added value for the European Capital of Culture programme and the European Union as a whole .
To sum up , we should look at the bigger picture regarding cultural policy and try to understand its importance for the whole of the European Union .
The internal market and foreign and security policy will not endure if there is no strong cultural base to support them .
Culture is the basis of everything , the basis of the future for the European Union as a whole , and that is why it is important to ensure that it is acknowledged , not just in the light of GDP , but as a value in itself , both for people and societies , and , ultimately , for the entire European Union .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , in recent years , academic and political focus on culture and education has increased dramatically , with analysis consistently highlighting these areas to be crucial not only in encouraging economic growth and social cohesion , but also in facilitating mobility for young people across Europe .
Unfortunately , in the current economic climate , with many Member States adopting austerity measures and budget reductions necessary to reduce deficits , these areas can often appear neglected and I wish this were not the case .
Investment in education and culture helps Member States to compete globally , equipping our young people for the challenges of tomorrow , and encourages creativity , innovation and mutual understanding .
However , it is precisely in these areas where the Member States , rather than the EU as a whole , can act , and where they know how best to respond to the educational challenges they face .
I am concerned with a number of aspects of the reports we have discussed this morning , especially regarding the intrusion on Member States ' subsidiarity in terms of educational targets and social policy .
It is beyond the competence of the EU to dictate educational reforms to Member States , and we must ensure that this is respected .
In terms of culture , the EU can assist Member States in getting the best out of their policy priorities through exchanges of best practice and highlighting areas of importance , such as early years learning , the reduction of early school leaving and the promotion of vocational training .
Another key to helping our young people secure opportunities is to allow flexibility in labour markets so that people can learn on the job .
However , the arbitrary creation of new projects and organisations to facilitate these goals runs counter to the budgetary realities evident across the EU .
We must be mindful of this sad fact and try to deliver what we can for the real world that we face .
Nonetheless , I am a great believer in the power of culture to ensure mutual understanding and to spur innovation and economic growth .
We have a wealth of culture and creativity in Europe which needs to be fostered and developed .
The creative industries add greatly to the EU 's economy and our cultural experiences .
We need to give them the tools to continue their development and gain the rewards they deserve .
It goes without saying that , the more we educate our young people across Europe , the more the future begins to look brighter in a challenging global environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur of the Youth on the Move report , and in view of the various amendments that have been tabled to the reports on the cultural and creative industries and on early years learning , I should like to share the following thought .
The economic crisis is being particularly harsh on young people .
In many regions of the European Union , youth unemployment is above 40 % .
This is what makes an in-depth review of policies to get young people into work , such as the Youth on the Move report , so necessary .
I will focus on four - in my view - key aspects of the report .
Firstly , I believe it is of the utmost importance to promote mobility .
It is an extremely valuable means of informal learning that favours cultural exchange and gives young people the tools they need to develop within a global professional environment .
Secondly , and in close relation to mobility , it is crucial that young people learn other European languages , for two purposes : to interact fluently in the European environment and to be fully integrated members of the communities where they live and work , or , in other words , for social cohesion .
Thirdly , I should like to stress the importance of policies to stimulate entrepreneurship .
Indeed , it is essential to foster entrepreneurship programmes for university students .
This will involve promoting forums where financial players and students with innovative ideas can interact .
Lastly , I believe it is vital to promote equal opportunities in access to university so that no fraction of European talent is wasted .
We need young people to take an active part in the economy .
We need young people to develop their full potential because they , too , have an essential role to play if we are to emerge from the crisis .
Mr President , with only two minutes to talk about five reports and an oral question , I will restrict myself to two reports : the report by Mrs Sanchez-Schmid on creative industries , and the report by my colleague , Mrs Schaake , on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions .
I am doing this because , together , they give us the micro vision and the macro vision of what Europe needs in order to be able to turn this crisis around , with the help of the talent and imagination of Europeans .
In the case of the creative industries , I believe that it is very clear that Europe has probably the highest concentration of potential for the creative industries .
This is true from the outset for our urban areas , our cities , which have , on the one hand , very good connectivity and , on the other , very strong and varied cultural personalities , with a great deal of diversity .
Some of our urban macro-regions also have elements that the creative industries need to be sustainable on their own : that is , intensive capital , a concentration of talent and knowledge , and a vast array of already established companies .
We can see this , for example , in the region between Paris , London and Antwerp .
However , this is not true of the whole of Europe .
In other words , in some peripheral regions of Europe , there is talent , there is history , and there are cities that could play a major role in relaunching the European economy , but they cannot get there without aid , whether at Union level or at Member State level .
Therefore , we cannot delude ourselves about this : until Europe puts its economic house in order , for example , by issuing bonds , nothing can be done .
We are here in Parliament with very good ideas and , at the same time , the governments are tearing the euro to shreds and making recovery impossible .
As regards external action policy , and since I am already almost out of time , I should like to say that the European Union has a unique opportunity to develop a completely different type of foreign policy from those of the Member States .
Moreover , culturally , this has nothing to do with creating a potential European identity and an illusory European identity , and subsequently exporting it or selling it overseas .
Europe could , instead , position itself very well to use culture in external action as a two-way street , whereby we teach but also learn , and whereby we maintain fruitful dialogue with other great regional blocs such as Mercosur or the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) .
That is how best to benefit the rest of the world with the example of European democracy , but it also benefits the European Union , because we will be able to learn from others .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer my contribution by stating the need for a new methodological approach , particularly in the heritage and cultural heritage sector , linked to the intelligent use of new technology .
An awareness of the massive potential for improvement that new technologies can offer us , both in terms of efficiency and effectiveness , necessarily involves abandoning the ways we worked in the past .
New technologies mean new working methods .
I myself have witnessed that by using technology intelligently in the monument protection sector , it is possible to obtain significant results , in terms of both the planning and restoration works .
Additionally , as a simultaneous by-product , and without incurring additional costs , we can obtain highly accurate geometrical databases that can be used to monitor and manage the artefact in the event of natural disasters , as well as products for scientific education and for promoting the artefact on a global scale , fulfilling criteria for cultural understanding and exchange
What I think matters most is that we contribute to a plan of action , whose aim is to help us reach a new awareness of technology , so that new economic opportunities may be created for Europe .
I believe especially in the need to train new people and in professional , young and highly qualified individuals , who are able to rise to the challenges posed by the new global market .
( BG ) Mr President , I will restrict what I have to say to the ' Youth on the Move ' report .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur because the report has managed to cover absolutely every aspect of this issue and this European policy .
More specifically , I will restrict my speech to three issues .
Firstly , with regard to points 24 and 25 in the report concerning children staying at school and increasing their attendance at school , I would like to ask the following question .
Incidentally , I also submitted a question to the Commission quite recently for a written reply .
I am still waiting for this reply , but I am taking this opportunity to mention this problem which I have been raising for a long time .
Many of the Eastern European countries from the last enlargement round face the problem that certain minority groups already follow a practice , which has almost turned into a tradition , where they stop their children going to school , who are then exploited by their parents .
When measures are taken to change this process , these measures are usually described as discriminatory .
This is why I am asking the question : whom are we discriminating against to be more precise ?
I wonder whether it is the parents , who are exploiting their children , or the children , who are losing , as a result , any opportunity to become integrated because they do not have any education , although , as you know , economic integration through work and resources provides a basis for any other integration .
Regarding point 27 of the report , this point again makes a very precise reference to a real problem .
A leading university lecturer recently shared his view with me that , in actual fact , Bulgarian universities are not aware that there is also an Erasmus programme for teachers .
Further measures need to be taken in this area .
Finally , on the subject of youth unemployment , which is mentioned under letters F and G of the report , this is also a significant problem .
The problem to which I am referring is that when young people apply for a job , they already need to have had a traineeship .
However , when someone has just left school or university , they cannot have already gained such work experience .
Such a requirement is ridiculous and discriminatory and must be looked at closely .
This is the procedure in both the public and private sectors .
For that matter , one measure which can be taken in the public sector in particular is to impose strict rules for people to retire who have reached retirement age so as to free up jobs for young people .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , we have to thank Mrs Sanchez-Schmid for the report .
EU institutions have set themselves the goal to take advantage more effectively of existing opportunities that lie within cultural and creative industries .
This is an important task , because better industry terms would allow the EU to become a global market leader in this area .
Culture contributes to the fight against poverty and marginalisation , and plays a part in strengthening and preserving the common European spirit and heritage .
By creating a clear path for creative thinking and the resulting ideas , we can all gain intellectual and economic advantages .
Cultural and creative industries are already important motivators and influencers of the economy , even though their situation is not always favourable .
While it is not possible to restrict creativity , it is possible to negatively influence people 's willingness to create .
An uncertain entrepreneurial environment and an unfavourable legislative framework can dampen citizens ' creative spirit .
We can rightly expect from a European strategy to help creative groups , which have been restricted until now , to express themselves on a European level .
At the same time , it may promote a certain degree of opportunity balance amongst Member States , allowing us to experience the presence of an industry with five million workers , as well as the growth of their numbers in every Member State .
In this area , we intend to assign an important role to small and medium-sized enterprises as well .
Central Europe has a considerable number of bright citizens with a desire to create .
The question is whether we can already provide everyone with the proper background today .
Unfortunately , the answer is no , but an increasing number of targeted programmes have been set up to improve the situation , including , for instance , the Danube strategy .
This morning 's discussion also concerns youth .
It is vital for future generations to receive from Europe full support in the areas of cultural learning , further education and artistic creation .
We must find solutions that make artistic creation attractive within the European Union and , at the same time , secure a playing field in international competition .
In summary , it is of vital importance that we concern ourselves with cultural and creative industries , which is why we must create as soon as possible - for artists and creative minds alike - adequate conditions that take into consideration unique characteristics , in the areas of mobility , intellectual property rights and social protection .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , through its report on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions , Parliament clarifies its aspiration to also put our own stamps on this developing policy field .
The fact - and I want to put this carefully - that I do not see a representative of the External Action Service here today shows how necessary this report is .
The report quite rightly urges that , in future , cultural aspects should play a more significant role in external policy , into which they should be more systematically incorporated .
For my group , it was important to call for a coherent strategy that more effectively coordinates existing EU external policy programmes with cultural components , thereby taking account of cultural diversity in the EU .
Mrs Pack has already made reference to this , saying that the existing structures in the Member States and between them , such as the EUNIC network of national institutes for culture , must be incorporated and that civil society must be seen as part of European external cultural policy .
The EU 's motto of ' United in diversity ' should also come to bear on the image that the Union projects to the outside world .
We should also make even better use of the new media as a communications platform to that end .
As we do all this , we need to make sure that art and culture do not become means to an end in external policy .
It is our cultural values that characterise our European Community .
It is therefore important and right that this cultural diversity and identity should also be disseminated outside the Union by its policies .
I feel sure that we can achieve much more in this way , including in the debate about human rights and democracy , than through many cases of sabre-rattling , sometimes with absolutely nothing to back it up , in this House .
( DA ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in the middle of a fight , which is also reflected in the debate here today - a fight between the forces in Europe that want to weaken the European project and those of us who - in the midst of the crisis that we find ourselves in right now - want us to reef the sails and actually strengthen the European project .
A great deal is currently being said about the economy and about integration and foreign policy , and that is clearly important , too .
However , there is no doubt in my mind that if we are to preserve the European project and , in particular , if it is to find support among the people of Europe , who are currently sceptical about the whole idea , we need to invest in culture and we need to invest in young people .
Therefore , I obviously very much welcome the debate here today and also the five reports that we are discussing .
I was shadow rapporteur for the report on Youth on the Move , and I would like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Zver , for his excellent cooperation .
As time will not allow me to go into too much detail , I will just concentrate on two aspects . The first is the question of young people being able to move across borders .
I believe that in this time of crisis , it is necessary for us to really focus , both politically and financially , on actually implementing and supporting this mobility for young people .
Therefore , I am naturally very pleased that one of the things we are working on is strengthening what we are calling the European Qualifications Framework , in other words , the scheme that allows young people to use the points that they gain across borders .
This is a small but tangible detail that it is important to promote so that young people do not experience problems in this regard .
Secondly , I would like to highlight what we are referring to as the Mobility Scoreboard , in which we indicate the barriers to mobility in the Member States .
This is also something that I strongly support - I think it is a very good idea .
These are just two specific examples that show that we are making progress and that the devil is in the detail . In specific terms , this is where we need to work to strengthen the opportunities for young people and , in so doing , invest in our young people .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his cooperation and to wish the Commissioner luck with the huge task - as I know - of making the other Commissioners in the Commission College aware of the importance of culture and young people .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to focus my attention on the cultural dimensions of external actions and the report drafted by Mrs Schaake .
I would like to say that in several aspects , the report is worthy of support and congratulations .
In paragraph 17 , it condemns totalitarian regimes which use censorship .
In paragraph 50 , it objects to the use of cultural arguments to justify human rights violations , when we have problems with the exploitation of precisely this kind of supposed diversity in contacts with China , for example .
It encourages the involvement of civil society in paragraph 39 , and stresses the importance of democratic freedoms and fundamental human rights .
In all these areas , the report is worthy of support and praise .
By the way , during the work of the Committee on Culture and Education , we were able to remove from the report the proposal to appoint a special EU ambassador solely for cultural affairs .
These are the successes .
Unfortunately , however , there are also matters which I would call problematic , which means that unfortunately , during the meetings of the Committee on Culture and Education , a change was made to the provision which said that this was about appointing a person who would be responsible only for cultural matters and nothing else .
This is something to which attention should be called .
The second thing - the report calls for additional training for European External Action Service staff in the fields of cultural and digital policies .
In the Committee on Culture and Education , we did not want this provision to increase costs in this area , but unfortunately , that amendment fell .
This is why my attitude to this report is simply one of ambivalence .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the two reports by Mrs Schaake and Mrs Sanchez-Schmid remind us that culture is not a decoration motif but the fruit of complex interdependencies , showing that cultural questions should be addressed in a transverse manner and integrated into all European policies , internal as well as external , social as well as economic .
In this respect , I encourage you , Commissioner , to continue in this direction and to develop cooperation with the other committees , with the European Commission 's other services , as well as with Baroness Ashton 's European External Action Service .
Furthermore , I would like to come back to a point that has not been expanded on in these reports , concerning the mobility of artists and of professionals in the cultural sector .
Indeed , this issue is of major importance for the emergence of a European cultural area .
In this regard , two aspects seem to me to be important ; namely , firstly , the dissemination by the European Union and Member States of clear and understandable information on regulations and procedures currently in force .
Secondly , the removal - as has already been said - of the regulatory and administrative barriers which impede the free movement , within the Schengen area , of those in the cultural sector , in particular , for third-country nationals , by introducing , for instance , common accelerated procedures within the European Union for short and long-term visas , as well as a single procedure for obtaining work permits in the Union .
I strongly urge the Commission to continue its work in these areas .
Finally , in the context of a rise in power of a largely American global mainstream as regards cultural leisure , it is urgent to remind the European Union and Member States of the importance of providing themselves with tools enabling them to defend and promote the diversity of European cultures and of third countries .
Therefore , Europe should reposition itself and not abandon the battle over soft power , since what is at stake here today is respect for cultural diversity as a tool for dialogue and as a guarantee of peace and stability worldwide .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to make a few general comments on all the debates that are being put to us this morning .
Unfortunately , issues relating to education and culture are not given enough importance in this Chamber .
Yet they are vital for our future , the future of Europe , the future of our youth .
The under 30s account for 20 % of the European population , but unemployment of the under 24s has now reached nearly 21 % , and almost 15 % of 18-24s leave further or higher education before the end of the second cycle and do not follow any additional study or training .
Worse , nearly 25 % of young people under 15 have reading difficulties .
We cannot accept these figures and , with the recession , they are getting worse in a number of Member States .
The ' Youth on the Move ' report submitted to us is a step in the right direction on certain points and conveys a number of messages to the Commission and to Member States .
The European Parliament reaffirms its will not to see our youth sacrificed on the altar of austerity policies implemented across Europe .
Let us hope that these will not be empty words !
This report also contains a number of worrying aspects , particularly when it demonstrates the desire to reform higher education curricula solely on the basis of market requirements , without going to the trouble of reaffirming the more general role of higher education with respect to the overall training of tomorrow 's citizens .
We know that the broader young people 's training is , the better they can face life 's uncertainties , especially those uncertainties relating to work .
Soon , we will have the opportunity to work on the issues involved in the Bologna process and I welcome that .
All I would say is that our role is to listen to the growing worries - and the word is weak - in a number of States in relation to the reforms undertaken in the name of the Bologna process .
We cannot sacrifice our youth ; words are not enough in this regard .
I would like to add a few words to thank Mrs Honeyball for her report and the work we have been able to do on the issues around childcare .
I fully support the guidelines of this report .
Conversely , I cannot share the guidelines of Mrs Sanchez-Schmid 's report on cultural industries , since these guidelines would introduce a commercial rationale , subject to market forces , to cultural goods .
Finally , I would like to offer my resolute support to Mrs Pack for choosing Sarajevo as European capital of culture .
( LT ) Mr President , I wanted to say a few words about the Youth on the Move initiative .
This initiative has a very fine objective - to increase the education and training of youth through mobility and ease the transition of young people from education into the labour market .
This is particularly important today for young people who are one of the social groups hit hardest by the global financial crisis .
Young people must be supported to enter the labour market in order to secure their own futures , as well as contribute to economic growth and prosperity .
It is vital for young people to be able to develop the competences , skills and knowledge that will allow them to actively contribute to the growth and sustainable future of the European Union over the coming years .
I believe that it is essential to ensure that the education they are receiving is conducive with the needs of the labour market .
It is also important to ensure that Europe 's young people are not deprived of the opportunity to develop themselves and to contribute to the prosperity of the European Union .
Mobility does cause certain problems .
Young people who have gained an education in another Member State most often stay and work there .
Therefore , a country such as Lithuania , which faces a tough economic situation , risks losing , for some time , educated people , who are the basis for the country 's growth , and not just in an economic sense .
True , this is our own internal problem and we will solve it ourselves .
Generally speaking , it is excellent that we are trying today to address an issue that is very important for young people .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , dear guests from Thuringia in the visitors ' gallery ,
Mr President , to my colleague who is afraid of educated young people moving to another state , I would say that civilisation grows and develops when people move , and we ought not to be afraid of that .
It happens wherever people from different countries meet and bring together their various experiences : the examples of this in Europe are very numerous and it is good that we have so much to say about mobility .
This mobility will guarantee continued health and prosperity for Europe .
Mr Zver 's report draws attention to numerous barriers that act as disincentives to mobility in Europe , and I would like to highlight some of them .
To take up what Mr Løkkegaard briefly mentioned , it is really not acceptable that young people who are studying , training or working abroad should encounter difficulties , when they move , with the most basic tasks such as accessing banking services or renting an apartment .
What is more , they are penalised by roaming charges when they try to telephone home or access the Internet and search online for basic , necessary information .
Data roaming is extremely expensive .
The Commission has proposed introducing a mobility scoreboard as part of the Youth on the Move initiative .
This will permit systematic monitoring of Member States ' progress in dismantling barriers .
The scoreboard should be comprehensive and straightforward so that it can serve as a real catalyst to Member States ' removing those obstacles .
This would benefit both old and young , students and workers .
I call on the Commission to present a detailed proposal on how this mobility scoreboard will be operated , and I hope it will do so as soon as possible .
In conclusion , mobility is a horizontal issue , and I therefore urge my colleagues , on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and also on other committees , not to lose sight of the mobility dimension in their work in all areas .
( IT ) Mr President , in an ageing Europe that is struggling to find answers to the global challenges of the future , the European Union and its Member States must seize this strong stimulus from Parliament to demonstrate that they can be more courageous , investing in future generations , in education and in culture .
With these four reports and the Sarajevo proposal , Parliament calls for these issues to be placed at the heart of the Europe 2020 strategy .
In particular , the economic advantages , as well as those in employment and innovation , are highlighted by the report on cultural and creative industries , which already account for almost 3 % of Europe 's gross product and employ 5 million people - a figure which rises to 7 % if ancillary industries are taken into account .
As shadow rapporteur for this measure for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists & Democrats in the European Parliament , I am pleased to see that the rapporteur , Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , has welcomed our amendments .
What did we propose ?
First of all , that cultural tourism and fashion should be added to the eight sectors already included .
We also hope that the Commission - and I am sure that Mrs Vassiliou will take action to ensure this happens - will submit a White Paper on cultural and creative industries as soon as possible in order to strengthen this cross-sectoral strategy throughout Europe and the Member States .
Cutting funds for culture and education at times of crisis - as my country is doing , on the grounds that culture is not essential to survival - means failing to invest in the future and in smart , inclusive growth ; it means failing to understand that culture is essential for life .
The report states that the European status of artists and of those engaged in creative professions should be officially recognised , and that in cultural industry , small and medium-sized enterprises should be fully recognised as such for the purposes of access to credit and support when starting up , especially for young people under the age of 35 .
It also promises to protect jobs , and to introduce specific training and innovative financial instruments , bearing in mind that capital in the creative sector often consists of values that are intangible but nonetheless crucial for innovation in all sectors .
The Europe-wide cultural sector must be taken into consideration in the legal framework for international trade , certainly in the European dimension and in cultural diplomacy , in the internal market , in mobility ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , for strategies like Youth on the Move to be effective and deliver measurable results , there must be increased education and business cooperation .
While I agree with the rapporteur that education should not only ensure employability but also encourage creativity , there is a need for a move towards integrating education and business objectives .
University programmes must be brought closer to the demands of the labour market .
Young people should be given the opportunity to acquire , without barriers , the experience , skills , knowledge and know-how to equip themselves for future career paths and entrepreneurship .
In particular , it is necessary to improve opportunities for young people in vocational education and training to facilitate their mobility in the European Union and allow for apprenticeships abroad , thus expanding their skill set and employability .
Mobility programmes and the benefits of the experience of working and studying abroad must be accessible to all young people regardless of the type of education they have chosen .
Youth on the Move has the potential to be successful , but it must also translate into concrete measures that will deliver benefits for our young people .
Mr President , my own constituency has a long history of combining the promotion of the Welsh language to the young generation with artistic and technical talents to produce animated programmes like Sally Mally , Super Ted and Sam Tân .
Today , this past has been reinvigorated by new productions such as Dr Who and Torchwood , so that Wales is quickly becoming known as a centre for cultural excellence with regard to film and programme production , as well as being home to newer creative areas , like the hugely profitable gaming industry .
In order for this to continue , the most important thing we must now do is to provide the support that our creative industries need to continue to grow .
We must focus on reducing the administrative hurdles that all small businesses face and look at ways to get real added value from the Single Market via cooperation on intellectual property rights , a European patent and realising the full potential of the Digital Agenda and , of course , eliminating inconsistencies in existing EU legislation , such as in the field of VAT .
Our EU budget should be used productively to develop the huge amount of creative energy around us into true wealth-creating businesses , providing sustainable jobs and a prosperous and rich future for our people in Wales and beyond .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , in reality , we are holding a debate this morning about the significance of culture in the various policy areas - in foreign policy , in economic policy , in education policy and in social policy - and we all know that all of us benefit from culture being taken more seriously .
The breaking out of democracy in the Arab countries would not be possible without this culturally-based desire for opening up , for cultural diversity , democracy and freedom of the press .
Creative industries are an important part of economic policy .
In my home country , Germany , there are more jobs in the creative sector than in the automotive sector .
That is something we must take note of .
The result is that this is also an important part of the Europe 2020 strategy .
The point I want to make , however , is that , if we want to bolster the creative industries , we have work to do , in particular , on digital development .
We know that it is precisely the producers of creative content that form the base of the value chain for the cultural sector .
On the one hand , therefore , we have a major interest in cultural diversity , bolstering creative people and easy access to creative content online .
Yet , at the same time , we want artists to be fairly paid , something that is not always the case in today 's digital world .
We therefore need to amend contract law in order to strengthen the bargaining position of our artists .
We need to develop new social models in order to find a fair balance between easy access for users and proper payment for those who create new content .
I have one last point to make .
It would be of major symbolic value and a major historic success for Europe if Sarajevo were to be a European Capital of Culture for 2014 .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the report on Youth on the Move contains some good ideas , like the demand that the crisis must not be used as an excuse to cut education spending .
However , the report accepts the Bologna Process , which has increased the stranglehold of big business and furthered the process of commodification of education .
The rapporteur referred to the fact that universities are underfunded , and therefore called for them to look for more funding from private sources .
Surely the answer to underfunding is not to invite in the private sector with all the distorting effect that has on education , or to impose fees that block access to hundreds of thousands across Europe , but for state investment to provide free well-funded education at all levels .
Furthermore , as a result of the brutal austerity , in many countries , it is virtually impossible for young people to get a decent job after finishing education .
A quarter of young people in Ireland are now unemployed and 1 000 people emigrate every week , so for many Irish families , the very notion of Youth on the Move has a very different meaning .
This unemployment crisis can only be solved on the basis of massive state investment to create decent jobs .
Mr President , just when responsible people and governments are watching every penny , the Commission proposes more expense - Youth on the Move card , European skills passport , European Vacancy Monitor - through Europe 2020 , all for cultural diplomacy and to get young people to travel when they do that already , backpacking their way round the world on their own initiative .
What do we need expensive promotions for ?
As for spreading European culture , well make the most of it , because the way this crazy EU is going , there will be none left , just a meaningless mantra : ' United in Diversity ' .
Do you not understand that Europe is not a single state but a wide and glorious tapestry of attractive , distinctive but matching cultural panels , and to amalgamate them is to reduce them all to a grey amorphous mass , thereby destroying that which you say you admire ?
Do not push EU culture ; make Italian , German , French , Dutch , British and all the other cultures available for all who want to sample them , and the rest will follow .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since the digitisation of cultural and artistic assets , I believe that the question is the following : is Europe destined to become a land of consumption for the United States , and soon for emerging countries , or will it finally wake up and put resources towards developing its informational , cultural but also economic potential ?
Naturally , I firmly believe in the richness and diversity of European culture , but I am talking today from a perspective of competitiveness to condemn a piece of nonsense and an absurdity .
The piece of nonsense is free services that some people dream of , access to everything for nothing .
If we were to go down that road , there would be no more investment in this sector .
Creators and inventors would not be able to receive fair remuneration and they would gradually disappear .
Therefore , the economic models that we are going to implement for the online movement of our cultural heritage exclude services that are free of charge .
The absurdity is the tax applied to dematerialised cultural assets from two aspects .
First of all , there is a VAT distortion depending on the countries where the activity is based .
For instance , American platforms have been enjoying a moratorium since 1998 , which has led to their extraordinary boom .
Secondly , there is a discrimination in VAT rates which penalises digital goods in relation to physical goods .
I think that we need to address these two issues through legislation .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I also welcome the opportunity that the debate we are holding gives us , a debate about four reports that we are going to vote on at the end of this morning 's session .
These are reports that I think deal with issues that are very important to address , to try to provide solutions to the central problems in the European Union ; reports that deal with how to address early school leaving , youth unemployment , the economic crisis and migratory movements .
In this regard , firstly , I would like to make a brief comment about early childhood education .
As Mrs Honeyball said , I believe it is one of the issues that has not been given the attention it deserves .
We know - and every day we have more studies that confirm it - that it is during early childhood that the most intense development of our cognitive and emotional abilities takes place .
For this reason , all the studies say that investing in the first years of life produces much better results than doing it later .
I believe that it is time , beyond focusing on university studies or on professional training , as we have been doing , for us to concentrate on early childhood learning .
Another report that seems very important to me is Youth on the Move , one of the main aims of which is to address early school leaving .
I believe that this issue is absolutely connected to youth unemployment , with the very high percentage of unemployment that we have in our Union .
We must provide answers for the future of these young people , who are the future of the European Union .
To conclude , with regard to the report on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions , I would like to highlight the importance of culture in our cooperation policies .
It is important to create a better mutual understanding with third countries and , in these times of great upheaval to the south of our borders , I believe it makes a lot of sense to answer these questions .
Mr President , ' if you want to know where hell is , ask the artist , and if you cannot find the artist , you know you are in hell ' .
I think this quote , which I found by an anonymous author in Sarajevo , summarises the importance of arts and culture not only for open societies but also for our relations with the rest of the world .
Bosnia and Herzegovina , with Sarajevo as its capital , belongs to one of the black holes on the European map , and this is due to our history .
Now , however , we have to look to the future .
The people of Sarajevo have come close to knowing hell , especially during the siege of that city , and arts and culture have helped people there to survive .
The orchestra rehearsed while the city was being shelled , and the winter festival full of arts and culture continued .
Sarajevo deserves a European spring .
The next generation suffers from the wounds of history , and we have an important responsibility as Europeans to look to the future with them and to include them in the European horizon .
I fully support Ms Pack 's initiative and I want to ask Parliament to support it and to do everything we can to include Sarajevo as a European cultural capital .
I believe that , if we all want this , it absolutely can be possible , because it would be very disappointing if our ideas and common sense were to be blocked by bureaucracy .
( PL ) Mr President , the parts of Mrs Schaake 's report which speak about the need to increase the mobility of young people from European neighbouring countries are very important .
While , on the one hand , it seems to me that over-involvement of the European Union in cultural activity in the Member States is not necessary , I think , on the other , that in view of what is happening today in Tunisia , but also in view of the events of two months ago in Belarus , it is important that the European Union , with its cultural message and its message about democracy and the rule of law , addresses itself to the young elite of neighbouring countries , and that money is found for youth exchanges , joint courses of study , travel , the establishment of universities and support for teaching programmes .
Such programmes do exist in the Member States - at the Centre for East European Studies in the University of Warsaw in Poland , for example .
This should be seen as an example , and it is to be welcomed that Mrs Schaake is pointing us in this direction today .
Without this , we will not be able to achieve anything .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , visitors in the gallery , it is a great honour for me , perhaps no longer as a youngster , but still as a new Member of this House , to be speaking here for the first time .
I would like to characterise the flagship Youth on the Move initiative , part of the Europe 2020 programme , as an excellent objective for the greatest possible improvement of the entry of young people into the labour market , with two main emphases .
As well as early years education , it targets , firstly , the reduction of school drop-out rates and , secondly , increasing the number of graduates .
As a result , to a not inconsiderable degree , of the setbacks caused by the economic crisis , but also , and above all , as a result of structural deficiencies in many - almost all - Member States in other areas , the Member States of the EU have completely different prerequisites .

Allow me to cite my own home country as an example : Austria has a school drop-out rate of just 8.7 % , as compared to the EU average of around 14 % , and it would certainly be worth examining Austria 's dual system of vocational training , which is supported by the social partners .
Germany , too , is very successful in this area .
Let us take that as the benchmark .
Austria itself , however , should strive to achieve a benchmark when it comes to the unsatisfactory number of highly qualified graduates there .
There are considerably higher numbers of qualified academics in other Member States , and we should study their systems .
There is much that we can learn from each other in these areas .
The failures demonstrate very clearly that there is a need for action - we need to overcome the gulf between the education system and the labour market quickly and efficiently .
In closing , however , I would just like to offer my sincere thanks to Mrs Pack and to support her when I say that having Sarajevo as a European Capital of Culture is not a derogation , it is a must !
Mr Becker , I did not want to cut you off as I know it is your first speech in this House and I wish to welcome you .
I hope that in the future , the allotted time can be adhered to but , in any case , I wish you great success in your work as a Member among us .
( RO ) Mr President , there are countries in the European Union which have a national unemployment rate of 20 % , but a youth unemployment rate of 40 % .
It is not the case in just one country , but in very many countries , where the average youth unemployment rate is twice the average national level .
If we are talking about European integration or the future of these programmes and projects which we have in mind here , all these young people must feel European .
All these young people must also find their future within the European Union 's borders .
This is why I strongly feel that we ought to talk much more about providing young people with access to jobs and about the future these young people have in the European Union when we mention the ' Youth on the Move ' programme .
I believe that the solutions we are providing to these issues are not good enough and that we should focus much greater attention on the way in which Member States implement the projects and programmes which we have in mind here .
I believe that the European Commission 's role is to encourage more Member States to implement these programmes properly and meet young people 's needs .
( SL ) Mr President , at a time when cultural differences between nations are leading bureaucrats to close borders - as most recently demonstrated by the Danes - and build high walls , they prefer to leave conflicts to be resolved with arms rather than with understanding and compassion .
At a time when artistic achievements are becoming single-use goods and a major source of profit , when all-powerful global monopolies are being created , which are dictating trends and values , the report on the cultural dimension of our External Action Service and the cultural dimension of the European Union as a whole is more than just welcome .
The report talks us through the ways in which our common cultural image and the artistic achievements of small nations and Member States of the European Union in contact with the cultures of other nations can raise the standard of our public debate and even ease our diplomats ' and strategists ' burden in finding solutions to innumerable crises , at home and around us .
By refusing to observe borders , new media and new technologies are opening up immense opportunities in the process .
I would have liked the report to have devoted a word or two to books , to the idea , for example , that books should not be subject to taxation .
We could speak of cultural management or about giving a new impetus to the one-time idea of Melina Mercouri for a European Capital of Culture .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , let us give Sarajevo a chance !
( PL ) Mr President , the process of early childhood education is one of the most important duties both of parents and the state .
In this context , it is important and appropriate that the resolution stresses the significance of the early teaching of regional and minority languages .
Of particular importance is teaching using the mother tongue as the medium of instruction , because it is known that the language in which children think is also the one in which they more successfully assimilate knowledge .
Therefore , it is unacceptable that in schools for indigenous national minorities , instruction in a language other than the mother tongue should be introduced from the first and second years , something which was recently decided by the Lithuanian Parliament .
The compulsory introduction of bilingual instruction is understood unequivocally by the Poles who have lived in Lithuania for over seven centuries as discrimination which should be brought to an end .
( FR ) Mr President , I am very sorry to hear the consequences of the earthquake in your country .
( SK ) I would like to applaud the work of Mary Honeyball on the early years learning report .
I can sense from the text the effort that has been made to overcome ideological prejudices and find a compromise across the political spectrum .
This is right and proper , as it involves the family and the well-being of children .
Parents have the main responsibility for raising and educating their children .
This is also confirmed by the references made by the rapporteur to the articles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
The responsibility of parents is also mentioned in the General Declaration of Human Rights - parents have a preferential right to choose the type of education for their children .
I also share the belief that investment in education and in early years learning will bring a return in future prosperity .
There is evidence that children already develop the foundations of responsibility , understanding and social behaviour in their early years .
The report also emphasises that caring for young people is the best way to prevent future juvenile criminality .
I go into these factors in greater depth in the report prepared on the contribution made to the fight against juvenile criminality by policies on gender equality and parental responsibility .
Just like the rapporteur , I , too , am opposed to artificially increasing the percentage of women on the labour market at any price .
Many mothers would prefer to care for their young children rather than have formal employment .
They do not have the freedom to choose , however , as society places little if any value on the work of women in the home and in caring for children .
The submitted report contains no proposals for states to place a financial value on the work of mothers in raising and educating children , at least in proportion to the contributions states make to the running of pre-school facilities .
The report as a whole is a step in the right direction , and future social developments will oblige us to pay more attention to this topic .
( EL ) Mr President , the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative focuses on strengthening the mobility of young people , mainly for the purpose of employment .
However , in times of economic crisis and when values are being questioned , the mobility of young people cannot be linked solely to preventing unemployment .
With conservative trends threatening the unity of the European Union , and we heard some of them this morning , the mobility of young people can be used as an important instrument for strengthening European cohesion .
The needs of the market should be taken into account as a secondary factor .
However , universities should maintain their independence and public character and their courses should retain their academic and research-based orientation .
Higher education in the European Union should not be confined to reproducing models which created both the crisis and the loss of confidence .
On the contrary , they should aim to create new standards of social cohesion and collectivity which the humanities and a European system of university classification based on them can develop in the right direction .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , visitors , the cultural diversity of Europe is an important commodity that we need to preserve and even develop in future .
In order to make that possible , we need to face the challenges of the digital age not only in the information and knowledge society , but also , above all , in the cultural and creative sector .
Cultural diversity is not just an ideal ; it is also a significant economic factor .
Around five million people in the European Union are employed in the cultural sector .
That equates to around 2.5 % of the total population .
The cultural sector is a growth sector that is developing faster than many other areas in the economy .
The development of information and communications technologies is driven just as much by the content offered by the cultural sector as the nature and quality of that content have been changed and developed through technology .
We therefore need a framework for the cultural and creative sector within which it can develop sustainably in the face of the challenges of the digital age .
We need a modern , accessible and legally certain system in which everyone can develop on an equal footing .
The cultural and creative sector is a driver for Europe .
We therefore need to pay some attention to this area , including when it comes to education and training .
We need to provide young people with cultural and creative skills - including within the scope of lifelong learning .
However , we also need to improve the business skills of our creative artists and to give them a sound media grounding in new technologies .
We need to create a framework within which those engaged in the cultural sector can safeguard their livelihoods .
We therefore need to work intensively on the issues of copyright , social security and intellectual property , but also on open access to information and content , in order to ensure the continued development of the creative and cultural sector in the future in a digital environment and in order to enable us to retain cultural diversity and the cultural heritage of Europe as a significant distinguishing feature of the European Union .
Mrs Verheyen , during your speech , the interpreters indicated to me that they could not keep up with you .
I did not interrupt you as it seemed to me difficult to do so and I apologise to the interpreters for this .
I want to inform the Members that the system is changing so that instead of lighting the warning signal to the President , it will be lit for each of you when you are speaking .
In this way , you can directly see that the interpretation teams cannot keep up with you .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ' Life is beautiful , my love .
You look out on the world and it is already yours ' .
These first lines of a simple poem show how great life is , and remind us that we are responsible for the world we are building for our children .
In the report presented , Mrs Honeyball offers a timely reminder that the future of our children is shaped right from the very first years of their life , years in which institutions must take on a key role if our children are to grow up as we wish .
I agree with all the points made by the report : it is important that the Member States and the Union should shoulder responsibility for measures to support children 's early learning , but they must claim a role that cannot be solely delegated to parents , or to those who work in the education sector .
As I always maintain at meetings of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , parents living in poverty mean children raised in poverty .
Children have the right to receive help and services from Member States and from the Union .
If we are to overcome poverty , social exclusion and illiteracy , we must support our children from their first steps .
To this end , we must invest in care and education from the earliest childhood , and monitor the services provided and the proficiency of providers .
All children must be able to access education , regardless of social background , and we must ensure that this opportunity is also available to the children of asylum seekers , refugees and all those who have permission , even if only temporary , to reside within the Union .
Mrs Honeyball emphasises research and the exchange of best practices , the wise use of Structural Funds and programmes such as Comenius , and , finally , the need for the States to reclaim their crucial role in the earliest years of children 's education , to ensure that objectives for smart , inclusive and sustainable growth are met .
( CS ) Mr President , the report on early years learning is not and cannot be an attempt at the unified arrangement of this highly individual matter .
I see it , however , as an important contribution to the debate on common European aims and values in pre-school education .
The research in this area emphasises the significant role which pre-school care has for the healthy development of children and their further integration into society .
It seems that pre-school education has a positive effect also on the further education of the child , and that investing in early years learning in the broadest sense of the word is more effective than any later intervention .
It is therefore in our interest to support this type of education , also with a view to achieving , among other things , the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy and increasing the number of inhabitants with a high quality university education , while at the same time reducing the proportion of people who do not complete their studies .
High quality pre-school education can bring us much closer to these objectives , perhaps more than we are willing to admit at the moment .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Honeyball for the work she has done .
Ensuring that all children have access to education and support structures in their earliest childhood must become a right both for parents , especially for mothers , but , above all , for children themselves , because it means that they can lay solid foundations for their education , be supported in their social integration and personal development , and have a better chance of finding a job once they become adults .
More generally - as other fellow Members have reiterated - the Commission 's Communication on the EU strategy on the Rights of the Child states that , in 2009 , more than 6 million young people dropped out of the school system , having barely completed lower secondary education and , of these , 17.4 % did not go beyond primary school .
These figures are worrying and lead one to think that the school and educational system is often neglected and does not receive the investment it needs .
Investing in the quality of education , right from the first years of life , represents not only an essential starting point for a child 's cognitive , sensory and motor development , but is also a prerequisite for building an inclusive society that offers a wealth of opportunities for future generations .
In addition , the improvement in the quality and number of nursery schools and structures for early childhood - as provided for in the objectives set out in the conclusions of the European Council meeting in Barcelona - allows working parents to balance home life and work .
Unfortunately , however , the statistics show that many Member States still have a long way to go before they reach these objectives .
Mr President , Youth on the Move contains many encouraging initiatives .
These include , in particular , plans for a European student lending facility , the European Youth Guarantee , to ensure that young people are in either training or employment within four months of leaving school , and the recently announced Youth at Work plan , designed to build contacts between young people and businesses .
However , I feel obliged to urge a note of caution .
In 2010 , EU countries achieved just one out of five benchmarks set for education , and that does not augur well for Europe 2020 .
If Youth on the Move is to enjoy better success , its implementation and progress will have to be closely monitored on the ground and by Members of this House in our constituencies .
( PL ) Mr President , today 's discussion is one of the most important and significant discussions to be held in the European Parliament .
It concerns the entire culture and education sector , and , therefore , the foundation which permanently underpins our vast European home .
We must remember this and attach enormous importance to this discussion , bearing in mind that not everything has been given us forever .
We have to know that this huge European home , if it is to be a strong one , must have a strong foundation and be resistant to further potential crises and perhaps great changes which cannot be ruled out and may be waiting for us .
So I wanted to thank all the rapporteurs for these very good reports and , in particular , both Mr Zver and Mrs Honeyball , because for the first time , we are taking a comprehensive approach to education .
We want to give outstanding and wide-ranging abilities to all our children , starting from the earliest years until they are in tertiary education .
Today , if we want European society to be mobile and young people to be open , sensitive and competent , we should have a responsible approach to the whole area of education , and , after all , the indicators we have at present are alarmingly poor .
One third of the citizens of Europe do not have any vocational qualifications .
As for the cultural dimension , I would like to thank the Commissioner for the information that the European External Action Service is going to have ambassadors and cultural attachés in all the countries of the world .
I would like to thank Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , because support for culture means , above all , support for the business connected with culture , but , in particular , it means support for the inner aspect of culture .
This is why cultural undertakings must have administrative support and need a reduction of bureaucracy in administrative systems , but they also need support with raising capital , which may also come from Union funds .
We share this mission together , and this is why , as I close , I would like to ask the Commissioner to relate this serious and important discussion to the Council , which is absent today , so that in the forum of the Council , too , it will be possible to discuss these important tasks for Europe .
( SK ) Mr President , as the shadow rapporteur in the Committee on Regional Development for the report on unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries , I consider it important that the cultural and creative industries have been recognised as an instrument for local and regional development .
Plenty of regions are still lagging behind - for reasons that include the financial crisis - and cultural and creative projects will certainly help towards creating jobs and making these regions competitive .
It is important for Member States , regions and local authorities to make the best possible use of EU programmes supporting culture and creativity , political cohesion , structural policy and others .
The definition of the funding options is important for the cultural and creative industries .
Funding is the greatest obstacle to growth for many businesses .
It is therefore also important for private capital and public / private partnerships to be brought into culture and the creative industries , as the rapporteur requests , and to emphasise the importance of sponsorship .
I support the motion for a resolution .

( GA ) Mr President , it is great that we are discussing this important matter this morning and it shows how serious we are about cultural and educational matters .
Culture and education are intrinsically valuable in themselves .
Both have a huge part to play in creating a united Europe and in the development of our economies as we move forward .
The initiatives we are discussing here this morning would facilitate that .
Youth on the Move is a wonderful initiative .
Many have benefited from it already and will do so into the future , but one thing is vital and that is that there is mutual recognition in all Member States of qualifications and diplomas .
This would facilitate greater movement , but also raise the standard in each of the institutions .
I also have to say - mea culpa - that I am a late convert to early childhood education .
Like many , I thought it was basically a babysitting service , but now I know that it is the best investment and it gives the best return for investment in education at any level .
Certainly it reflects an old Irish saying , ' well begun is half done ' , and it can be done at early childhood level .
I also want to emphasise the importance of intellectual property rights ( IPR ) , in particular , for actors .
Many of them are living on the breadline and they deserve to benefit from their genius and this certainly can be done by protecting the IPR online and offline environments .
I also want to put on my sporting hat and say that sport is a very important part of culture and education as well .
I have called for an indigenous festival of sport in Europe .
If we do that , then we can contribute greatly to sport as part of our culture .
My last point is that I visited Mannheim last year . There , under the one roof , was a music school which involved production , performance , education , the creation of instruments , etc .
This is something that could be emulated in other places .
( ES ) Mr President , allow me to join in the words of support for the residents of Lorca , in Spain , that have been affected by this natural disaster .
It is a land that has demonstrated its support many times and it will be able to appreciate the support shown by the European Parliament today .
Commissioner , in 1989 , the then President of the Commission , Jacques Delors , stated that education and culture should be the soul of Europe .
We now know that it is not only the soul , but the heart and muscles of Europe .
Without equal opportunities , which improve the opportunities of all children and all young Europeans , without social cohesion , which provides education , without the ability to compete , which contributes to the spread of knowledge among all citizens , the European Union will be weak .
However , with all of that and culture , it will have the place it deserves in the world .
Mr President , in 2014 , it will be 100 years since the murder of Archduke Franz Ferdinand , which triggered the start of the First World War .
It was also in Bosnia and Herzegovina that we had a bloody war in Europe in the 1990s .
It is important to mark those tragic events , which led to many deaths , suffering , division and horrors , but it is even more important to mark and celebrate European unity and peace today .
Sarajevo is a city which , despite everything that happened , has maintained its multicultural spirit and strength .
In order to recognise this , it would be a strong symbolic gesture to name Sarajevo European Capital of Culture 2014 , to reaffirm Europe 's message of peace and stability .
It is a pity to miss out on this historic momentum by turning to the rules .
It is only when we deal with our past , when we recognise and face history , that we can look openly to the future , so please give Sarajevo this possibility .

( HU ) Mr President , for an ageing Europe , it is vital that all young people make the most of their talents and succeed in the labour market later on This requires an education that , already in early childhood , aims to balance the disparity of opportunities ; one that pays special attention to providing education , professional training , and employment advantages to every young person , irrespective of their financial situation , social and ethnic background , and disabilities or perhaps other health problems .
The 2020 strategy aims to raise the level of tertiary education to 40 % and to reduce the share of early school leavers to 10 % .
To achieve this goal , every Member State must aim to go in this direction .
There are places where nowadays , we see exactly opposing tendencies : a decrease in the age limit for compulsory education and a reduction in the number of state-funded higher education places .
Europe 's future sustainable growth and innovative capacity can be guaranteed only if everyone contributes their own efforts , and if every country travels along the same path .
( ES ) Mr President , I , too , of course , would like to add my support for the residents of Lorca .
In this debate about education , I want to reiterate an important point : the need to include in secondary school studies a specific subject covering the history , aims and workings of the European Union .
I have already talked about this issue in the last term , in plenary , after the failure of Constitutional Treaty referenda .
Fortunately , last year in this House , the Løkkegaard report on journalism and new media , approved in September , supported the introduction of this subject in paragraph 13 .
I myself submitted an amendment in this regard .
Recently in Spain , the Valencia regional government decided to include a subject for the next academic year .
It is an initiative that other regions and countries should follow .
I understand that the Commission , of course , supports and welcomes initiatives of this type .
Ladies and gentlemen , we only value , we only appreciate ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , Youth on the Move is one of the most important initiatives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
We must promote economic growth based on modern technologies , which can only be created by educated people .
We must give the right support to children and young people .
Foreign language instruction , sports and cultural activities , voluntary work and youth exchanges - these are programmes which should be accessible to children and young people in all regions of the European Union .
We must bring about an improvement in educational standards and reduce disparities - at all levels of education , from nursery to university - in every region of the European Union .
In the opinion of Professor Jacek Kochanowicz , a lack of the ability to cooperate is one of the greatest problems for the development of Poland and the European Union - we must change this , too .
Human capital comes from education , and social capital comes from trust between people .
Investing in educational and cultural programmes ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Mr President , first of all , we should look at the context in which we are having this debate .
We need to compare the fine words we are hearing here on the importance of culture and education with the reality .
The irrefutable reality is of a sharp divestment in these areas ; a retreat of the state that threatens its social role and has the result of exacerbating inequalities in access to education , to knowledge and to culture .
The result is the multiplication and deepening of social inequalities .
The reality in Member States such as Portugal is the closure of thousands of schools , thousands of teachers being without a job or a secure job , and the chronic underfunding of the state higher-education system and the increased cost of attending it .
The reality is that budgets for culture are being slashed to penury levels .
Let us not , therefore , ignore this reality that investment is urgently needed : all the more so if the shameful and obscurantist intervention plan drawn up by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and European Commission is implemented .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to express my sympathy with your compatriots ; we look on Spain as a friend and sympathise whenever anything happens there .
The ' Youth on the Move ' report is one of the most important initiatives included in the EU 2020 strategy for promoting and providing more opportunities for education and training for young people and helping them to make the transition from education to the labour market .
Education , lifelong learning , innovation and culture certainly lead to progress .
There is a Greek proverb which says that heads make capital , not the other way round , which is why we must identify , highlight and develop the skills and abilities of our young people , which we can do if we ensure that they can find employment in keeping with their qualifications and skills .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , these reports are at best bestrewn with paradoxes and at worst are full of hypocrisy .
They talk approvingly of diversity , but welcome the eradication of diversity between nations .
The diversity that they promote within Member States involves the promotion of the cultures of recent arrivals , which are anything but European .
As populations change , so will their cultures .
Indigenous cultures will be displaced and lost .
They talk about freedom of expression but are only convincing when they express their intolerance of those with whom they disagree .
They want to promote only cultural values of which they approve ; those consistent with so-called ' European ' values .
In the political sphere , we saw on Tuesday this Parliament 's attitude to freedom of expression when it voted to hand over a Member of this House for a show trial in France for a thought-crime offence , without even being given the opportunity to defend himself .
( FR ) Mr President , the present situation of young people in Europe is very worrying - as you are aware - since there are five million young people out of work .
Today , I am delighted with the European Commission 's ambition to want to democratise young people 's access in Europe .
However , I believe that we have to go beyond this ' Youth on the Move ' programme and , above all , avoid the trap of wanting every young person to go to university .
We need to be relevant to all groups of young people , including those who are the furthest removed from the European Union and especially , of course , apprentices .
It is with this in mind , I believe , that we should urgently introduce a genuine mobility programme for these target groups , in addition to the Leonardo programme .
I think that the Erasmus name , the Erasmus hallmark , should be used for all the programmes and in a variety of forms , in particular , for apprentices , so that we have the necessary ambitions to achieve our aims .
The second issue is that of funding .
We must put in the resources because , as many of you have pointed out , youth and education should be the top priority for the Union 's future .
( PT ) Mr President , this is an opportunity for an extraordinary commitment to the social mobility of young people and a decisive commitment to training a generation with an open worldview ; a generation with skills that , because it has global vision and thinking , is capable of contributing to its regions ' development and to Europe 's progress .
This is because , if all young Europeans have the experience of study , of a work placement or of employment in a different country , they will not just acquire more skills , greater independence and better vision , but they will , above all , gain enormous added value from contact with other young Europeans and exchanging experiences with them .
More than ever , Europe needs a generation of Europeans who know and trust each other , and who know and trust Europe , in order to carry the project forward .
Therefore , allow everyone from Fajã Grande in the Azores , Europe 's westernmost point , to participate .
We must ensure that no one be left out for financial reasons .
( SK ) Mr President , the report on early years learning includes a mention of the work experience approach to education for children from poorer families .
Of these , the rapporteur identifies children from Roma families , who have very little access to early years learning , as the most at-risk group .
It is therefore very important for Member States to create specific conditions for access to early years learning for children whose families do not , for various reasons , provide them with the sort of material and family support that would enable them to take part in the standard education system without major problems .
Special care for children from the more at-risk groups , however , must be provided in a very sensitive way , in order to avoid stigmatising these children or families , which might increase the risk of their social exclusion .
We must therefore systematically modify and improve the special care mechanisms for these children , so that we can successfully integrate as many children as possible from at-risk groups into our society .
( DE ) Mr President , the first three years of a child 's life are crucial for the development of the brain and for language learning .
Without a certain level of language acquisition , further learning is scarcely possible , as the language deficits can only be overcome with great difficulty with increasing age .
The report observes that most immigrant children in the EU are educated without adequate linguistic knowledge .
At the same time , it declares that migrant families and minorities such as the Roma make much less use of the early years education offered than other families .
We cannot allow it to be the case that the level of our schools continues to fall and fall because so many children quite simply cannot understand the teaching .
In other words , every child - migrant or not - must have mastered the national language by the time they enter school to a degree that enables them to follow the teaching taking place there .
( PL ) Mr President , the work on creating a European early years learning framework based on shared goals and values points us in the right direction for the harmonisation of our education systems .
Stressing the importance of the first years of life in a person 's subsequent development and emphasising the potential inherent in early childhood is extremely important in the context of implementation of the 2020 strategy .
To my mind , the subject we are discussing is exceptionally relevant to the current situation .
In my country , a new law entered into force last month on forms of care for children up to three years old .
The new law extends the range of childcare facilities and introduces several new forms of care : children 's clubs , day carers , legal nannies and workplace nurseries .
These changes are meant to create favourable conditions for the proper development of children .
The variety of educational possibilities allows this development to be assisted and stimulated in all areas while making use of the child 's own natural potential .
Opening workplace nurseries will make it easier for parents to return to the labour market after a longer break .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , when referring to Youth on the Move , we are talking about money , but first of all we are talking about the future .
Innovation , creativity , employability are topics that are really important for all of us in the European Union .
It is good that the Commission has focused on this crucial moment of entering into the labour market , which is exactly what I would like to focus on too .
Young people are confronted with the sad reality , with the bad working conditions of internships today , even with exploitation .
And , of course , there is the stigma , when entering into the labour market , of wondering ' am I really needed ? ' when there are such high unemployment rates .
That really is my huge topic right now , so I urge the Commissioner to please keep on track and focus also on the future , to create something like a statute for internships which establishes rules against exploitation ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to start by expressing the Commission 's sympathy for , and solidarity with , the people of Lorca and its neighbourhood .
As a child , I experienced a very strong earthquake in my home city , and I know how horrible the experience is .
As Europeans , we should not be satisfied with the situation of the European education system .
We cannot accept that one in seven of our young people leaves school without the skills and qualifications that he or she needs in order to find employment and have a fulfilling life .
Nor do I accept that one in five of our young children cannot read properly .
We have to really give our full attention to our education systems .
We have to strengthen them by strengthening our mobility programmes , because through mobility , young children , students , workers and volunteers get the transversal skills that they cannot get through formal education .
I think that cutting our budgets on education is a very short-sighted policy .
Once again , I plead with the Member States and governments not to do that , especially in times of crisis , because this will have very negative repercussions in the future .
We must work together to ensure that , in the next multiannual financial framework , the provision for education and mobility is higher than at present , because that is what we need in order to exit the crisis and give meaning to our people .
One honourable Member made a reference to subsidiarity .
Let me assure you that all our policies and all our recommendations on education and culture fully recognise , and comply with , subsidiarity rules .
We do not dictate to Member States .
We simply make recommendations to Member States .
We give them the platform to work together to exchange good practices and to learn from each other .
Cultural and creative industries are important - as many of you have mentioned - as a motor for development and for job creation .
However , let us also remember that these creative and cultural industries have a value per se .
Creativity and culture are values of the European Union which we have strengthened and have to maintain .
After analysing the input that we have received on this topic from all the stakeholders , and following the public consultation with the stakeholders , we are about to put forward recommendations on how we should strengthen and support cultural and creative industries in order to develop and produce the results that we expect them to .
Regarding the external dimension of culture - culture in our external relations - I think we have a responsibility to do this .
Let us not forget that we have all signed and adopted the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity .
We have to work with all the countries which have adopted the convention in order to ensure that it is implemented .
Let me stress that such cultural exchanges with the outside world will be beneficial not only for them , but also for us , because we are enriching our culture , our knowledge , and our values in the world .
Finally , I have taken note of the strong support that you all expressed for Sarajevo getting the title for the 2014 Capital of Culture .
Mr President , thank you for having conducted this debate with as much democracy and generosity as to enable many of my fellow Members to participate .
The debate has , above all , been a high quality one and it has focused on the following : we want to strengthen and maintain our current mobility programmes which are part of the lifelong learning and Youth on the Move programmes .
Our message to Member States is that they should pay more attention to , and also invest more money in , youth policies which span several sectors .
We also want this debate to yield a further benefit ; we want Member States to continue reforming their education systems and social policies , as well as their markets and the like .
I would like to respond to one objection which cropped up during the debate .
The Youth on the Move dossier does not focus very much on the importance of the market ; we actually wanted to avoid that question altogether , but we have emphasised in several places that education systems need to adapt to the needs of society and the economy , and that this large gulf , this large gap , should be reduced as much as possible and that young people should be enabled to enter the labour market with as few obstacles as possible .
Interestingly , that is precisely what the youth organisations pointed out during the preparation of the report .
By way of conclusion , I would briefly like to emphasise the following : let us make use of all this positive energy that we have here in the European Parliament , the temple of European democracy , as well as in the European Commission , and let us do everything to ensure this report does not remain merely a dead letter .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank everyone for the helpful and constructive way that we have conducted this debate today .
The overwhelming majority of you , with only one or two notable exceptions , were very much in favour of my report on early years learning and the other reports we debated today .
I think we have really put down a marker for the future that education is extremely important .
It is not only important for children , for the very young children I have been talking about and the young people that my colleague has been talking about , but it is also important for the future of Europe .
I therefore strongly support what the Commissioner has said , that Member States should now continue to invest in education and should not be using the economic climate to make cuts , because making cuts in education would be the worse possible thing to do .
Education is about our future , it is about having adults who are employable , who are fit , who are healthy , who are not a drain on our social services .
We understand that and we have got to convey that message back to our Member States so that they can exercise their subsidiarity to make sure that what we have been talking about here is actually put into practice .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am coming back to you with some concrete next steps on the report on the role of culture in the EU 's external actions that we talked about this morning .
I want to start with a quote from a Hungarian diplomat in the United States , Mr Simonyi , who said that ' rock and roll , culturally speaking , was a decisive element in loosening up communist societies and bringing them closer to the world of freedom ' .
When we look , in particular , at today 's uprisings of the young generation in North Africa and the Middle East , we can see that , today , an open Internet is that decisive element for moving into the world of freedom .
We need an Internet freedom strategy to facilitate free expression , press freedom , access to information and access to cultural and educational content .
This is a priority , but there are many more concrete suggestions in the report , for which the foundations are already laid down in both the Lisbon Treaty and the ratification of the UNESCO conventions .
They now need practical implementation .
The External Action Service should coordinate the work of different Directorates-General and create a Directorate-General for cultural and digital diplomacy .
EEAS staff should be trained , and a cultural attaché is needed in each EU representation .
There needs to be coordination , streamlining and mainstreaming through an interinstitutional taskforce which should report back to the European Parliament .
We ask the Commission to adopt a Green Paper in 2011 , followed by a communication on a strategy for cultural cooperation in the EU 's external actions .
We also call for capacity-building through the funding of initiatives independent of government , and we want to promote EU cultural activities in the rest of the world on line also .
Existing programmes , such as the European Neighbourhood Policy and the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , have cultural components which need to be coordinated and strategically deployed .
We also need to protect and promote cultural heritage , such as through the Blue Shield programme , and we need to engage in cultural policy dialogues with third countries .
Human rights should be respected , and cultural arguments can never be used to justify violations of human rights .
I would recommend that colleagues read the report .
I think that this debate shows that we need many more discussions on culture in the EU .
Mr President , Commissioner , after all these speeches , I wish to thank my fellow Members , the shadow rapporteurs as well as the rapporteurs of the committees who produced opinions , who suggested to me many ideas and who have made it possible to improve the text that we are voting on today .
I would now like to look further down the road with you .
How are we going to follow up on this report ?
We are asking the European Commission to draw up a White Paper , following on from its Green Paper , so as to perform a review leading to a genuine strategy for the creative and cultural industries .
We are also eagerly awaiting legislative proposals on how cultural goods are taxed , on the governance of collective management societies , and on budget allocations for the programmes relating to culture , education and media .
We must turn our ambitions into specific measures .
Why not introduce straight away a reduced VAT for all cultural products , whether they use a physical medium or are online ?
Disparities in taxation produce distortions that , without exception , run counter to the competitiveness of European companies .
The Americans have had a competitive advantage for a long time thanks to a tax moratorium on these services .
Will Europe do something about it ?
Why not also consider a single price for digital books across Europe ?
French politician , Edouard Herriot , once said : ' Culture is what we are left with when we have forgotten everything ' .
Nevertheless , culture can be quickly forgotten if we do not protect it , if we do not maintain it , if we are not interested in it .
I hope that Europe will give itself the means to promote its culture , so that its model and heritage can exert influence , so that Europe can defend its identity and is able to grow its economy .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The future of the European Union rests on its young people , on their potential and ability to embrace the current EU project and take it to a new dimension of inclusion and cooperation between Member States .
The first condition ensuring that the young people of today become Europe 's citizens of tomorrow is for them to get to know one another .
This means them coming into contact with as many cultures as possible within Europe , moving around freely and studying in as many Member States as possible .
With this in mind , I think that lifelong learning programmes , such as Erasmus or Leonardo da Vinci , must receive more substantial financial support from the authorities in the coming years .
Europe needs an ever-growing number of its school pupils and students to come into contact with a new social , educational and cultural model .
I believe that the mobility programmes aimed at young people will successfully bring about a real change in the attitude of Europe 's young people and create a shared vision for them about what Europe stands for , in areas from education , science and research to culture and our common values .
This report sends a clear message : the European Union must incorporate a consistent and coordinated cultural strategy into its foreign policy .
The bonds that unite more specifically Europe and the countries south of the Mediterranean are going through deep changes .
A wind of freedom is blowing on the Arab world .
Culture is a significant asset .
It contributes to a living and long-lasting democracy .
Cultural and educational exchanges encourage the emergence of an organised civil society .
Cultural cooperation is also one of the keys to the Union 's success for the Mediterranean . It leads nations to share and interact with one another , respect and better understand each other every day .
Ever since the 1990s , the European Union has seen an exponential increase in cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) , in terms of the number of jobs they have created and their contribution to gross domestic product .
The nature of these industries is twofold : from an economic perspective , they help generate jobs and growth , and from a cultural perspective , they facilitate the social integration of citizens .
The Commission 's Green Paper officially recognises the economic and social importance of this sector of the economy .
However , whereas some of our international partners are already making extensive use of the many resources offered by CCIs , the European Union has not yet developed a strategy based on cultural activities .
In my opinion , the challenges posed by globalisation offer these industries great opportunities for development , which are likely to increase economic and employment growth potential .
In concrete terms , the ability of CCIs to boost social and territorial cohesion will depend on strategic investment .
It will also be necessary to cooperate with local bodies , to pass on expertise and to exchange good practices .
I also believe that the stronger safeguarding of intellectual property rights is an essential condition for protecting cultural diversity in Europe .
The European Commission communication entitled ' Early Childhood Education and Care ' ( ECEC ) is a welcome initiative , because it examines problems in children 's education and aims to establish means of providing children with the best start for the world of tomorrow .
However , in my opinion , this Commission document lacks analysis of research and data on children 's education , care and social protection , taking into account information from all 27 European Union Member States .
Furthermore , I would like to highlight the close link between socio-economic disadvantage and opportunities to educate and teach children from an early age , because families on low incomes are much less likely to use ECEC services .
Consequently , later on , some of these young people are neither employed nor in education or training .
I understand the Commission 's efforts to encourage the Member States to exchange examples of good policy and practice , making use of the open method of coordination , but it would be much more useful and effective to draft and adopt common quality criteria .
This would promote data collection and benchmarking in all European Union Member States , because data collection is particularly important for observing progress and measuring outcomes .
I would like to point out that there is a particular lack of information on children from families with social problems , on children with special needs and disadvantaged children .
This own-initiative report is devoted to the issue of the study mobility of young people , which arises from the 2020 strategy .
It is undoubtedly right to increase the competitiveness of young people by creating conditions within the framework of university education for them to spend at least one year in another Member State .
Mobility , a system of recognising credits and other measures will limit the growth in unemployment among young people , which stands at an average of 21 % in the EU today , which is an alarming figure .
Personally I very much welcome the appeal to the Commission and the Member States regarding support for voluntary activities , and for measures to be introduced in legislation that would make it possible to recognise voluntary activity by the unemployed as time spent working .
This measure will lead , particularly with young people , to a strengthening of work habits , to greater competitiveness and to greater motivation in seeking work .
In my opinion , it is no less important to have a permanent link between the requirements of the labour market and professional education , a link that has to be highly flexible in this regard , so that future graduates can be best placed on the labour market , bringing about a gradual reduction in unemployment among young people .
I would like to emphasise my strong support for the ' Youth on the Move ' framework , aimed at improving education systems and vocational training in Europe .
I think that this is of paramount importance with a view to developing specific policies supporting youth mobility and facilitating a stable transition for them from the education system to employment .
An important factor which needs to be considered is that young people are one of the social groups hit hard by the global economic crisis .
We have a duty to support young people entering the labour market , both for their sakes and to support the European economy .
Today 's young people are the leaders of tomorrow .
This is why it is vital for them to have the opportunity to develop their skills , abilities and knowledge now so that , in the near future , they can make an active contribution to the European Union 's growth and development .
We must lay the foundations for concrete policies which will support young people and provide them with greater mobility and opportunities to study abroad .
The role of this mobility is not only to support the economy but , at the same time , to make an extremely important contribution to creating cultural cohesion at European level .
I consider our discussion devoted to education and culture to be an important one , and would like to add an approach that so far has been missing from numerous important considerations .
Mutual understanding and respect for one another are fundamental conditions for traditional national communities , minorities and majorities living together harmoniously and prosperously .
Education plays a vital role here .
If the history and literature of minority communities were taught in majority schools , and if minority education efforts were to include majority culture , communities living together would get along with each other more harmoniously .
Language education also has a prominent role in cultural understanding .
This is true not only in the process of learning world languages , but also in the relationship between majorities and minorities living alongside each other .
I believe that it is not only minorities who should have to study the language of the majority , but also vice versa .
Everybody could live a richer life , allowing mutual respect for one another to manifest itself .
At the same time , in knowing each other 's language , generations growing up would develop a much more positive attitude towards each other , allowing them to create relationships with their peers of the same age more easily , which would be decisive with regard to the future of these regions .
And lastly , I find it important to mention the importance of a deep understanding of cultural heritage , so that communities living together can recognise and respect each other 's cultural values .
I believe that the concrete task of the Commission is to promote all of these issues , while that of Parliament is to strengthen theoretical and political support .
Young people are the driving force of any society and its future .
Their education , vocational training , qualifications and integration into the labour market provide the basis for achieving the Europe 2020 objectives aimed at smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
This is why I firmly believe that Europe must continue to invest in their development and initiatives like Erasmus , Leonardo and ' Youth on the Move ' should be constantly developed further and made popular .
Improving the quality of education and training , as well as young people 's access to it , are important steps on the way to reducing unemployment and developing the European economy .
Unfortunately , Europe still has regions and social groups where there are limited conditions for this .
Efforts must be coordinated to resolve this problem .
It is also important for education and training programmes to be more closely linked to business needs and to stimulate young people 's potential and creativity so as to make them more competitive on the labour market .
I support the efforts to encourage youth mobility , both during their education and in connection with their professional life .
I think that this is an important condition for developing new skills and their self-awareness of their European identity .
The cultural dimension of the EU 's external actions is one which is important and very much needed .
Around the world generally , European culture is seen as attractive and desirable .
It is more difficult to find acceptance for European values .
Working in the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I have repeatedly experienced cultural differences and their consequences .
As Europeans , we try systematically to promote values and principles which , for us , are fundamental and inalienable .
This quite often meets with a lack of understanding from our partners .
Some of them see in this nothing less than a kind of cultural imperialism .
This is precisely why it is so difficult to persuade our partners that the values promoted by the European Union are not an attempt to impose our way of thinking on others .
The fact that we try to spread our ideals , for example , in the field of human rights , follows simply from a moral imperative .
We respect difference and diversity , but we cannot give up principles which we consider to be fundamental .
We will not accept discrimination , and we will not give up the protection of human life and human dignity .
On this , the Union is united and in full accord .
I would like to congratulate Mr Honeyball on his excellent work , and for having noticed critical items that may not have received sufficient attention in the past .
These include , in particular , recognising the connection between poverty , a disadvantaged situation , and poor school performance .
I would like to remind my fellow Members that there is an additional connection : the disadvantaged situation is particularly pronounced in cases where the child is living with disabilities that the parents , who are inadequately informed , neither understand nor accept .
I will pay careful attention to this problem in the report I am currently working on .
The work carried out by Mrs Honeyball and , in particular , the adoption of a child-centred approach , will be an excellent reference base in the future .
The draft report ' draws attention to the general importance of studies before entering school , with particular emphasis on language learning as well as multilingualism and linguistic diversity ' , which I support joyfully and enthusiastically .
I agree that supporting the early development of disabled children and helping them acquire adequate linguistic competence is a basic human resources investment which represents a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity .
It is also important that in order to develop the linguistic competence of deaf children , they must first learn their mother tongue ( sign language ) , which will allow them to become truly multilingual in the future .
And this is an investment for reaching the EU2020 goals and for raising the level of employment , in order to achieve a more accessible , inclusive and sustainable society .
Support for youth mobility , especially for young people from the countries of the Eastern Partnership and the Union for the Mediterranean , is particularly important in view of recent events in Belarus and North Africa .
The processes of democratic transformation which are currently beginning in Egypt and Tunisia can be strengthened thanks to the EU 's efforts to educate the citizens of these countries in the spirit of democracy and respect for the rule of law and human rights .
Educated citizens are the greatest enemy of dictators and totalitarian regimes .
The experiences of EU Member States can be used when organising such programmes .
In Poland , for example , there is the Konstanty Kalinowski Scholarship Programme , which is operated , among others , by the Centre for East European Studies in the University of Warsaw - an international study centre which enables students from the East and the Balkans to study in Poland .
The Union should also intensify efforts to establish a University of the Eastern Partnership , modelled on the Euro-Mediterranean University in Slovenia .
The EU should support the initiatives of young and talented people to promote particular political strategies .
A good example of such activity is the website Eastbook.eu , whose founders supply thousands of Internet users every day with information about events in the countries of the Eastern Partnership and the progress of the programme .
The EU should also give support to young people from Member States for study visits to neighbourhood countries .
This helps break down cultural barriers .
Worthy of praise here is the Eurobus initiative - a journey around Ukraine organised every year for young people from the EU 's Member States .
The adoption in June last year of a new EU strategy , Europe 2020 , is intended to help bring us out of the economic crisis and contribute to further development of the European Union .
It is also a significant step in terms of maintaining and even increasing youth mobility .
One of the priorities of the Europe 2020 strategy is the Youth on the Move initiative , the aim of which is to improve the results of our systems of education and make it easier for young people to enter the labour market .
This aim is to be achieved , as the name suggests , by developing the idea of youth exchange and helping young people to acquire new skills .
Statistical data show that currently , as many as 15 % of young people end their education early , and in so doing gain qualifications which do not meet the needs of the labour market .
In addition , only around a third of people have completed tertiary education , and this proportion is significantly lower than in the United States or Japan , for example .
Therefore , one of the most important challenges facing the European Union is the need to give particular attention and financial support to these two problems .
However , the situation will not improve if both the Commission and the Member States do not follow the guidelines contained in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Youth mobility is a key to the further development of Europe , and if we aspire to the status of the world 's most innovative economy , we must not neglect to invest in human capital , and particularly in young people .
In the context of the current economic crisis , the EU needs a global strategy based on innovation and creativity , which will contribute to economic growth and job creation .
This is precisely why the cultural and creative industries must be encouraged .
Consequently , I think that we need to ensure at the moment in Europe that there is a greater distribution of creative works and free access is provided to them online without , however , ignoring the fact that the artists and their works must be protected and receive fair remuneration .
With this in mind , we must set up a legislative framework capable of supporting the development of these industries and of instilling confidence in consumers and those operating in the digital market , as this sector may facilitate the creation of new jobs , thereby capitalising on the European Union 's cultural diversity and its innovative potential .
At the same time , I think that we need new business models which will support these industries , by leveraging the benefits offered by the single digital market .
In conclusion , I believe that this report marks a first step in the development of this sector .
However , the Commission and Member States must step up their efforts to turn the cultural and creative industries into a core sector of the European economy .
I am pleased that , as part of the Europe 2020 strategy , we are focusing particular attention on young people , given the demographic challenges which our continent has to face .
Against this background , ' Youth on the Move ' , a flagship initiative from the European Commission , offers concrete measures for raising the level of education and vocational training , including through mobility and facilitating access to employment .
Apart from reducing the incidence of early school leaving and increasing the proportion of university graduates by 2020 , I would like to highlight some aspects which may provide support to young people .
The first aspect is the importance of devising more flexible educational programmes which will be compatible with holding down a job at the same time .
The second aspect is the benefit of having a virtual mobility system to supplement geographical mobility .
Another aspect is to encourage study grants offered to students by private companies .
Support is also just as important for private youth initiatives , which can lead to job creation and , by extension , social integration .
Youth unemployment caused by the economic crisis is a considerable challenge across the EU , and so far , neither the EU nor the Member States have handled it properly .
The employment situation of young people depends on general economic policy ; Member States , therefore , should move towards investments and job creation .
Unfortunately , the austerity measures which are also felt in Hungary and which affect , amongst other things , the education system , as well as the spending cuts affecting job creation , do not really help young people ; on the contrary , their sense of isolation from society and the labour market could pose a long-term threat to the economy .
The economic crisis should not be a reason for education spending cuts , because combating the impacts of the crisis requires that young people receive higher levels of education .
The success and effectiveness of the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative depends , to a large extent , on the attitude and key activities of Member States and the financial support they provide for the implementation of these programmes at a national level , which could contribute to the social integration of young people .
The role played by local education institutions , as well as local and regional authorities in the area of education and mobility , is also very important , which is why I believe it is important to support the mobility of teachers and youth and education workers , since they are the ones who can motivate youth .
In order to achieve these EU targets , a partnership approach should be created with local and regional authorities as well .
I supported this report , which reaffirms our ambitions for young people in Europe .
The Europe 2020 strategy puts the education of young people at the heart of its objectives and proposes targets for 2020 : a reduction of early school leaving from 15 % to 10 % and an increase in the percentage of those having a higher education qualification from 31 % to 40 % .
Nonetheless , I would like to insist on one point : obstacles to young people 's mobility .
Currently , it is estimated that only 4 % of European students receive an Erasmus grant during their studies .
This is still too little when one knows that a CV can be greatly enhanced by a year abroad , in terms of learning - especially with regard to learning foreign languages - open-mindedness and skills .
Three issues can explain this figure : the fact that many students are not even aware that these opportunities for studying abroad exist , the cost of an Erasmus year for a student 's budget and the complexity of recognising achievements .
In all these areas , Europe and the Member States must commit themselves , so that the Erasmus programme , which is one of the EU 's greatest successes , becomes a success for everyone .
The principal goal of the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative is to promote youth mobility and to break down barriers that are still standing in its way .
However , I do welcome the fact that it also places increased emphasis on harmonising education and labour market needs .
Perhaps the gravest concern of today 's graduate youth in particular is that , following the completion of their studies , they are faced with not being able to capitalise on their knowledge on the labour market .
The alarming unemployment figures of young people support this ; the effects of this phenomenon have a ripple effect towards a decreased willingness to have children and a drastic delay in starting a family , thereby strengthening negative demographic processes .
The problem , of course , is known both at European Union and Member State level .
However , the solution is primarily in the hands of the latter , as only they can reorganise and reform the national education systems and adjust them to the new socio-economic realities .
The task of the EU is to create a framework for the processes and prevent Member States from losing track of the original goal while , at the same time , encouraging and motivating them to implement reforms that are difficult in the short term but certainly profitable in the long run .
At a time of economic crisis , when some Member States are reducing investment in education and training , I am pleased that Parliament has today adopted the report on Youth on the Move .
In recent years , it is , in fact , young people who have felt the effects of the crisis most acutely .
The rate of unemployment among young people in the EU has exceeded 20 % , which is twice as high as the rate for adults , and in some Member States , it has reached 40 % .
Budget cuts are having a direct effect on young people 's prospects and opportunities for development .
The knowledge and skills of young people are essential for the achievement of intelligent and sustainable development .
Youth on the Move , a flagship initiative of the Europe 2020 strategy , should aim to enhance the attractiveness of higher education in Europe , raise the quality of education and increase student and worker mobility .
This initiative enables young people to acquire knowledge , skills and competences which are essential for work and life .
These priorities and objectives will not be fully realised and achieved if the EU does not ensure long-term financial support in its budget .
Therefore , it is so important that this programme be given high subsidies , not forgetting , at the same time , how important it is to continue to promote it and maintain an appropriate information policy .
This report shone the spotlight on an occupational category that is all too often neglected .
What would European culture be without creative artists ?
While developing the creative industries economically , we must not forget those who work in this sector .
As the shadow rapporteur for my group in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , the social situation and the conditions in which creative artists in Europe live are particularly important .
Unfortunately , many of the 5 million people who make their livelihoods from the creative sector live in precarious conditions .
Second and third jobs are not rare , as one job is often not enough to live on .
A lack of health and pension insurance is on the agenda .
Contracts are mostly uncertain , and many creative workers are scarcely able to plan more than a couple of months in advance .
Moreover , a fair level of social security protection , with adequate insurance against unemployment , sickness and for old age , must be standard practice also for those working in the creative sector .
I am very pleased to see that the rapporteur followed the position of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in this regard and included it in the report .
It is now time for the Commission and the Member States to remedy these social deficiencies and to promise the many creative minds of Europe that creative artists in Europe need not live as an underclass .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his fine work and beneficial cooperation on this report .
I want to highlight again the great economic and cultural potential , as well as the unique nature of the creative industries .
They lie in a very delicate area between mainstream business and the creation of cultural products .
It is gratifying that even in the current circumstances , this sector is one of the most dynamic and innovative in Europe .
One other point worth mentioning is that it offers potential for growth and provides jobs for around 5 million people in the EU .
Unfortunately , my suggestion urging the European Commission and Member States to discuss the opportunities for creating specialist European and national funds , which would have provided resources for borrowing under soft terms for these industries , was rejected by a small margin during the vote in the Committee on Culture and Education .
Nevertheless , I firmly believe that this idea of mine will come to fruition and will be adopted in the near future .
I think that this is extremely important for the support and development of the cultural and creative industries because , as they are not quite commercial activities , they need soft financing , which banks cannot provide nowadays in the normal way for other industries .
In the European Parliament , we are calling for specific action - for the European Commission to recognise the creative sector as one of the most productive areas of the Union economy and so to treat its development as an absolute priority .
To achieve this , we want primarily to increase the possibilities of financing the creative sector , as a pillar of intelligent economic growth , from the Union budget .
For it is possible to create synergy between Union programmes for the support of culture , such as Culture 2007-2013 , for example , with existing Union research programmes ( such as the Eighth Framework Programme , which supports the EU 's technological development ) , or to extend the possibilities for spending money from existing funds ( such as the European Social Fund , for example ) .
We also recommend supporting the development of new and innovative financial instruments ( compilations of bank guarantees , returnable deposits and intelligent loans ) , thanks to which it would be easier for creators or small and medium-sized businesses from the creative sector to start their enterprises .
Of course , money is not everything .
Among other things , we propose strengthening cooperation between the cultural and creative sectors and European universities , increasing the number of specialist training courses for young people , and improving the mobility of all creators and people of culture .
To this end , we intend to create a multilingual Internet platform which would be used for the exchange of experiences between creators and , as a consequence , for the creation of a still closer network of contacts between all those for whom the development of the creative industry in Europe is important .
Statement by the President
Yesterday afternoon , an earthquake struck the Spanish province of Murcia .
At least seven people were killed .
Many were injured .
Three hours ago , Mr Martínez Martínez made a statement about this .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I extend condolences to the families of the victims .
We wish all those who have been injured a rapid return to health .
We also admire the immediate reaction and effort of the people of the province , who are helping in the rescue operation .
I am just sending a letter of condolence to the Spanish authorities on this matter .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you very much for your compassionate and supportive words .
The Lorca tragedy is becoming clear .
At the moment , we know that eight people have died , among them two pregnant women and a twelve year-old boy , more than 250 have been injured and 80 % of houses are affected .
That is to say , from now on and for the moment , many Lorca citizens will be homeless .
A large portion of Lorca citizens have also lost their places of work and with them have gone their hopes , expectations and opportunities .
Lorca is a city of 70 000 inhabitants , of whom 20 % are immigrants that the city has received , taken in and been able to give a new life with new meaning .
I know that together , the old and new residents of Lorca , with help from the institutions and from everybody , will be able to begin a new journey in their lives .
I also have to say and call on the European Union not to leave anyone behind and to be able to help those affected , recognise their pain and stand by their side , opening their arms and offering opportunities .
I would like to thank you all very much and to ask for a minute 's silence .
( Applause )
I will ask everyone to rise .
We will now observe a minute 's silence .
Cleanup in Europe and Let 's do it World 2012 ( written declaration )

Ladies and gentlemen , written declaration 0003 / 2011 submitted by Mrs Jordan Cizelj , Mrs Gomes , Mrs Lepage , Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienand Mr Tarand on Cleanup in Europe and Let 's do it World 2012 has been signed by the majority of Parliament 's component Members .
In accordance with Rule 123 , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published in the Texts Adopted of this sitting , together with the names of the signatories .
As far as I know , Mrs Jordan Cizelj wanted to say something about this .
Mrs Jordan Cizelj , you have the floor .
( SL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I want to thank you for the support you have given to this written declaration .
With this declaration , we have shown our commitment to a clean environment in this year 's European Year of Volunteering .
However , I would invite you not to stop at just this signature , but to help ensure that next year , in 2012 , this action , that is , the one-day action to clean up our environment , becomes a success in as many countries as possible , in even more countries than has been the case so far , and , in that way , to support environmental groups in your countries .
Mr President , I want to thank everybody for supporting this initiative .
I will be very brief .
It has been a pleasure to work under the surveillance of Ms Jordan Cizelj and in cooperation with Ms Gomes , Ms Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienand Ms Lepage .
This is a genuine citizen 's initiative , and will show how citizens can guide Europe to a better future .
However , knowing the controversy around written declarations , and the differing opinions about their usefulness , I would like to apologise to those Members who felt offended by our campaign , and to repeat the promise I made to the chair of my subcommittee , Mr Danjean : I promise not to start a written declaration again during this parliamentary term .
I hope you will help me to keep my promise , and I hope we will all meet again on the Action Day in 2012 .
1 .
Youth on the Move : - a framework for improving Europe 's education and training systems (
2 .
Early years learning (
3 .
EU-Mauritania Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( vote )
4 .
Public procurement (
5 .
European fisheries sector crisis due to rise in oil prices ( vote )
6 .
Small Business Act review ( vote )
Mr President , we , the co-authors , all agreed to a compromise yesterday that reads as follows : ' Notes the growing illegal trade in all Member States in counterfeit and pirated products imported from third countries , which are threatening the competitiveness of European SMEs ' .
We authors all agree to this .
7 .
Innovation Union : transforming Europe for a post-crisis world (

Mr President , I would like to ask colleagues to vote in favour of Amendment No 1 because it supports the idea of having more funds for innovation policy but delete the wording suggesting that funds from the common agricultural policy ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
8 .
ILO Convention supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers ( vote )
9 .
Antibiotic resistance ( vote )
10 .
Cultural dimensions of EU external actions (
11 .
Unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries (
12 .
Sarajevo as a European Capital of Culture in 2014 ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
We now come to the explanations of vote .
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Madam President , there is no doubt that this report represents a step forward in the creation of new educational opportunities for young people .
It advocates more research , more innovation , more EU 2020 strategy in a context that is becoming increasingly relevant .
We need more education at school level , more training , but also more universities , so that we are working together with young people to ensure that the promotion of culture yields added value .
Building educational success is the focus of this report , and it is also the reason why we voted in favour .
Greater mobility for young people , a greater capacity to develop opportunities for work , and a labour market that must take into consideration not only young people working in a given context , but all the sectors that provide opportunities for young people to grow .
( SK ) Madam President , I supported the European initiative Youth on the Move , the aim of which is to reduce the proportion of students leaving education early from 15 % to 10 % by 2020 , and to increase the proportion of people with a university education from 31 % to 40 % .
For the purposes of comparison , 40 % of the population in the US have a university education , and 50 % in Japan .
At present , 14.4 % of young people in Europe aged 18 to 24 years have less than higher secondary level education , and almost 21 % of young people are unemployed .
I also support the fact that the Youth on the Move initiative aims to ensure education that will meet the needs of the labour market .
It is estimated that by 2020 , the proportion of jobs requiring a high qualification will rise from 29 % to 35 % .
( PL ) Madam President , European programmes which support young people call for unqualified support .
The people who are the future of our continent are also the most defenceless , are they not ?
It is we who must ensure that they receive the right education , with access to the benefits of culture and , most of all , the opportunity to learn foreign languages , as well as the opportunity to make a free choice of where they would like to receive their education .
Not everyone has the money and the opportunity to be able to arrange this for themselves .
The good results achieved in many programmes for helping young people , such as Erasmus and Leonardo da Vinci , show this to be an effective investment .
The greatest support is needed by young people living in rural areas , who often do not have the financial means to begin a course of higher education and also do not have the opportunity to find work outside of agriculture in the area where they live .
( FI ) Madam President , I wish to say a few words about Mr Zver 's excellent Youth on the Move initiative .
This is one of the success stories of EU policy .
Even the Eurosceptics or those who are critical of it are of the opinion that it is because of these youth mobility programmes that a certain added value has been achieved that benefits everyone .
The Bologna Process , the Copenhagen Process and other such initiatives are good examples of this .
Mr Zver 's report endorses this trend , one that has already been perceived as a welcome one , and which creates new opportunities and prerequisites for young Europeans studying in the different countries of Europe .
It will be a way for us to be able genuinely to exchange best practices .
I believe that in the long term , this will constitute one firm basis for economic growth in Europe , but more important than economic growth is to remember that it is via this process that people , young people , can grow as individuals and Europeans .
Madam President , across Europe , we are condemning generations of young people to emigration and poverty .
We are condemning generations yet unborn and unbegot to debt - all in order to sustain this conceit of monetary union .
In Ireland , GDP is down 20 % from its peak - an almost incredible figure .
In Greece , we have riots in protest against the austerity package ; and yet we know that it is not going to work .
When the bail-out was agreed a year ago , the idea was that it would be an immediate stop-gap , that it would be a short-term contingent measure , and that by now , Greece would be borrowing cheaply again as the crisis would have passed .
We can see that it has failed .
However , we are continuing with the same policy in Portugal and in Greece again , rather than admit our mistake .
What a high price we expect our constituents to pay for our conceit !
( LT ) Madam President , I am pleased that today , we adopted the motion for a resolution entitled Youth on the Move : a framework for improving Europe 's education and training systems , because this resolution provides clear recommendations and key orientations that European Union countries could and should follow in order to improve education and training systems .
Nevertheless , I would like to single out a few aspects : firstly , given that the Youth on the Move initiative aims to achieve the principal goal set in the Europe 2020 strategy of reducing the number of people leaving school without qualifications from 15 % to 10 % , it lacks measures and recommendations oriented towards raising teacher competences , qualifications or professional prestige .
We must clearly understand that the teaching profession is the profession that creates the greatest added value for society , and must strive to ensure that teachers in European countries are the best .
I very much agree with the call in the document for an all-embracing strategy to be submitted to the Commission , aimed at promoting non-formal education , and I would call for this document 's key recommendations to be directly linked to the multiannual financial framework .
( DE ) Madam President , today , we have with us the National Executive of the Sudeten German Homeland Association , including the Sudeten German Youth , which is energetically pursuing cross-border collaboration with the Czech Youth .
In this regard , this report is of truly inestimable significance , as it covers three points : firstly , the networking of the universities , especially in the Euroregions and border regions ; secondly , vocational training - as it is not just academic education that we need ; and thirdly , and above all , the question of language skills .
I want to state quite clearly that I love the language of Shakespeare , but I do think it is a pity if our young people converse in but one language .
It is precisely the learning of the language of our neighbours and the learning of the smaller languages that we ought to be promoting in particular in this framework .
The truth is that you only really get to know the culture of your neighbours when you start to experience day-to-day life in their language .
In this connection , we have a lot of work to do , but also major opportunities .
( PL ) Madam President , I am extremely pleased that Youth on the Move is an integral part of the Europe 2020 strategy .
I am pleased , too , that the report we have voted through today has given attention to the importance of non-formal education , understood as education by participation in youth organisations and non-governmental organisations and by volunteering .
I am sure that non-formal education helps young people become active citizens , teaches teamwork , helps develop individual interests and gives them better chances of finding work - and that is something which is very important .
( PL ) Madam President , children are our future .
They will be part of conscious society in Europe in the future , so it is very important to educate children from an early age .
We must instil positive values and the right moral standards into our children from their earliest years .
Education should be based on good , solid foundations and be provided by teaching staff with appropriate education and training .
We must strive to achieve equal opportunities , so that all children , regardless of whether they come from urban or rural areas , or from rich or poor families , have access to early learning .
In the process of eliminating inequalities , we should pay particular attention to rural communities - where children have much poorer access to educational and cultural facilities .
( FI ) Madam President , it is very important to focus on the early years of childhood and early childhood education and care ( ECEC ) .
That is why I warmly welcomed Mrs Honeyball 's report , for which I myself was shadow rapporteur .
With regard to this excellent report , I would like to make it clear that , hopefully , it is the importance of upbringing rather than education that needs to be emphasised when we are talking about small children .
That is because all the essential ingredients of a person 's life are established during the first few years , and so it is probably true that if children have a secure basic upbringing , a secure living environment , they will also have the chance to succeed in the future .
We should therefore stress the importance of upbringing rather than education .
There will be a time for education later on , but , as has been said , this report reviews different models that exist in Europe , and the basic premise is that we should ensure that , from early childhood , not one single young person is excluded : everyone should have an opportunity to live a good , full life .
Madam President , last summer , I had the pleasure of visiting your constituency , and one day I took my children to the beach .
I remember watching my two little girls building a sand castle , oblivious to the incoming tide , so captivated were they with the shells and twigs with which they were decorating their work .
I had not the heart to point out to them that the tide was coming in , and today I felt rather the same way as I read through our voting list .
We have these epochal events - this economic crisis on our border , this collapse in our share of world GDP - and here we are talking about early years learning , about our responsibilities to the International Labour Organisation , and about whether Sarajevo should be a European city of culture .
Let me give you the raw and scary statistics : in 1974 , the nations of Western Europe accounted for 36 % of world GDP ; today it is 26 % ; in 2020 it will be 15 % .
While we are worrying about early years learning , putting out all our propaganda about drawing Europe together , and producing The Raspberry Ice Cream War , and while our children are being encouraged to read the unintentionally hilarious ' Captain Euro ' , our part of the world is being overtaken by more virile countries that have learned the benefits of decentralisation and the dispersal of power .
Surely the time is coming when all our pomp of yesterday will be one with Nineveh and Tyre ?
( LT ) Madam President , I would like to react to the misinformation provided by Mr Tomaševski during the debate this morning .
He stated that children from the Polish minority in Lithuania are unable to study in Polish .
For your information , Lithuania is home to around 200 000 Lithuanian citizens of Polish descent , and there are 62 schools where teaching is only carried out in Polish and 34 schools with Polish classes .
Meanwhile , in Germany , where there are 2 million people of Polish descent , there is not one state school exclusively for Poles .
It should be noted that only in Lithuania can citizens of Polish descent obtain an education in Polish from nursery to university .
This is unique in the world .
Lithuania is home to a subsidiary of Białystok University , the only department of a Polish university outside Poland .
In a survey , 42 % of representatives of national minorities in Lithuania cited insufficient knowledge of Lithuanian as a disadvantage when competing for jobs .
It is strange to hear criticisms of the Lithuanian education law , which mirrors the law in Poland , and I would like to pose a rhetorical question : does Mr Tomaševski feel that national minorities are being abused in Poland too ?
( SK ) Madam President , I have already spoken in the debate and applauded the fact that Mrs Honeyball has tried to find a compromise across the entire political spectrum .
Despite this , I abstained from the final vote because I think that this report interferes in the affairs of nation states in many points .
This can be seen most clearly from the fact that it welcomes the Barcelona objectives , despite the fact that the Barcelona objectives ended in a fiasco precisely because they were mere numbers dictated centrally by the EU to the individual Member States .
In my opinion , we must leave it to the Member States to decide how many pre-school facilities they need , because it is not just a question of numbers , but also a question of quality and the culture of a given country .
I very much regret the fact that I was unable to vote for this report , but it fundamentally challenged a belief that is dear to me .
( SK ) Madam President , childhood undoubtedly has fundamental significance for the physical , mental and social development of children .
We must therefore understand that the return on investments into pre-school education is the guarantee of future growth .
Apart from this , many studies have already shown that funding used in this way brings considerable economic and social advantages in the medium and long-term .
The best and most natural way to secure support of this kind is to protect the family as the basic unit of society .
Parents are the first and most important teachers of their children , and thus the legal framework should not contain provisions which penalise parents for personally caring for their children , particularly in the early years .
This agenda is within the exclusive competence of the Member States .
It is more than desirable for the Union , through its coordinating role , to contribute towards improving the situation in the individual Member States .
Madam President , supporters of the common fisheries policy often point out that fish do not recognise national borders .
They tend to tell you this as though it is an original insight - oh really , they swim around , well who would have thought it !

Yet the reality is that territorial jurisdiction and property rights are the only secure basis for conservation .
If you look at the countries that have pursued successful conservation policies in fisheries - whether it is the Falkland Islands , Iceland , Norway , New Zealand - all of them have done so on the basis of giving skippers a sense of ownership so that they have an incentive to treat fisheries as a renewable resource .
It is the basic wisdom of Aristotle that that which nobody owns , nobody will care for .
Unfortunately , the common fisheries policy defines fish stocks as a common resource to which all nations have equal access .
Hence , the ecological calamity which has befallen stocks in the North Sea .
One point which is particularly timely is that we have seen in recent years a migration of mackerel from common fisheries policy waters into Iceland territorial waters .
That , I am afraid , makes them Icelandic property .
There is no point in complaining about this .
It is our bad luck and their good luck .
It may happen that it comes the other way round in a few years time , then it will be our good luck .
In the meantime , the best and surest way to ensure that we treat fish as a supply that is always going to be there is to recognise the ownership rights of the people who have the water under maritime law .
( DE ) Madam President , the rising global market prices for oil are not the only cause of the crisis in the fisheries sector , as the fuels are generally already exempt from tax and as the rising global market prices affect every fisherman in the world - in the European Union and beyond .
As a second point , the raising of the de minimis thresholds should be seized as an opportunity to also help fishermen to be able to work - and fish - in a more environmentally sound and sustainable way .
Thirdly , simply making the fuel cheaper will not achieve this aim .
Put simply , I expect the Member States , too , to produce innovative and useful solutions in this regard .
( ES ) Firstly , Madam President , I want to convey my support to all the people in Lorca , in the province of Murcia in Spain , to the eight people who died and their families , and to the 250 who were injured in yesterday 's earthquake .
I voted in favour of this joint motion for a resolution , not having gone along with my group , due to my concern about the difficult time the sector is experiencing and which has worsened due to the oil price increase .
The EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 increase of de minimis aid for companies for a period of only three years can help them in this complicated situation .
In addition , I have to say that this increase does not imply any increase in the European Union budgets .
Its application must also guarantee environmental and social sustainability , and should not distort competition between Member States .
However , the European Fisheries Fund must continue to support this sector in order to reduce fishermen 's dependency on fossil fuels , to make its activity more efficient and provide it with innovative proposals that must give new opportunities to the maritime sector .
( GA ) Madam President , I was pleased to support these recommendations .
Fishing - like farming - is a very precarious occupation .
It is open to the vagaries of the weather and subject to the quota situation and , of course , the vagaries of stocks and supplies .
Now , added to this , we have the sudden increase in oil prices .
Ultimately , the solution will have to come from within the European Union , with it becoming more self-sufficient in terms of more general energy supplies , obviously including renewable energies . However , I also think that we need to look at exploring areas within Europe that have not been explored before because it was not economically viable to do so .
Now that is changing .
I think if we could increase the supply within Europe , that would automatically bring down world prices and also , of course , make us less dependent on non-democratic regimes for our supply .
( SK ) Madam President , I fully agree with the demand for the assessment of the impact of all relevant bills on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) to be performed systematically both at a national and at a European level , because these businesses are the real backbone of the European economy and , as such , provide more than 100 million jobs .
Current practice shows , however , that at a regional and local level , access to financial support for the initial stages of innovation and for supporting start-ups and small innovative companies is still very inadequate and patchy in the EU .
This heterogeneity is also confirmed by the finding that 75 % of the overall EUR 21 billion assigned for financial support was made fully available through the intermediary banks , which was drawn on by just 50 000 out of the total of 23 million SMEs .
Madam President , Fine Gael members have asked me to speak on behalf of all four of us in the EPP on this issue .
We strongly support the main thrust of any provision such as this to support small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
We know the importance of SMEs to the Irish economy and to the European economy .
However , we do not see the case for including reference to the CCCTB in this report .
It appears to me that we buy into the propaganda of whatever the flavour of the day happens to be .
Currently in Germany , for example , they say they are having second thoughts about this whole CCCTB .
So let us assist SMEs , but let us not insert particular propaganda into provisions of this kind .
There is a case for and against CCCTB .
Let us not put ideology in the place of assistance .
We should give every possible assistance to SMEs , but it is not necessary constantly to introduce these terms .
We voted against CCCTB , but we did not vote against the entire report because we did not want to retard the sort of support that is needed for SMEs , and I am glad of the opportunity to put that on record .
Mr Mitchell , I am going to ask you a question .
Could you tell us what those initials stand for ?
Madam President , I am glad you said that .
I thought you were going to ask me whether I was speaking in Lithuanian at the beginning !
CCCTB stands for common consolidated corporation tax base .
I felt sure that our visitors would appreciate knowing what we were talking about .
( Applause )
Madam President , I just wanted to ask whether something could be called an ideology just because it is not liked in Ireland .
Madam President , this is not a question of what is liked or not liked in Ireland .
We are Members of the European Parliament , and we will put our views forward .
We will not be told what to do by any representatives of any other Member State .
We are not obliged in this country to do what is liked in other Member States .
Every Member State sends its parliamentarians here for them to put their views forward .
Our views are that the case for the CCCTB , which is currently being denigrated in Berlin , is the sort of propaganda that came off the top of somebody 's head .
The case for it has not been proven .
There is a case for and against this , and we should not be bludgeoned into this by any flavour-of-the-day political correctness .
This item concerns explanations of vote .
( FI ) Madam President , as far as common corporate tax is concerned , it would be a very challenging prospect for the European Union , because its 27 Member States are all very different .
Their economic structures are very different , though of course , as we are in the Single Market , it is very important to ensure that small and mediumsized enterprises , which actually make up the backbone of the European economy , have fairly equal opportunities for competition .
At present , that is not the case , and in that sense it is very important that a review of SMEs is now conducted .
Being from Finland , for example , I realise very clearly that Finnish companies are a very long way from the heart of the internal market and , for that reason , logistical costs - transport costs - push up the prices of products considerably .
We therefore need different systems of compensation via taxation even within the European Union , but also in other ways , so that the competition situation might be fairer for everyone .
It is very important that a report such as this one has been produced and that we should also aim to consider companies in remote areas in the north , for them to be able to compete on an equal footing with other European companies .
( GA ) Madam President , firstly , I agree with what my leader , Gay Mitchell , said about the CCCTB and I voted accordingly .
However , I want to focus on another point .
The point I want to mention is that it was notable that it took an oral amendment to raise the issue of counterfeiting with regard to this individual proposal .
That is unfortunate , because counterfeited goods are doing huge damage to businesses right across Europe and this has not been highlighted or tackled enough .
Many of these goods come from third countries and are facilitated by the governments of those countries , which give safe haven to goods coming to Europe .
We need to name and shame and take action against those countries because they are having a terrible effect on legitimate businesses within Europe .
It is time that we said : No more !
( PL ) Madam President , more rapid development , efficiency , including cost-efficiency , and greater competitiveness are the best means for tackling economic problems .
To achieve these objectives , we need to work together for innovation .
Something which is very important , here , is the emphasis given to citizens ' creativeness , for example , by making room for employees to suggest how to improve work processes .
Another factor which drives innovation is consumption , and a specific example of the way in which citizens ' creativeness can be combined with the desire to use modern technologies are the iPhone applications being developed by European consumers .
Strengthening the knowledge base by bringing together businesses , knowledge institutions and the citizens themselves is an important factor in achieving the goals of the Innovation Union .
In this respect , it will be essential to achieve the full engagement of public and local authorities .
A fundamental objective of innovation is to maintain a high level of prosperity in Europe .
I hope the joining of forces which has been proposed will contribute to support for the process of innovation and help bring about economic stabilisation .
Hence , I support the report .
( DE ) Madam President , unfortunately , I never had an opportunity to speak in the debate yesterday , although I was present .
I would like , however , to give my backing , in particular , to those speakers who stressed that innovation and research should and must take place in the agricultural sector , too .
Agriculture is no ' old economy ' - it is modern and it is also an environment where activity , research and innovation take place .
European agriculture faces at least three major challenges ; namely , ensuring the feeding of the population , sustaining the environment and producing energy .
These at times widely divergent aims require systematic scientific permeation both now and in the future .
( PL ) Madam President , I endorsed the report on Innovation Union .
Innovation is , of course , crucial for Europe 's development .
However , in my opinion , something which is absolutely fundamental is support for innovation in the small and medium-sized enterprise sector in particular , especially in the European Union 's new Member States , which , in this respect , are some way behind .
Indeed , it is events in this sector - as would appear from numerous analyses - which will decide if the European economy of the future will be competitive in relation to other major world economies .
It should be remembered - as is shown by research conducted by accountancy firm Ernst & Young - that three quarters of applications submitted by small enterprises in Europe for research subsidies and the purchase of new technologies are , unfortunately , rejected by the banks .
Funding is a serious problem , so we should persuade individual Member States to support small and medium-sized enterprises in this area .
Without this support , they will not cope with the growing competition in the world economy .
( PL ) Madam President , I endorsed the interesting and comprehensive report on transforming Europe for a post-crisis world .
I did so in the hope that the course of action proposed in the report will reduce the growing disproportions in development between the different EU Member States and slow down the ' brain drain ' , which the report calls - too politely , in my opinion - intellectual mobility .
Therefore , to secure the sustainable development of Europe , we must allocate increased funds to the development of innovation and to research projects in the EU 's new Member States .
We should encourage governments that as well as increasing budgetary means allocated each year to research , they should establish a percentage of their budget as a minimum threshold which must be used on research and development-type projects .
However , the amount spent on research and development should not in any way reduce future budgetary plans for the European Union 's current priorities , such as the common agricultural policy or cohesion policy , because they are fulfilling their role well .
( SV ) Madam President , despite the fact that innovations are so incredibly important for economic and social development in Europe , up to now , the EU has not had any collective regulations on innovations .
The fact that this proposal has been tabled by the Commission and Commissioner Geoghegan-Quinn is therefore extremely important .
When we now lay down the rules that are to apply , we must try very hard , in this document and in the Innovation Union , to simplify and remove any unnecessary bureaucracy .
Simplifying the rules is extremely important , because every researcher , every industry and every small business brings this up as the greatest barrier to using EU funds and working together in a focused way to improve the situation for innovations in Europe .
We also need to ensure that we have much more effective management .
We need to focus on the really big projects instead of spreading the money over a large number of different areas , as we do in all other contexts .
Finally , the Innovation Union can be a really good tool in our work to solve climate issues . Thank you .
( FI ) Madam President , the everyday life of the domestic worker is often uncertain , undervalued and unofficial .
They are treated unequally , unfairly and poorly .
In Europe , domestic workers are generally migrant workers , a large number of whom have arrived in the country illegally .
They no not appear in any registers , they are at risk of being exploited , and they are at the mercy of their employers .
The ILO convention on domestic workers and the common rules that would apply are a primary means of ensuring that the human rights of domestic workers and their employment and social rights are respected , supervised and developed .
It would be naïve to say that there were no illegal domestic workers in Europe .
This is a kind of modern day slavery .
These workers , who are frequently women , are the most vulnerable of all .
They do not dare to complain about the fact that they are treated badly or about violence or sexual exploitation .
The exploitation does not just apply to those from outside the EU : we are also exploiting our own citizens .
Improving the situation of domestic workers should be a priority for the Europe 2020 strategy .
( DE ) Madam President , I will set out my views on domestic employment .
First of all , I agree with those who say that those employed in this sector - and they are mostly women , of course - are entitled to fair pay and fair social services .
I also very much agree with those who say that , in this sector in particular , many unbelievable things happen and there is much injustice .
I do ask , however , that attention be paid to red tape when implementing justified demands .
In Germany , for example , the reality is that I , as someone who is covered by this legislation given my employment of domestic staff , need to call on the assistance of a tax advisor quite simply because there is so much red tape and the statutory stipulations are so complicated .
This takes its toll on the nerves , takes time and costs money .
Those who eschew the red tape mostly then pay their staff cash , thereby contributing - sometimes inadvertently - to illegal employment .
That is why I am calling for attention to be paid to the amount of red tape involved .
( DE ) Madam President , as a skilled farmer , I would like to add another couple of comments about these issues .
The first is that it is right that it must be our aim to reduce the use of antibiotics in livestock production , in particular .
' As little as possible ' should be the cornerstone of our action in this regard .
My second point is that we need an analysis of the status quo , in other words , an analysis of the data covering what is actually happening on the ground in the Member States of the European Union .
Obviously , all Member States need to take part in such an analysis .
My third point is that we need further scientific studies in order to analyse the dangers and also in order to be able to counter those dangers effectively .
Fourthly , what we do not need is ideological bogeymen .
Ideology cannot replace science .
( FI ) Madam President , this report is worthy of our support .
It is with good reason that Europe has been regarded as an economic giant : it could also equally be a cultural giant .
In all its cultural diversity , the EU is a coherent yet varied community of values .
In international policy , culture is of major importance .
It is a human right and each person and nation has a right to enjoy it .
Culture is also linked to human wellbeing and coping generally .
Cultural policy also allows the EU to connect with other countries with which no other form of partnership has been agreed on .
Support for the cultural dimension in those countries in North Africa which are now building a new , more democratic society is also especially important .
Bilateral development and trade agreements should always require not just elements of social responsibility but also cultural elements .
There should even be cultural experts associated with the European External Action Service , so that culture can be made part of the EU 's foreign policy in a way that is more coherent and systematic .
( PL ) Madam President , the cultural heritage of European countries is , in itself , something of value .
Although there are many cultural differences between them , the Member States have already made a good name for themselves in the world , one which attracts the citizens of other countries who would like to draw on these cultural resources .
The European Union 's political and economic position can be strengthened by promoting the Union 's identity and cultural value .
An important role in the area of culture is being played by new technologies , which also enable people to exercise fundamental human rights .
Particularly in countries which are in the grip of censorship , the activity of citizens and access to information are maintained by the instrumentality of the Internet .
The Union must , therefore , support freedom of the Internet in the world arena and make significant contributions to the development of culture and the awareness of people in closed societies .
In addition , the young generation needs a consistent strategy on mobility for increasing development in the area of science and culture .
I support measures for cultural diplomacy , which can also be helped by the work of parliamentary delegations .
This is why I endorsed the report .
( PL ) Madam President , the declarations and remarks contained in the report are exceptionally valuable and appropriate .
In particular , I would like to refer , here , to the statements which point out that the European Union is obliged to take action throughout the world to promote respect for freedom of expression , freedom of the press and freedom of access to audiovisual media .
Also very appropriate is the call for the European Commission to promote Internet freedom globally , in view of the threats to this freedom of which we increasingly read and hear .
Although I am pleased to note that we are calling for values which we Europeans consider to be fundamental , I also admit that it was with a certain sadness that I endorsed this report .
I am aware that we sometimes call for these fundamental values to be upheld in other parts of the world , but forget that they are also being violated in some of the European Union 's Member States .
An example of this is what is happening in Poland in relation to journalists who are critical of the government .
They are being removed from public media en masse , and representatives of the government are trying to close down the independent , privately-owned daily newspaper Rzeczpospolita , which is the second largest quality daily in Poland and which is critical , incidentally , of the government 's position .
While we are dealing with the matters raised in the report , this , too , should be opposed .
( FI ) Madam President , it is very important that the cultural dimension is also included in the debate on foreign policy .
I think that we have reached this conclusion because , with the current turmoil in the Middle East , it has been realised that we had forgotten all about the cultural dimension for decades : for example , in the European Union 's relations with Syria .
Since 1963 , Syria has been under emergency law , which has allowed the execution of people without trial , but few European delegations , the EU delegation for example , have raised the issue .
Trade and finance have taken priority over human rights .
Just as Mr Repo said just now , human rights are also a crucial part of the cultural dimension when we speak of the European Union .
This is important to remember .
Human rights , democracy , this hard core : this is what we must promote more vigorously in European foreign policy , instead of looking at things purely from the perspective of the economy .
( PL ) Madam President , I endorsed the interesting report on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions .
How can one not be in favour of these statements on action which the EU is taking throughout the world to promote respect for freedom of expression , freedom of the press , freedom of access to audiovisual media and so on ?
However , I have the impression that we care too much about the situation outside the Union and care too little about standards inside the Union , for example , in Poland , because it is in Poland that after the current governing coalition gained control of the public media , it began to dismiss large numbers of journalists and close down their programmes , all of which had one thing in common - criticism of the current situation .
So , for example , such people as Jacek Sobala , Anita Gargas , Jacek Karnowski and Wojciech Leszczyński have lost their jobs .
Journalists such as Joanna Lichocka , Tomasz Sakiewicz , Rafał Ziemkiewicz , Jan Pospieszalski , Grzegorz Górny , Tomasz Terlikowski , Bronisław Wildstein and Wojciech Cejrowski have lost their programmes - and these are just some examples among many others .
The gagging of free speech in Poland is a disgrace to the entire European Union .
( FI ) Madam President , first of all , concerning Mrs Sanchez-Schmid 's report , I wish to say that it is extremely important that we in the European Union acknowledge the impact that creative industry and culture also has on economic growth in the European Union .
It is very significant : 2.6 % of EU GDP comes specifically from creative industries , and they employ 3.1 % of the EU 's workforce .
You could therefore say that over the last few years , even decades , it has been a growth industry , and it will continue to be one in the future too .
When we speak of the cultural dimension , it is also important to remember that it is something other than just economic growth .
It is also growth for humanity , and this should never be forgotten when speaking about culture .
In this respect , the impact of culture should not be measured in terms of growth in GDP : we must also appreciate the fact that a person does not just generate growth in GDP by participating in the rat race , but by living a unique life of human values , and it is to that end that we must create the right conditions and circumstances .
We , as members of the European Union , should remember this because , all too often , the Union presents us with a narrow picture of itself , as little more than a system of bodies of economic cooperation , and we forget the wider picture .
With respect to Sarajevo as Capital of Culture for 2014 , I would like to say that I hope that this project goes ahead .
For us on the Committee on Culture and Education , it has been an idea and project that we have all shared , as 2014 will mark the hundredth anniversary of the outbreak of the First World War , which began with an incident in that very city .
It symbolises the developments that have taken place in Europe .
We want to show that 2014 is the year that would mark the start of a long period of peace , or would continue the long period of peace that has already started .
The Baltic countries should also , however , participate more robustly in this peace and stability development .
It would certainly have greater significance for a wider Europe .
( FI ) Madam President , with respect to Sarajevo as Capital of Culture for 2014 , I would like to say that I hope that this project goes ahead .
For us on the Committee on Culture and Education , it has been an idea and project that we have all shared , as 2014 will mark the hundredth anniversary of the outbreak of the First World War , which began with an incident in that very city .
In a way , it symbolises the developments that have taken place in Europe .
We want to show that 2014 is the year that would mark the start of a long period of peace , or would continue the long period of peace that has already started .
The Baltic countries should also , however , participate more robustly in this peace and stability development .
It would certainly have greater significance for a wider Europe .
Written explanations of vote
I am voting for this proposal as this initiative aims to achieve the major objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy of reducing school drop-out rates from 15 % to 10 % and of increasing the percentage of people with tertiary education from 31 % to 40 % by 2020 .
The ' Youth on the Move ' initiative also focuses on promoting learning mobility , with it also being essential to ensure that the education they are receiving is compatible with the needs of the labour market to equip them with the skills and knowledge they will need .
Mobility is important to learn about other cultures , but also to better understand one 's own .
Less than one third of the EU 's population has a higher education degree , compared with over 40 % in the United States and over 50 % in Japan , so Europe must increase these numbers in order to be able to make itself more competitive in an ever-increasing global economy .
Recent years have seen the European Union become increasingly focused on creating a knowledge-based society that is able to compete with all other economies on a global scale .
With its Youth on the Move initiative , the EU 2020 strategy has given young people a key role , with the aim of meeting the five main targets by 2020 : employment , research and innovation , climate and energy , education and reduction of poverty .
These targets are ambitious , given that the current situation is so unstable and forces young people to live in a perpetual state of uncertainty , far removed from the encouraging prospect of a stable job in the future and of their place in society .
It will be impossible to consolidate the spirit of European citizenship , and to unlock the potential that young people represent , unless the tools available offer the resources that are needed for things to work well .
Member States should refrain from adopting austerity measures that involve making cuts to the educational system and employment .
Instead , they should focus on establishing platforms that involve both employers and workers , universities , businesses and local and regional organisations , in order to offer opportunities in the educational and professional training sector , and to ensure that there is good mobility and that qualifications are recognised .
I voted in favour of this report .
Young people have suffered particularly badly from the crisis , and the average youth unemployment rate in the EU is over 20 % , twice the average for adults , while in some Member States , it exceeds 40 % .
Owing to the economic crisis , Member States are cutting investment in education and training , directly affecting young people 's future prospects and the future of the EU .
Investing in education is , without doubt , essential for sustainable growth and development and , even in times of economic crisis , financing youth programmes and education should not be regarded as a cost to be met now , but rather as an investment in the future of Europe .
I feel that the Youth on the Move initiative provided for in the Europe 2020 strategy can contribute towards strengthening the existing education , mobility and employment programmes for young people and encouraging Member States to achieve the targets of the EU 2020 strategy .
I voted for the Zver report .
At the moment , too many young people are failing to utilise fully their potential in education and vocational training .
These problems require harmonised action at EU level so that young people are better prepared for the labour market .
We need policies which will cover the steps that young people have to take when making the transition from education to employment .
I feel that it is vital for young people and the various youth organisations to be involved in the decision-making process .
This will help reinforce their sense of belonging and of making an active contribution to a youth strategy .
The key objective of the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative must be to increase European cohesion .
The EU must deploy its own financial instruments to help young people , by using the European Investment Bank and European Investment Fund more effectively .
The Youth on the Move initiative is part of the Europe 2020 strategy .
It introduces 28 measures aimed at better adapting teaching and training systems to the needs of young people , encouraging them to make use of EU aid to study or take part in a training course in another country .
This initiative aims to increase youth mobility by aiming to ensure that all young people in the EU have the opportunity to study abroad by 2020 .
This report , which merited my vote in favour , warns of a series of situations worthy of particular attention .
In order to avoid this initiative existing simply as a concept , it is necessary that the Member States commit to it both in terms of financial support and its implementation , and it is also important that an EU budget is adopted for it .
It is essential to overcome practical barriers and obstacles to mobility , and additional mechanisms should be put in place to ensure that people with disabilities are provided with the same opportunities as anyone else .
The mobility of students in secondary education is no less important , and programmes such as Comenius should be better promoted in the Member States .
Although the European youth unemployment figures are extremely worrying - in January 2011 , the unemployment rate among under-25s in the EU rose to 20.6 % - the report on the 2020 strategy 's flagship initiative , ' Youth on the Move ' , calls on Member States to increase their investment in education , training and mobility .
Policies relating to young people , whether they concern early , continuing or vocational education and training , must be seen as an investment , not a cost .
Putting the emphasis on human capital is essential for the future of our European societies .
Highlighting the synergies between the different agents involved , developing young people 's independence , taking action to stop young people leaving education early , reasserting the importance of vocational training and apprenticeships , adopting a binding European quality framework for training schemes : these are the kinds of good ideas that it is important for us to air now at national level .
This is because the success of the 2020 strategy will depend on the initiative and the political will of the States responsible for implementing it , as these policies largely remain within national competences .
Youth on the Move ( YoM ) is one of the flagship initiatives of the Europe 2020 strategy for the promotion of smart , sustainable and inclusive economic growth .
YoM outlines key courses of action for increasing young people 's education and training by means of mobility , and thus for facilitating their entry into the labour market .
According to recent figures , 14.4 % of young Europeans aged between 18 and 24 years dropped out of school before completing their secondary education , and less than one third of the European Union 's population have a higher education qualification , compared with around 40 % in the United States and 50 % in Japan .
It is essential that young people are able to develop the skills and abilities that will enable them to enter the labour market and to make an active contribution to the Union 's growth
I therefore wholeheartedly endorse and encourage the initiative that aims to reduce the school drop-out rate to 10 % , and to increase the percentage of people with post-secondary education from 31 % to 40 % by 2020 .
Lastly , I believe that high quality education and training are indispensable for meeting the demands of the modern labour market .
I supported this report because of the need to promote a framework for the improvement of education and training systems in Europe .
The Youth on the Move initiative has to be a political initiative to promote education , mobility and employment programmes for today 's youth and as an incentive for Member States to attain the aims of the Europe 2020 strategy .
I applaud the rapporteur 's vision regarding the investment that needs to be made in the future of young Europeans .
Learning mobility , as well as improving European students ' chances of finding a first job , promotes increased European identity and citizenship , and consequently increases young people 's involvement in the Union 's democratic processes .
That said , I support the efforts towards guaranteeing the quality and accessibility of learning mobility , and I would highlight the rapporteur 's mention of the importance of encouraging more Member States to sign up to the Commission 's Quality Charter for Mobility .
in writing . - Youth on the Move is a fantastic initiative , and I strongly support the group in giving it my full support .
The report refers to the ' Youth on the Move ' programme , which allows young people and youth organisations to do more at European level ( seminars , meetings , trips ) and to take an active part in debates on policies relating to young people , with financial assistance from the EU .
The positive points in the report include frequent references to the importance of access to education , opposition to cutbacks in spending on education and training and a call for increased funding for them so that , all other things being equal , everyone will be able to take part in this programme .
It also gives young people from neighbouring countries the opportunity to take part and highlights the need to oppose discrimination in the workplace .
Huge importance is attached to a pragmatic system of internships which will allow everyone to earn a decent wage and access social insurance , so that they do not replace real jobs .
However , as there are certain points in the report which are typical of the Bologna policy on education , to which I am opposed , in that it refers to the need to formulate programmes in keeping with the ' needs of the market ' , which I consider may jeopardise the nature of the programme , I abstained .
Young people are currently one of the groups hit hardest by the global economic and financial crisis .
The EU and the Member States have an obligation to support specific , effective measures that enable the transition to be made to the labour market , through better education , training and mobility .
The Youth on the Move initiative is in response to this very aspiration , offering answers to the challenges faced by young people and helping them to be successful in the knowledge economy .
In the face of unacceptable youth unemployment figures , I believe that the quality of education and training , adequate integration into the labour market , and a strong commitment to youth mobility , are key to exploiting the potential of all young people and to achieving the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Moreover , although this initiative focuses on employment as the end result , it does not ignore issues linked to education , to youth participation , to active citizenship , to mobility , to language learning and to a whole series of skills that are essential to the area of non-formal education today .
I am voting for the tabled report , and I call for robust financing for the initiative , which is indispensable to sustainable growth .
The ' Youth on the Move ' initiative is an important point of reference for young European citizens .
In financial terms first and foremost , as it represents another boost to European projects for the mobility of young students and improves European schools , stimulating research and debate about the significance of a united Europe and showing what it can offer .
The contribution of ' Youth on the Move ' to the debate on the definition of a European cultural model is no less important .
Cooperation between the various institutes and learning in the various disciplines , which are taught differently in the various countries depending also on the political awareness of the ruling classes , also represents a key contribution to the definition of a European identity .
We must ensure that through our young people , these identities are truly European and not allow the only educational model for our young people in the future to be the American one , although this has , of course , been an important point of reference until now .
The European Union has all the tools it requires for offering the world its values and ideas of how it wants and will want its children to grow up .
Young people are , to a large extent , characterised by their dynamism , by their enormous generosity , and by an enormous capacity for learning and assimilation .
A Europe with a future , and one aiming to be increasingly competitive and dynamic , needs this important capital .
The ' Youth on the Move ' programme included in the Europe 2020 strategy is therefore an important collection of programmes to support the youngest people , with objectives that are ambitious but very clear , in which I see myself and in which I hope the people at whom it is aimed will participate significantly .
This initiative advocates the need to give more young people improved access to the labour market , which is a very relevant goal given the level that youth unemployment is reaching in a number of Member States .
I would also stress the attention given to the importance of mobility of young Europeans , during both their education and their working lives .
This education in a variety of cultures and places will provide an education that is more complete and richer , whilst contributing to building a real feeling of ' European ownership ' , which will help to cement the concept of European citizenship included in the Treaties .
To support and strengthen these measures , I am voting for this report .
Student mobility programmes such as Erasmus , Erasmus Mundus and Comenius are attracting more and more candidates .
However , there are still practical obstacles to mobility , especially for obtaining visas and medical papers in different languages , for transferring grants abroad , and for the recognition of qualifications gained in another Member State .
In 2004 , when the Erasmus Mundus exchange programme was launched , with the help of a large majority in this Parliament , I got the European Commission to agree to take the necessary measures to ensure quality in this programme .
A ' European Quality Charter for Mobility ' was even created .
Only , seven years later , the same obstacles are still there .
That is why the European Parliament has wanted to reiterate how much increased investments in education and training are needed .
The opening of European mobility programmes to all young people , irrespective of their course or social background , is crucial in order to give them better access to the labour market .
It is time for the Member States to genuinely commit in order to guarantee high quality training for all young Europeans .
Since young people are the future of Europe , and since it would be irresponsible not to make them a priority when they are experiencing an unemployment rate of around 20 % , I enthusiastically supported the Zver report on improving education and training systems in Europe .
For a number of students , confronted with ever higher demands on the part of employers , entering the labour market is often a genuine ordeal .
That is why the European Parliament has very warmly welcomed the proposals in the ' Youth on the Move ' report : increasing investment in higher education , developing international mobility programmes , recognising informally acquired competences , combating early school-leaving and supporting young people in entering the labour market .
Commitment to education and training to improve young Europeans ' qualifications is a key objective of the Europe 2020 strategy , and an instrument that I consider essential to combating unemployment and encouraging entrepreneurship .
I therefore welcome the Youth on the Move initiative , in particular , its aspect of supporting and encouraging student mobility , and of recognising qualifications , as well as the importance ascribed to non-formal and informal education , which are often as important as formal learning or even more so .
If Europe wants to successfully achieve the ambitious objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , which place particular stress on innovation , research and training , it will have to invest in better qualified young people , opting for forms of education that are more geared towards future incorporation into the labour market and paying particular attention to knowledge that really prepares young people for the future .
This report is on the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative , which will eventually be , it is hoped , a framework for improving education and training systems .
This is one of the seven flagship initiatives of the Europe 2020 strategy , whose interlinked priorities are smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
This initiative comprises 28 key actions and concrete measures to increase the education and training of young people through mobility and employability , working towards the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy to reduce the school drop-out rate to below 10 % , to increase the level of tertiary education from 31 % to 40 % by 2020 , and to reduce unemployment - youth unemployment in particular - that is currently at around 21 % .
Therefore , and as I am an advocate of the youth training scheme ' Your first EURES job ' , I could not agree more with the proposals outlined in the report , and I voted for it , aware that the EU should continue , and strengthen , all measures in support of our young people .
That is the only way we will achieve a Europe that is stronger and more founded on solidarity and inclusiveness .
The subject matter of this report and its scope mean that it inevitably ends up tackling important issues , in some cases correctly , in others , incorrectly or very insufficiently ; it is contradictory in some places .
It mentions , specifically in the recitals , important issues like the decline of public investment in higher education , the increase in fees and the consequent widening social gap , but this issue is not properly taken up in the body of the resolution .
It also mentions the problems many young people have in taking part in mobility programmes for financial reasons , the problem of high drop-out rates from school , and of unemployment and insecure jobs amongst young people .
This makes its contradictions more obvious : by endorsing the objectives of the so-called Europe 2020 strategy , it ends up advocating the path that leads to the problems it identifies , of unsecure jobs and unemployment for young people .
On the one hand , it advocates the end of discrimination against young people in the workplace .
On the other hand , its mention of work experience placements implicitly opens the door to a different status for these workers , and it is wrong as regards ' protection arrangements for atypical and insecure jobs ' .
For these reasons , we abstained from the final vote .
It is not enough to express interesting principles if you do not take reality into account .
A quality education from the earliest years of life is necessary to ensure the development of the human being and of societies .
However , funds for quality public education are increasingly short , and students are faced with a lack of grants , unemployed families and dropping out of their studies , as is happening in Portugal with the restrictive policies that are being practised .
The reality , then , is a sharp divestment in these areas .
In the name of the crisis , there is a retreat of the state that , here too , threatens its social role and has the result of exacerbating inequalities in access to education , to knowledge and to culture .
The result is the multiplication and deepening of social inequalities .
The reality in Member States such as Portugal is the closure of thousands of schools , increasing youth unemployment and reducing the job security of thousands of teachers , as well as the chronic underfunding of the state higher education system and the increased cost of attending it .
The reality is that budgets for culture are being slashed to penury levels .
The most serious aspect of all this is that the situation will be exacerbated if the aggressive programme of intervention drawn up by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and European Commission is implemented .
The Youth on the Move programme is an initiative that is central to the EU 2020 strategy .
The aims of the Youth on the Move programme are to encourage higher education in the Union , to improve the quality of education and training , and to promote student mobility by improving the effectiveness of existing European programmes .
This report adds a key element to a European policy that must aim to provide young Europeans with the tools to be more competitive on a labour market that has become increasingly globalised .
Focusing on student mobility has to be the first step in giving more employment opportunities to our young people .
Unfortunately , the figures on youth employment in many Member States must be a cause for concern and reflection .
Supporting young people by encouraging dialogue between the European institutions and youth organisations is a good start , but it cannot be considered the ultimate aim .
We should be able to listen to them and to give them credibility and trust .
Only this way will we be able to create a Europe which the new generations will see as an opportunity and not as a millstone .
in writing . - I voted for the Zver report .
In order for the EU 2020 ' Youth on the Move ' ( YoM ) flagship initiative to be successful , EU Institutions must create a pragmatic , comprehensive and wide-ranging policy supported by all Member States which focuses on connecting the areas of vocational education , professional qualifications , lifelong learning and apprenticeship to the labour market so as to ensure that each Member State will truly take ownership of the EU 's education system .
YoM is about making the transition from learning and training into the labour market easier for Europe 's young people .
One of the goals of this policy initiative is to reduce the number of early school leavers and increase the proportion of people with tertiary education qualifications , the reason being that early school leaving runs counter to the dynamics and needs of the labour market and is also in direct conflict with Europe 's economic and social sustainability in general .
Consequently , all labour market players , including those from the professional sectors , businesses , trade unions , ministries and public employment services , should engage in a structured dialogue on how to guarantee professional integration of the young , promote formal / informal training and ultimately develop an education system in the EU which is able to provide career security for our young people .
This report once again shows how important it is for European development to promote the mobility of our young people in all fields .
The alignment of study programmes and corresponding mutual recognition must be achieved in all areas of training and education , in particular , in manual trades , where there is a lot of ground to make up .
There should also be more checking by the competent educational authorities in the countries concerned of whether additional barriers need to be removed where these have been built up at the administration level or at the level of the trade associations .
Mobility on the part of apprentices also leads to better recognition of many trades and impedes social dumping , as there is a progressive scale that means that , for the same level of training , the same pay is awarded .
Popular common sense says that ' travel broadens the mind ' .
It is from this perspective that I support the idea , defended in the Zver report , that the funding of young people 's education and mobility is an investment in Europe 's future , not an additional burden on the budget , this despite the current difficult economic situation .
What is more , someone 's social background or financial situation should not restrict their accessing the opportunities of travelling abroad .
Similarly , disability should not be an obstacle either , and that is why additional funding should be set aside for young people with disabilities .
Finally , legally binding rights should be established in order to prevent the casual jobs and exploitation to which young trainees could fall victim .
I voted in favour of this document because it recognises that it is essential to overcome practical obstacles and barriers to mobility and further promote recognition of time spent abroad and of qualifications from other EU countries .
Moreover , it acknowledges that people with disabilities face even more barriers to mobility than those who are not disabled and additional mechanisms should be put in place to ensure they are provided with the same opportunities as anyone else .
Furthermore , students with families ( e.g. with children ) should also be afforded additional support to overcome the unique challenges they will face in participating in educational mobility .
Quality mobility is key to achieving intercultural learning , personal development and multilingualism for young people .
The focus is on employment as an end result and , indeed , employment is a problem of education , but also of youth participation and active citizenship .
Therefore , the existing programmes should continue to focus on active citizenship and the development of key competences , non-formal education and the promotion of European civil society .
In order to avoid this new strategy from simply existing as a concept , it is essential that the Member States commit to it both in terms of financial support and its national implementation in their respective countries , and that an EU budget is adopted for it .
Member States should see this as a long-term investment , not only in young people 's education , but in the future prosperity of their individual countries and of the EU as a whole .
My support for the ' Youth on the Move ' programme goes without saying and is based on principle .
However , we have tried to suggest additions to the Commission 's proposal , which we regarded as necessary .
Indeed , in the report adopted without any problem in the Committee on Culture and Education and during the European Parliament plenary session , we stressed how important it is for Member States to be involved in the implementation process and to be monitored by the European Commission .
We also called for successful programmes , such as Lifelong Learning , to receive more funding in the new multiannual financial framework , and for better coordination between programmes .
The appropriate attention should be focused on young people , who are at the heart of this umbrella programme , and jobs and opportunities for affirmation should be created for them because they are the European citizens on whom we will be depending in the future .
In a Europe that looks to the future , thinking about young people must be a priority .
Allowing them to follow the most suitable educational pathway , to make it easy for them to learn foreign languages , to approach the world of work equipped with the appropriate skills , or perhaps to enter a new educational or working environment , means building a future for all the countries of the European Union through the energies of university students and young workers , who come together in the same economic and cultural melting pot .
Today , more than ever , I believe in one Europe - a hotbed of ideas and projects - which is why I voted in favour of the report by Mr Zver .
In terms of the EU 2020 strategy , creating a network of knowledge and opportunities , not just for young people but also for teachers and for all those who work in education and training , means supplying oxygen to those energies that we must unleash , using the mobility of our young people , who must learn to live in the Europe of the future .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of Milan Zver 's report ' Youth on the Move - a framework for improving Europe 's education and training systems ' .
Throughout this report , I think that it is important to support the various programmes that have been introduced at European level to facilitate youth mobility , which are beneficial both in terms of acquiring new knowledge and competences and in terms of developing a genuine European citizenship .
At European level , it is important that , beyond 2013 , we increase the credits allocated to European mobility programmes , such as Erasmus and Leonardo da Vinci , and make them permanent so more young people can benefit from them - not just students , but also trainees , young professionals and young farmers .
I also think that it is necessary to move towards greater recognition of qualifications obtained through all the various types of apprenticeship , non-formal or informal , given the competences that can be acquired in this way .
Finally , I want to stress that one of the key ways of combating youth unemployment is to keep adapting educational and vocational training systems to the constantly evolving needs of the labour market .
The question of education and training systems is currently taking on a completely different and a new significance than was the case , for example , a decade or more ago .
In different parts of Europe , we are faced with levels of education which are not the same , so the need to improve the situation in this area seems beyond question .
It is important that young people have the chance to play an active role in the world of work , and also in civil society in its broadest sense .
I myself am strongly involved in and support work related both to Youth in Action and the European Voluntary Service , which is one of the five operational actions of ' Youth in Action ' .
Therefore , I think it is important for the European Parliament to be able to continue to support similar measures .
At the present time , we must not forget young people .
They should be given the chance to develop and they should be helped , so that they can acquire new skills in an economy which is becoming increasingly international .
Youth on the Move is not only an opportunity for young people to become active and to get into work , but is , above all , a way for them to overcome their own limitations and weaknesses , and is a chance to develop .
This is why I endorsed Mr Zver 's report .
Thank you .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Youth on the Move ( YoM ) is one of seven flagship initiatives contained in the Commission 's Europe 2020 strategy to promote smart , sustainable and inclusive economic growth .
YoM comprises 28 key actions and concrete measures to increase the education and training of young people through mobility and ease their transition from education into the labour market .
This is particularly important today as young people , being one of the social groups hit hardest by the global financial crisis and simultaneously having had the smallest role in causing it , must be supported in entering the labour market in order to secure their own futures , as well as to bolster the economy .
Young people are tomorrow 's decision makers , and it is vital that they are able to develop the competences , skills and knowledge today that will allow them actively to contribute to the growth and sustained future of the European Union over the coming years and achieve the goals set out in the EU 's growth strategy .
In the context of the Europe 2020 strategy , young people 's knowledge and skills are essential if the objectives of smart , inclusive and sustainable growth are to be achieved .
As such , youth has a key role to play in achieving the five EU headline targets for 2020 : employment , research and innovation , climate and energy , education , and the fight against poverty .
The ' Youth on the Move ' flagship initiative of the Europe 2020 strategy aims to enhance the attractiveness of higher education in Europe , the overall quality of all levels of education and training and student and worker mobility through the more effective use of existing European programmes .
It is therefore essential to vote for this initiative , so that in the future , we will have young people who are increasingly qualified and prepared to realise the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
The ' Youth on the Move ' initiative emphasises mobility for learning purposes , but it is also vital to ensure that the teaching young people receive meets the needs of the labour market and , as a result , it is vital to give them the skills and knowledge they will need .
Young people are , unfortunately , one of the social groups worst hit by the global financial crisis and should be given assistance to enter the labour market and to be able to shape their own future and support the economy .
Education and training are key factors for greater prosperity and greater social cohesion in Europe .
Student mobility is clearly a central component of the Europe 2020 strategy .
It offers many opportunities for students ' intellectual emancipation , for combating early school leaving , unemployment and poverty , as well as for the development of international cooperation in higher education but also in vocational education and training .
Moreover , student mobility is one of the major challenges of European integration .
Nonetheless , this mobility should take place with financial resources that measure up to ambitions and with the removal of the practical obstacles to this mobility .
The effects of the global economic crisis were drastic for young people , in particular , right around the world , but also within the EU .
Youth unemployment within the EU has reached a high of 21 % .
This is compounded by the fact that 15 % of these young people dropped out of school and thus lack any qualifications for the labour market .
The EU has a target of reducing this rate to 10 % by 2020 and increasing the proportion of people with a qualification from a university or technical college from 31 % to 40 % .
In order to be able to achieve these targets , there must be EU-wide recognition of education and training courses and qualifications .
This is also the only way that greater mobility of our young people can be achieved , something which is also intended to help them become acquainted with new cultures and societies so that they also have the option of making a success of themselves beyond their home country in years to come .
For that reason , barriers that are still in place need to be removed and procedures simplified , while existing programmes need to be expanded and promoted .
I abstained in the vote , as I believe that there has been no discussion of how to bring about mutual recognition of qualifications obtained through qualitatively differing methods of education and training .
This especially applies to the skilled trades , for which there is no uniform standard across Europe against which qualifications can be measured .
For young people in particular , there were grave consequences of the global economic crisis , namely , serious rises in the youth unemployment and school drop-out rates .
Young people often find themselves with no prospects .
Against this backdrop , it is important to increase the mobility of young people in the EU so that , where necessary , they will have more chance of finding work on another labour market .
The basis for this is the mutual recognition of qualifications and courses of education and training .
I abstained from the vote on this report as it fails to propose any tangible solutions to the issue of how mutual recognition is to take place where , of course , in many fields , there are qualitatively highly differing methods of education and training .
European Union Member States are facing a high rate of youth unemployment .
In some countries , it is even touching 21 % .
That is double the average unemployment rate for adults .
I voted in favour of this report because it provides guidelines on how to improve young people 's education and reduce the youth unemployment rate .
I agree with the report 's provision that it is very important to focus on the creation of new programmes that would allow young people to combine work with studies .
This is crucial for students who are seeking an education , but who have to support themselves financially .
One of the programme 's key objectives is to reduce the number of people leaving school early , which increases the risk of future exclusion from both employment and society .
We must increase support for people with disabilities and young people with children , so that they can participate in mobility programmes and take advantage of this opportunity to strike a study-work-life balance .
Access to mobility programmes should be possible not only for university students , but also for young people with a low level of qualifications and school pupils .
It is also vital for young people to gain more practical knowledge and experience through high quality compulsory traineeships .
The emblematic initiative ' Youth on the Move ' is one of the seven flagship initiatives included in the European Commission 's EU 2020 strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
It focuses on the mobility of students , but its added value lies in the fact that it also anticipates education that corresponds to the needs of the labour market and provides the skills and knowledge needed .
However , this initiative needs to be combined with the report entitled ' An EU strategy for Youth ' , which was adopted by the European Parliament in 2010 and which seeks to set out a new , strong , European strategy for the next ten years , so that , when it comes to youth issues , Europe can develop a single policy framework .
Moreover , in order to ensure that it does not remain a simple pronouncement , the responsibility generally lies with the Member States and it is a pity that the recent national reform programmes do not tally with the objectives set in the EU 2020 strategy , despite the fact that we all recognise that investment in research and education is a long-term investment with a good return which clearly reaches forward into the future prosperity of European citizens .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report is on establishing a framework for improving Europe 's education and training systems .
This measure is one of the key actions of the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative , which is part of the European Commission 's Europe 2020 strategy to promote smart , sustainable and inclusive economic growth .
It aims , through concrete measures , to promote the education and training of young people through mobility , and through facilitating their transition from education to the labour market .
This is a very current issue given that young people , as one of the social groups most affected by the global financial crisis and one of the groups least involved in causing this situation , must be supported in terms of labour market access in order to safeguard their future and to boost the economy .
Indeed , mobility itself may function as an engine for the transition from education to the labour market .
I therefore consider ensuring the provision of high quality education and simultaneously making it accessible to all young people to be among the most important aspects of mobility in education .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - The Youth on The Move ( YoM ) programme represents an opportunity to unleash the potential of young people and enable them to contribute to smart , sustainable and inclusive growth in the EU .
The YoM initiative supports lifelong learning and the ' new skills for new jobs ' initiative of the European Commission .
YoM looks to improve higher level education within Europe and to improve student and worker mobility through existing European programmes .
Part of the EU 2020 strategy states that ' by 2020 , all young people in Europe must have the possibility to spend a part of their educational pathway in other Member States ' .
The current economic crisis has badly affected young people , and youth unemployment rates in the EU are twice the average for adults .
This is one of the most difficult challenges facing Europe and it is vital that Member States do not respond by cutting investment in education .
We need to ensure that our young people have opportunities to learn and to move abroad to continue their learning if they wish , as investing in education today will better equip the EU to face challenges in the future .
At a time when young people are being hit particularly hard by the effects of the global financial crisis , everything must be done to ensure that they can develop the skills , qualifications and knowledge that will enable them to contribute actively to the growth and sustainable future of the European Union .
The ' Youth on the Move ' initiative is one of the seven flagship initiatives of the European Commission 's Europe 2020 strategy for promoting smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
It comprises 28 key actions and concrete measures to increase the education and training of young people through mobility and ease their transition from education into the labour market .
It is therefore very important that conditions be created to ensure its effective implementation and the achievement of the objectives to which this initiative is devoted .
The recession is hitting European youth full in the face : whereas one young person out of five is out of work , 40 % of young workers are on a part-time contract .
In this context , I lend my support to Mr Zver 's report , which proposes a series of recommendations aimed at improving the education and professional training systems for young people .
While we need to act in order to encourage the take-up of higher education by the greatest number and actively fight against early school leaving - only 31 % of Europeans have a university degree , compared to 40 % in the United States and 50 % in Japan - we also need to make sure graduates are employable .
This report contains several proposals to achieve this : improving communication between businesses and universities , making university programmes and structures more relevant to specific needs in the labour market , introducing into study programmes periods of high quality work experience that are fairly remunerated and respect the young person 's social rights .
in writing . - Funding for programmes such as Lifelong Learning ( Erasmus , Leonardo da Vinci , Comenius , Grundtvig ) , Marie Curie , Erasmus Mundus and Youth in Action must increase .
The committee proposes to create international cooperation networks at universities , making use of virtual mobility .
Mobility programmes should be available to vocational students , teachers and youth workers .
We call for EU-wide recognition of school , vocational and university qualifications .
We also insist on the importance of learning two non-native languages from an early age , including those of neighbouring countries .
Finally , we call for extra support for disabled young people , young parents and those who wish to get back into education .
I voted in favour of this report because it highlights how important it is for young people to have a multidisciplinary education , as far as the targets of the EU 2020 strategy are concerned .
In this framework , it becomes necessary to encourage young people to continue their studies to university level .
In fact , entering the world of work too early increases the risk of unemployment later on , and of a comparatively low standard of living .
This could therefore have high economic and social costs , as well as a negative impact on the Union 's sustainable economic growth and on its ability to improve its global competitiveness in the future .
For the same reasons , I believe that a multicultural , multilingual and practical education is essential for shaping the citizens of the future , especially if this is achieved by means of mobility schemes such as Youth on the Move .
Currently , too many young people are dropping out of school too early and not enough are taking advantage of higher education .
This undermines the stock of qualifications that Europe will need in the future .
Youth on the Move seeks to increase opportunities for educational mobility for all Europe 's young people by 2020 , enabling them to progress more smoothly from education to the world of work , by giving them an education that prepares them for the demands of the market .
For these reasons , we should make schools and businesses more aware of the need to create networks , improving young people 's practical knowledge by means of apprenticeships .
This initiative is centred around young people , but we must not forget those young people with disabilities , who must be guaranteed the same opportunities for study and work .
I endorsed the report on improving Europe 's education and training systems .
I am in favour of extending the operation of all educational programmes for young people .
Besides Youth on the Move , funding and political support should be given to programmes such as Erasmus , Leonardo da Vinci , Comenius , Grundtvig , Youth in Action and Marie Curie .
These programmes have achieved great success in the Union .
They involve a huge number of young people from various backgrounds ( the number of Polish students who went abroad on an Erasmus grant between 1998 and 2010 was 93 807 ) and they contribute to the development of young people 's potential and the creation of a strong European civil society .
They are very efficient programmes , where the cost for a single participant is very low but the funds are used by a high number of people .
Promoting the mobility of young people requires practical barriers to be overcome .
Around one third of the students who have participated in the Erasmus programme have experienced difficulties arising from uncertainties over the system of education in other countries and the lack of correspondence and continuity between the subjects of study in the home country and abroad .
The recognition of time spent abroad and of qualifications from other EU Member States should be promoted .
Other matters which also need to be resolved include difficulties with obtaining visas , medical papers being in various languages and the portability of scholarships when going abroad .
People with disabilities face even more barriers to mobility than those who are not disabled .
Additional mechanisms should be put in place to ensure they are provided with the same opportunities as anyone else .
The ' Youth on the Move ' initiative is one of the seven that are part of the Europe 2020 strategy .
It is made up of 28 key actions to improve the education and training of young people through mobility and bringing them into the labour market .
The relevance of this report in austere times for Europe is proven by the increasing proportion of young people who are unemployed in the various Member States , with the conclusion being that this age group is one of the hardest hit by the global financial crisis .
As such , I consider it essential to apply measures to reduce early school drop-out rates , to increase the number of graduates , and to make education and professional training more attractive .
Commitment to education should not be seen as a cost , but rather as an investment in the future .
I therefore believe that it is important to reinvest in already existing mobility and education / training programmes , and to establish European-level minimum conditions for work experience placements , since these should not be seen as employment , but rather as the acquisition of practical skills .
Finally , I would stress the need to coordinate measures with national , regional and local authorities , in the form of partnerships , in order to make the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative a success .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Milan Zver on the Commission initiative ' Youth on the Move ' .
Its objective is to ensure that measures are taken to combat the problems of early school leavers and to provide incentives to increase the number of Europeans with a higher education .
Reference is also made to the huge importance of ensuring that the education provided meets the needs of the labour market and provides the skills and knowledge needed by the young people of Europe .
Creating a secure future for our young people is a subject close to my heart .
Sadly , the prospects for young people in Lithuania today are rather bleak .
In Lithuania , youth unemployment stands at 34 % , almost 14 % higher than the EU average .
According to EU statistics , there are only two EU Member States where youth unemployment rates are higher than in Lithuania .
Even those young Lithuanians who manage to find work are often forced to accept unfavourable employment contracts .
We must make more effort to implement three key priorities : firstly , to promote entrepreneurship ; secondly , to improve youth employability by adapting education to the needs of the labour market ; and thirdly , to give young people an opportunity to play a more active role in society .
The Youth on the Move initiative is one of the platforms which may help to promote youth employment .
Work and study abroad may be beneficial to Lithuania 's young people and our country .
However , it is much more important to give our young people a European future in Lithuania .
It is possible to ensure this by developing contacts between young people and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
This would promote the need for young people among SME employers and would encourage young people to work for SMEs .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution because ensuring that young citizens can travel and work throughout the EU is essential in order to boost competitiveness .
EU 2020 objectives can be achieved by investing in programmes that provide young people with a wide variety of opportunities and promote labour market mobility .
By increasing the funding for projects that support youth mobility and increasing the focus on the cooperation between business and education , young Europeans will have a better chance of career success .
It is also vitally important to support young people who are no longer in mainstream education by encouraging non-formal and informal education .
I abstained when voting on this report , despite the critical look it takes at European policies , particularly those carried out by the Member States , aimed at young people .
This report contains a number of positive proposals , in particular , regarding the participation of young people in the process of drafting European youth policies , the enhancement of informal and non-formal education , and an improvement to trainees ' status .
However , beyond the stated desire to encourage the Member States to step up their investments in the area of education independently from the financial crisis , the report is in the spirit of the policies aimed at liberalising higher education and subordinating it to the sole immediate interests of the market and thus of companies .
Some provisions , such as the introduction of a European system of loans for students , in partnership with the EIB , are even worrying given the objectives set in terms of access to university by the greatest number .
By voting in favour of the ' Youth on the Move ' programme - a framework aimed at improving education and training systems in Europe - I wanted to support an ambitious action plan in favour of young Europeans .
The Treaty of Lisbon has broadened the EU 's remit in the area of youth .
In this respect , the European Parliament had a duty to reaffirm its support for this policy .
Indeed , European identity only has meaning if it is endorsed by our young fellow citizens .
Europe must take on this responsibility by proposing a concerted strategy in the areas of training and employment .
I welcome the ambition of this report , which sets at 2 % of GDP the investment in higher education .
At a time when the European labour market has been affected by a major economic crisis , training must be our priority so that we are able to offer future prospects to young people and make accessing employment easier for them .
The development of European exchanges ( Erasmus , Leonardo da Vinci ) will also be beneficial for young people , since these programmes offer real added value on a professional and personal level .
Learning a new language and discovering another culture are both assets that should be accessible to all .
Promoting smart , sustainable and inclusive economic growth necessarily implies the best possible opportunities and chances in education and training .
Mobility whilst studying , facilitated by EU programmes such as Erasmus , Leonardo da Vinci and Comenius , promotes not only the aspects of formal education , but also personal and social development .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
I am voting for this proposal , as pre-school end early-childhood education are provided in accordance with various traditions throughout the European continent , making the creation of a universal European system for early-childhood education difficult .
It is easier to implement common goals and objectives in order to consistently harmonise practices .
Children 's early learning lays the foundations for their successful lifelong learning .
Children in their earliest years are particularly curious , receptive and willing to learn , with this being the age at which the ability to speak and express themselves is formed .
It is also at this age that the foundations for children 's future educational and professional careers are laid , as well as for the development of their social skills .
This period is critical for cognitive , sensory and motor development , affective and personal development and language acquisition , and also provides the basis for lifelong learning .
I should stress that the early development of healthy lifestyle behaviours , such as good nutritional habits and appropriate and balanced exercise , can have a profound impact on physical and mental development .
The European Union is made up of a rich and diverse mix of educational traditions , with early years education provided in a number of different ways across the continent .
I voted for this report which , although it acknowledges that an EU approach to early childhood education services would be difficult to implement , encourages the development of a single European framework comprising shared goals and values , including shared entitlements and structures .
I voted in favour of this report .
Children 's early learning lays the foundation for successful lifelong learning , which is central to the achievement of the Europe 2020 targets , which seek to create a knowledge-based society , raise employment , lower school drop out rates and reduce poverty .
However , these objectives cannot be achieved unless all children are given an adequate start in life .
The Member States must increase investment , ensuring accessible and quality early years education for all children , which can help reduce early school leaving , combat the educational disadvantages faced by children from vulnerable social and cultural groups and reduce the resulting social inequalities .
I voted for Mrs Honeyball 's report .
Europe is made up of a rich and diverse mix of educational traditions .
This necessitates the development of a European framework comprising shared goals , entitlements and values .
The Europe 2020 strategy must be focused on creating an inclusive society by increasing employment .
Lowering school dropout rates and reducing poverty can only be achieved by providing all children with a future paving the way to a better life .
I wish to remind you of the importance of early years activities , especially foreign languages .
Cultural activities are a vital source of enrichment for children by promoting intercultural dialogue .
Last but not least , the variety of families ' differing living conditions must be taken into account .
In this regard , we need flexible and innovative early childhood education programmes .
Early childhood education is fundamental .
I totally support the aims previously set out to provide childcare services by 2010 to at least 90 % of children between three years of age and the mandatory school age and to at least 33 % of children under three years of age .
Europe is made up of a rich and diverse mix of educational traditions , with early years education provided in a host of different ways across the whole continent .
There is a clear variation between Member States in terms of the quality and supply of their provision , rates of enrolment , approach to services , governance of services , and so on .
For this reason , a ' one size fits all ' approach at EU level to early childhood education and care ( ECEC ) services is not suitable and would be difficult to implement .
However , the development of a common framework of shared goals and values , including shared entitlements and structures , is more than recommended .
The period from birth to the age of three is critical for children 's brain development , physical and cognitive development , and for language acquisition .
Furthermore , these early years lay the foundations for children 's lifelong learning .
Poor families are less likely to use ECEC services , especially in privatised markets , compared with other groups .
This is worrying , given that disadvantaged children are those who have been shown to benefit most from access to services of this kind .
in writing . - This is a very pertinent issue , and I strongly support the group line in focusing on Early Years Learning .
Building strong foundations in terms of education and care during children 's early lives , as a complement to the central role of the family , constitutes the crucial basis for success in terms of learning throughout their lives , social integration , personal development and future employability .
Children 's earliest experiences are the basis for all subsequent learning , conditioning children 's development , and helping reverse potential situations of disadvantage and transmission of poverty from generation to generation .
By giving children the ability to realise their potential , quality education and care structures can contribute significantly to achieving two of the major objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy : reducing early school drop-out rates below 10 % and lifting at least 20 million people out of poverty and social exclusion .
I therefore support the development of a European structure composed of common goals and values that includes shared rights and structures , which will contribute to coming up with adequate early-childhood education and care services ; these must benefit from effective and equitable financing .
It is well known that children in their earliest years are particularly curious , receptive and willing to learn , with this being the age at which the ability to speak and express themselves is formed , along with social skills .
Since children 's early learning lays the foundations for their successful lifelong learning , a key process for achieving the Europe 2020 objectives , I think that the Europe 2020 strategy , which seeks to create an inclusive society by increasing employment , lowering school dropout rates and reducing poverty , cannot be achieved unless all children are given an adequate start in life .
I voted for the report on Early Years Learning as I argue that parental leave is an essential component during the early years of a child 's life .
Responding adequately to children 's needs necessitates the defence of improved maternity , paternity and parental leave conditions , thereby putting both parents at the very heart of their children 's education .
As I said regarding the Youth on the Move initiative , education is an essential instrument in ensuring the realisation of the ambitious objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
That is not just true for secondary and tertiary education , but also for the first things learned , from the very beginning , in early childhood .
It is essential that European children have access to a quality education that prepares them in a challenging way for the basic skills of speaking their mother tongue , of mathematics and of one or more foreign languages .
This education must also enable them to acquire the methods of work necessary to successfully pursue their studies , and to become as productive as we want young Europeans to be .
This report is on early years learning in the European Union .
We all know that you build a house from the foundations up .
When the foundations are bad , there is a risk that the building might not be sound and could collapse .
The same is true for education .
An education with a robust , quality foundation guarantees Europeans a better future .
Intervention during a child 's early years is crucial to its future , improving health and family relations , and enabling it to get a better job in the future .
Early years learning is a very important issue that has not received the attention it is due from lawmakers .
The preparation of human resources is more important than the quality of buildings .
The quality of the professional services and the qualifications of those working in the sector need to be improved .
I agree that values and parameters common to all the Member States should be set out , so I voted for this report .
This report focuses on the crucial issue of early years learning , and its positive impact in terms of cognitive , motor , behavioural , affective and emotional development .
These are determinants of children 's healthy and balanced mental and physical growth .
Some important issues are acknowledged in the report 's preamble , such as the link between a poor and disadvantaged background and low educational achievement , or the major difficulties many households have in reconciling family obligations with deregulated working hours and insecure jobs .
Regrettably , these issues are forgotten further on : the proposals necessary to correct these situations are not made .
As something essential to social development and combating poverty , early years learning should be founded on the guarantee of a pre-school network that is public , free , high quality and accessible to all .
Education cannot be at the mercy of the logic of the market .
In order to provide the prospect of a better life and future , a public network of crèches needs to be created , covering a wider geographic area and more open to models of teaching that encourage the development of the child and of society , and that combat social segregation and discrimination .
The issue of early years learning is the key subject of this report , which focuses on its positive impact in terms of cognitive , motor , behavioural , affective and emotional development .
These are determinants of children 's healthy and balanced mental and physical growth .
Some important issues are acknowledged in the report 's preamble , such as the link between a poor and disadvantaged background and low educational achievement , or the major difficulties many households have in reconciling family obligations with deregulated working hours and insecure jobs .
Regrettably , these issues are forgotten further on : the proposals necessary to correct these situations are not made .
As something essential to social development and combating poverty , early years learning should be founded on the guarantee of a pre-school network that is public , free , high quality and accessible to all .
Education cannot be at the mercy of the logic of the market .
In order to provide the prospect of a better life and future , a public network of crèches and nursery schools needs to be created , covering a wider geographic area and more open to models of teaching that encourage the development of the child and of society , and that combat social segregation and discrimination .
Both the submitted reports and the debate so far consider culture and education from a variety of perspectives .
I consider the development of creativity right from birth to be a very important aspect .
The report by Mrs Honeyball points out that , from many perspectives , it is best to make a start with education in the early years .
According to the human rights documents currently in force in Europe , children are fully and actively engaged citizens with their own rights .
They have enormous creative potential .
The period from birth to the age of three has a fundamental effect on the development of thinking , and on physical and cognitive development .
The foundations for lifelong learning , which play an important role in achieving the Lisbon targets , are also laid in this early period .
Poor families , often Roma , usually have worse access to services in the area of early childhood education and care .
It is all the more sad for the fact that children from disadvantaged families should benefit the most from the opportunity to use these services .
We must ensure that education and care are available to all families and children , regardless of their origin or the financial situation of the parents .
I very much dislike resorting to pragmatic , financial arguments in questions of human rights , and in matters that should be obvious and as independent as possible of the economic situation .
However , it must be said that a decision not to invest in this area will actually give rise to costs that may not be immediately noticeable .
From time to time , this House produces reports whose titles leave no doubt about the fact that there will inevitably be nonsense in them !
The Honeyball report is one of them .
Pass over the usual paragraphs on the fate awaiting migrants , compulsory multiculturalism and the promotion of everything in the minority .
The gem in this report is at paragraph 14 .
Fathers and mothers are thus ' equal partners in early childhood education and care ' .
Did I read ' partners ' ?
Is it not their responsibility , first and foremost , to educate their own children ?
However it is true that , at paragraph 16 , the rapporteur is calling for investment in parental education programmes .
From the outset , parents are thus seen as incapable , irresponsible and childish .
This impression is confirmed by paragraph 27 , which stresses that , in the absence of adequate services for early childhood , our young children run the risk of falling into criminality and antisocial behaviour .
Your trust in the human being is astounding and one wonders how mankind has been able to manage without you until now .
No , really , the best favour you can do for our dear little darlings is to leave them in peace !
I voted in favour of this document , because the early years of childhood ( pre-school ) are critical for cognitive , sensory and motor development and language acquisition , and also lay the foundations for lifelong learning .
It is therefore recommended that Member States consider introducing a compulsory year of nursery schooling before the start of schooling proper .
The introduction and retention of innovative pedagogical models for language teaching is encouraged , particularly multilingual crèches and nursery schools which meet the objective set in Barcelona in 2002 , which includes the learning of regional , minority and neighbouring languages .
In an unstable economic climate , we must not neglect to invest substantially in early childhood education and care ( ECEC ) services .
I feel that the Member States should devote appropriate resources to ECEC services .
Quality early years education can help reduce early school leaving , combat educational disadvantages faced by children from disadvantaged social and cultural groups and reduce the resulting social inequalities , all of which affect society as a whole .
Young people from vulnerable social groups are particularly at risk .
We must care for future generations and the quality of their education .
While we are aware that it is both inadequate and difficult to create an approach to the care and education of young children , it is important to look at the possible implementation of what is needed and the levels at which action needs to be taken .
By young children we mean children up to the age of six .
This is a delicate stage in children 's cerebral , physical and cognitive development , as well as their language .
These are the years when children learn and become familiar with the tools that as adults they will use to elaborate cognitive mechanisms that are different , but necessary for their future education and work .
I therefore voted for this report because we are talking about protecting childhood , the right of thousands of children to go to school or to be given the best possible conditions in which to learn .
This subject is the key to the future and the development of the European Union , and for this reason we need to take the action described by Mrs Honeyball , who I would like to congratulate for her work .
It is of paramount importance that we support a standard policy and approach between EU Member States with regard to children 's early years learning .
Access to this kind of learning has important economic , social and cultural benefits .
Apart from having a standard EU-level policy , it is particularly important to ensure good collaboration and coordination locally between the various institutions and ministries involved in youth education programmes .
These programmes are very important as during their early years , children have a particular ability to learn things , and they can determine children 's entire educational and professional paths .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
In 2002 , the Barcelona European Council called for EU members to provide childcare to at least 90 % of children between the age of three years and mandatory school age by 2010 , and to at least 33 % of children under three .
These targets signalled a labour market approach to ECEC services , based on the need identified at the time of increasing the numbers of women in work .
While it is vital to give due attention to the link between ECEC services and equality of opportunities for women , these targets are clearly problematic , and outmoded , since they fail to take into account many of the crucial qualitative aspects of a strong early education policy .
ECEC centres are not simply a place to ' park ' children so that women can work ; they are of utmost importance in contributing to the well-being of children and improving their future life chances
The early years period of childhood deserves great attention and a careful approach in terms of the external environment .
We must always remember that this is a unique and unrepeatable period of development , which forms the personality of the individual .
There should be a more intensive focus on it , and it should never be undervalued or temporarily neglected in any way .
Adults should be a role model , thus helping children to acquire different types of knowledge and ability .
It is the period of development of the personality , when the learning process is , so to speak , unforced and natural , and the surrounding world is noticed , accepted and absorbed to the greatest possible extent .
Although child development involves a number of contributing factors , whether genetically based or from the external environment , it is particularly the effect of the parents and the immediate circle of people that forms the personality .
I would also like to mention and to emphasise that we should not forget in this context adequate and all-round focused movement activity aimed precisely at this age group , which can assist in the development of the individual and contribute to better health in the future .
Early years education has far-reaching implications on children 's future development and their chances of success later on .
Investments made during this period reduce the costs incurred later relating to health matters , the crime rate and antisocial behaviour .
Nevertheless , the provision of early years education is unequal across the European Union .
However , it would be difficult to implement a ' one size fits all ' approach .
I think that we need to focus rather on establishing a common framework with clearly defined objectives and values .
According to the target set in 2002 , EU Member States must offer early years education to 90 % of children between the age of three and the compulsory school age .
There is also an economic rationale behind this , given the rise in the number of women on the labour market .
It is vital for us to involve the minority population in early years education programmes , especially the Roma population , which is often disadvantaged .
We must also ensure that a sufficient number of childcare places are available so as to avoid long waiting times for enrolling children in this kind of institution .
We must not overlook either the qualifications of the staff working with young children , who have a crucial impact on the quality of education provided .
Ensuring all young children receive equal quality care and education , whatever their age and social condition , is a minimum .
The Honeyball report , despite being otherwise commendable , dares not ask for this minimum .
That is deplorable .
However , since this text has no legislative consequence , it can be approved in spite of its serious shortcomings .
It is agreed that early years learning lays the foundation for successful lifelong learning .
Children in their earliest years are particularly curious , receptive and willing to learn , and important skills such as the ability to speak and express oneself , as well as social skills , are formed at this age .
It is also at this age that the foundations for the child 's future educational and occupational career are laid .
We must therefore make the necessary efforts so that young children have access to the same learning conditions , without discrimination of any kind .
The learning undertaken by children during early childhood is the foundation of the success of their lifelong learning .
This learning sharpens the child 's intelligence , stimulates his or her natural curiosity and develops his or her motor skills , puts a premium on manual work and is good for mental health .
It socialises the child , develops his or her mother tongue and accustoms him or her to the sounds of a foreign language .
It leads him or her to the rudiments of reading and of arithmetic .
Nevertheless , early childhood education and care takes on different forms in the various countries of the European Union , depending on the country 's interpretation of childhood .
Early childhood education and care generally receives less attention and investment than the other education levels .
All parents and children should be able to use education and care services , regardless of family origin or financial situation .
Parents should , for their part , be the full partners of these services .
The pre-school period being the most important for the child 's emotional and social development , those working with these children should have the required qualifications .
In all cases , the prime concern must be to consider the higher needs and interests of the child .
Early childhood is unquestionably of fundamental importance to the physical , mental and social development of children , and we must therefore understand that the return on investment in pre-school education is the guarantee of future growth .
Apart from this , many studies have already shown that funding used in this way brings considerable economic and social advantages in the medium and long-term .
The best and most natural way to secure support of this kind is to protect the family as the basic unit of society .
Parents are the first and most important teachers of their children , and thus the legal framework should not contain provisions which penalise families for personally caring for their children , particularly in the early years .
Although this agenda is within the exclusive competence of Member States , it is more than desirable for the Union , through its coordinating role , to contribute towards improving the situation in the Member States .
For the reasons mentioned , I support the position of the rapporteur .
The motion for a resolution by the UK socialist MEP , Mary Honeyball , seeks to reduce the role of the mother and father of a child to that of equal partners in the State education system .
Verbatim , the report states ( in paragraph 14 ) that ' [ The European Parliament ] stresses that parents , both mothers and fathers , are equal partners in ECEC [ early childhood education and care ] ; ( ... ) ' .
This wording expresses deep mistrust of the family and the globally recognised right of parents to care for and bring up their children .
This is in direct contrast to the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany , which states that ' The care and upbringing of children is the natural right of parents and a duty primarily incumbent upon them ' ( Article 6 ( 2 ) ) .
This report is a manifestation of the EU 's anti-family agenda and seeks to meddle in the social competences of the Member States .
Moreover , the motion recommends the introduction of a compulsory year of nursery schooling before the start of schooling proper , as well as developing and improving early years educational establishments In so doing , the report confirms the EU 's ' Barcelona objectives ' which , as once upon a time in the Soviet Union , provide quotas for the state takeover of children 's upbringing .
The well-being of the child is not central to this motion .
The freedom of choice of parents in relation to bringing up their children is to be undermined .
I therefore voted against this report .
The first three years of a child 's life are crucial for the development of the brain and for language learning .
Language acquisition is the basis of logical thinking and contextual understanding .
Without a certain level of language acquisition , further learning is scarcely possible , as the language deficits can only be overcome with great difficulty with increasing age .
The report observes that most immigrant children in the EU are educated without adequate linguistic knowledge .
At the same time , it declares that migrant families ( and minorities such as the Roma ) make much less use of the early years education offered than other families .
We cannot allow it to be the case that the level of our schools continues to fall and fall because so many pupils quite simply cannot understand the teaching .
Every child - migrant or not - must have mastered the national language by the time they enter school to a degree that enables them to follow the teaching taking place there .
The report offers no meaningful attempts to solve this problem .
Instead , it leans towards complete nannying of the parents and a state takeover of child-rearing .
I therefore voted against this report .
The diversity in European educational traditions and , hence , in pre-school education , are both acceptable and welcome , as they reflect the different European cultural , historical and social aspects of a country .
However , there is room to develop a European framework with common coordination denominators , common objectives and values and common rights and structures .
Moreover , if the Barcelona objective stipulating that EU Member States must provide childcare for at least 90 % of children aged between three and the age at which compulsory education starts , and to at least 33 % of children under the age of three , is to be achieved , we need agreement between the Member States and , where possible , exchanges of information and best practices , especially by Member States with highly developed structures in pre-school education to partners with less experience in that sector .
Early childhood care and education are made available in different ways throughout the European Union , with different definitions of ' quality ' , which depend significantly on the cultural values of each country and region , and on their interpretation of ' childhood ' .
Early childhood learning is the basis for successful lifelong learning , which is central to achieving the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy .
I therefore voted in favour of the report on early childhood learning which sets out common EU objectives in pursuing the aims of the Barcelona European Council : specifically , that , by 2010 , the provision of childcare should be ensured for at least 90 % of children between three years old and the mandatory school age , and for 33 % of children under the age of three .
Like the rapporteur , I call for even more ambitious goals .
This is a child-centred approach which recognises that the early childhood years are crucial to cognitive , sensory and physical development , as well as to emotional and personal development , and for language acquisition , and that they also constitute the basis for learning throughout life .
in writing . - Access to Early Years Learning is of vital importance to young children in terms of their receptiveness and willingness to learn , especially since important skills such as the ability to speak and develop social skills are formed at a young age .
As well as this , there is a clear link between a poor and disadvantaged background and low educational achievement .
Therefore , we should ensure that the targets set at the Barcelona European Council of providing childcare to at least 90 % of children between the age of three and the mandatory school age , and to at least 33 % of children under the age of three , are met .
Addressing educational disadvantage by providing high quality early childhood education and targeted support , and by promoting inclusive education , are absolutely necessary to create a truly inclusive society .
Early childhood is a time crucial to children 's development of a series of cognitive and social capacities , the effects of which will be felt throughout their lives .
The aptitude for multilingualism should be remembered , for example .
However , this stage of learning has been minimally studied , and little importance has been attached to it in the context of education overall .
This has a negative impact on , for example , those raised in less well-off families , in which the cognitive development of children is often less stimulated .
We therefore urgently need to increase early childhood education and care ( ECEC ) .
That is why I voted for this resolution .
The first years of childhood are crucial for children 's cerebral , physical , emotional and personal development , for acquiring language , and are the foundation of lifelong learning .
Entirely in favour of the implementation of a common European approach for early childhood learning - while respecting the diversity of each Member State 's approach - I lend my support to Mrs Honeyball 's report , which recommends establishing a European framework for ECEC services , highlighting common values and objectives .
Given the critical role played by parents as ' main educators ' , the report seeks to improve parental leave - which should be long enough to enable parents to play their leading role in educating their children in the early stages of their life - and encourages the Member States to invest in parental education programmes as well as provide other forms of assistance to parents who require additional help .
Of course , this requires additional investment from all 27 Member States , and I am asking them to allocate adequate resources to ECEC services .
For me , education must be a political priority .
in writing . - Early learning in the EU follows a long and finely differentiated tradition in the different Member States .
It seems important to define a framework of values and common objectives which could be set as a goal in all Member States , while the sharing of good practices remains the key to providing high quality service , with the child 's needs and care at the core of all endeavours .
The report focuses its recommendations on the balance between the role of Member States and the Commission ; the necessity to make early school a broader service inspired by good practices in Member States where ' maternelles ' and kindergartens are a right of parents ; inclusion of all children , whatever their social background ( ' notion of public service ' ) ; caring for migrant children and their integration in early schools ; the inclusion of arts and all tools to enhance the children 's creativity ; training of educators for better intercultural skills ; gender parity while working in structures for early learning ; and creation of new and well qualified jobs .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that , within the European Union , individual Member States still deliver early education very differently from one another .
We need to develop a common European framework that includes targets and shared values , as well as shared entitlements and structures .
Children must be fully considered real , active citizens who are able to form and express their own opinions , enjoy certain rights , and who possess their own creative potential .
In this framework , once again , parents must be considered the centre of their upbringing .
The natural family is the ideal place for a child to grow up and develop , and , once again , allowing parents an adequate amount of leave may help to reduce the demand for places in childcare facilities .
We must therefore take concrete action , since very few Member States currently offer periods of paid leave that are long enough to meet families ' requirements .
A child 's early years learning is extremely important to its proper development and is the key to creating a stable and economically dynamic society .
Investing in early years learning has long-term benefits for the future of our children .
The efforts made in this report to examine the issue at European and national level are important .
I welcome the call for more European research in this sector , the need to identify and exchange best practices at European level , and for proper use to be made of the structural funds and programmes in this direction .
The European Council of Barcelona in 2002 had set the target of introducing , by 2010 , support centres for at least 90 % of children between three years of age and school age , and for at least 33 % of children aged under three .
Unfortunately , we are still a long way from these figures .
Yet the number and quality of support centres for childcare are crucial for Europe .
Indeed , from a very young age , caring for children , their learning and gradual awareness of their environment are of decisive importance for the next phase of their education .
In addition , their parents do not have to give up their professional aspirations because of a lack of childcare support centres .
Nonetheless , this report reminds us , and rightly so , that each country has a different conception of childcare and different models thereof , which we should respect .
With this report , the European Parliament is proving that the EU , far from wanting to sacrifice childcare in the name of free competition of services , lets Member States choose their educational model .
in writing . - Early years learning profoundly affects the life-chances of every individual .
In particular , development in the early years of healthy lifestyle behaviours , such as good dietary habits and regular exercise , are key determinants of physical and mental health .
Like all policies which work on the principle that ' prevention is better than cure ' , early years learning is also relatively cost-effective to deliver .
I congratulate the rapporteur on a comprehensive report which raises some key points for further discussion and action .
I endorsed the report on Early Years Learning in the EU .
I would like to call particular attention to three matters .
Firstly , the early years of childhood are critical for cognitive , sensory and motor development .
Therefore , when developing comprehensive early years policies and programmes , the Member States must take account of a number of different issues which affect childhood development , such as migration , gender equality and employment .
Secondly , centres at local level should develop action programmes which take account of differing life situations and needs in the area of early childhood education and care .
They must also have sufficient autonomy to enable the operation of programmes for children with uniqueness and creativity .
The next matter is the need to improve early childhood education and care services .
We should start here by developing mechanisms for evaluating provision and ensuring that quality standards are met .
My final observation concerns the need for universal access to childcare centres .
Data provided by the Polish Ministry of Education show that in Poland , there are 8 400 public nursery schools and 1 600 private ones , and that there are around 1.6 million children aged from three to six years .
This means there are nursery school places for barely 40 % of these children , while there are 352 crèches in Poland , which are used by only 2 % of children under three .
This problem is one of the main reasons for the high unemployment among women .
in writing . - I support this report as it is important to recognise the valuable contribution of early childhood education and how crucial it is to achieving the EU 's 2020 strategy .
It is a fact that there is diversity between the education systems in the EU Member States and , as a result , the research and exchanges of best practices which this particular report advocates will , in my opinion , bring about important results in terms of improving a child 's early years learning in the EU .
In fact , due to the child-oriented approach of universal rather than targeted services , the involvement of parents and the improved integration of services , I voted in favour of Mrs Honeyball 's report on early learning in Europe .
I voted in favour of this report , which recommends public policies in favour of childcare that are a step in the right direction .
While taking into account the diversity of systems and traditions in terms of education and childcare in the EU , the report emphasises an approach centred on the needs of the child and on the impact that learning from a very young age will have on the child 's schooling and personal development .
It presents in a clear manner the issues concerning childcare and equal access to education for all and , in particular , the children of immigrant families - whatever their situation - and particularly stresses these issues within the context of fighting against poverty and social exclusion .
It also highlights the need to provide stable employment , quality training and fair social protection to staff working in childcare .
I voted in favour of this report .
The rapporteur correctly placed the needs of the child at the heart of this report .
It is not surprising that the report should conclude that a single European solution is not possible .
All the same , we do need a ' framework ' at EU level in order to be able to coordinate early years learning with other EU-level programmes such as lifelong learning .
I am voting for the proposal of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , which considers the Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( FPA ) to have seemingly contributed to the overexploitation of some stocks , particularly octopus , and has therefore reduced fishing opportunities for Mauritanian fishermen and given the EU industry a competitive advantage as a result of subsidised access fees for EU vessels , I welcome the European Commission 's proposal to open negotiations on the renewal of the protocol of the FPA between the EU and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania .
I also welcome the European Commission 's proposal to introduce a human rights clause into the agreement , and call on the Commission to establish a dialogue with Mauritania aiming to help the country further develop a responsible fisheries policy which meets both conservation requirements and its objective to promote the economic development of fisheries resources .
Moreover , I call on the Commission to take urgent measures to reduce by-catch by European vessels fishing in Mauritanian waters .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
The protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement with the Islamic Republic of Mauritania expires on 31 July 2012 .
The Mauritanian fisheries sector is extremely important to Mauritania 's economy , representing 10 % of the country 's GDP and 35-50 % of its exports .
Therefore , the Commission intends to launch negotiations regarding its renewal .
I welcome the renewal of this protocol , but it should include many important issues .
Evaluations have concluded that most stocks in Mauritania are either fully exploited or over-exploited and , therefore , the Commission must discuss with Mauritania the development of long-term fisheries management plans that would include all fishery allocations by the Mauritanian authorities , to both their national fleets and third-country fleets , in order to ensure the sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources .
I am voting in favour of this resolution because it is necessary to begin negotiations for the renewal of the protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania .
These negotiations will allow EU-flagged vessels to fish in Mauritanian waters based on a principle of surplus stocks as described in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
It is also necessary that Mauritania ratify the relevant international fisheries instruments .
I support the resolution on the renewal of the protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EU and Mauritania because the agreement is based on the principle of surplus , which is compatible with the EU 's sustainable fishing strategy .
Mauritania is also one of the poorest countries in the world , classified as a Heavily Indebted Poor Country .
For this reason , this agreement is extremely important to Mauritania because the European Union is paying for this access , thereby providing additional income separate from financial aid .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to open negotiations on the renewal of the protocol between the EU and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania .
This country has been losing value added because of the lack of opportunity to exploit its own fisheries resources .
It is therefore necessary to study all the economic implications of this , particularly in economic and social terms .
It is essential to bear in mind that the fisheries sector is extremely important to the Mauritanian economy , and that this is one of the poorest countries in Africa , which is financially dependent on foreign aid and subject to severe political instability .
I voted for the motion for a resolution tabled today by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) because of all these factors , which require the special attention given to them in this legislative text .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on the EU-Mauritania Fisheries Partnership Agreement because I consider the renewal of the agreement , which should include a human rights clause , positive .
I think it is necessary to continue helping the country further to develop a responsible fisheries policy which meets requirements regarding conservation of fisheries resources .
As the protocol to the current Fisheries Partnership Agreement will expire in the future , the Commission 's intention to open renewal negotiations with the other party is logical .
Mauritania is a poor country that is highly dependent on the sector , so keeping the agreement with the European Union could be beneficial to both signatories .
Like the rapporteur , I think that there is a need for rigorous assessment of the current state of stocks and of the various types of fish in Mauritanian waters .
This joint motion for a resolution of the European Parliament concerns renewal of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania , which expires on 31 July 2012 .
The European Commission , aware of the importance of the renewal of this partnership , and under the terms of the Council mandate , has launched a process aimed at renewing this protocol , fully pursuant to Article 218 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The current agreement with Mauritania has been contributing to the economic development of Mauritania , where the fisheries sector is one of the fundamental pillars of the economy , representing almost 10 % of gross domestic product ( GDP ) , 29 % of national budget revenue and almost 50 % of exports .
However , it is also essential to the European Union , and to its fishing fleets in particular .
I agree with this proposal , for which I voted , but I think that catch control needs to be scientifically monitored , navigation control systems need to be modernised and wrecks need to be cleaned .
Surveillance should also be strengthened and illegal vessels impounded .
This resolution raises a number of important issues , in line with our longstanding questions , criticisms and suggestions as regards fisheries partnership agreements ; in particular , their serious lack of success with their development cooperation objectives .
We welcome the fact that a number of the points from our resolution have been included in this joint motion for a resolution .
Amongst the most important aspects , we would stress : the need for a comprehensive and detailed evaluation of the reasons for the inadequate achievement of the objectives regarding development cooperation and the various lines of support for the fisheries sector in Mauritania ; the advocating of support for the fastest possible construction of adequate facilities for landing fish along Mauritania 's central and southern coastlines , including Nouakchott , so that fish caught in Mauritanian waters can be landed at national ports rather than outside the country , as is often the case at present ; and that fisheries agreements between the EU and third countries should be preceded by a wide-ranging debate in the countries concerned , allowing participation by the public , civil society organisations and national parliaments , thereby promoting greater democracy and transparency .
We have a number of concerns about fisheries partnership agreements as they are currently undertaken and applied by the EU .
In particular , their level of achievement of development cooperation objectives is clearly inadequate .
We advocate the principle , enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , that access conceded to the EU must relate to quantities that Mauritania 's fleet is unable to catch .
Apart from that , the resolution includes several positive aspects , such as :
that fisheries agreements between the EU and third countries should be preceded by a wide-ranging debate in the countries concerned , allowing participation by the public , civil society organisations and national parliaments , thereby promoting greater democracy and transparency ;
that financial support for the Mauritanian multiannual fisheries programme must be in line with Mauritania 's needs for sustainable fisheries development ;
the need for a comprehensive and detailed evaluation of the reasons for the inadequate achievement of the objectives regarding development cooperation and the various lines of support for the fisheries sector in Mauritania .
For these reasons , we voted in favour .
This resolution was adopted following the proposal by the Commission aimed at opening the negotiations on renewing the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and Mauritania .
Voting in favour of a resolution is unfortunately the only thing Parliament can do to be heard in the negotiations of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( FPA ) .
At present , Parliament can only have its say once the negotiations have ended , which leaves it no other option than to either approve these agreements or reject their ratification , thus leaving it very little room for manoeuvre .
Now , the Treaties stipulate that Parliament be ' immediately and fully informed at all stages of the procedure ' .
Hence , it is essential and legitimate that we ask to be associated with the European Commission and Council during these negotiations .
This issue is not new and raises regular questioning of the European Commission by the members of the Committee on Fisheries .
It is regrettable that we are not able to make binding our opinion on our priorities relating to the provision of European funds to the countries concerned , in spite of the fact that Parliament has the power to exercise financial control .
I voted in favour of this document because Mauritania is one of the poorest countries in Africa , classified as a Heavily Indebted Poor Country , and financially dependent on foreign aid , and has been characterised by considerable political instability .
The current protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( FPA ) with the Islamic Republic of Mauritania expires on 31 July 2012 , and the Commission intends to launch negotiations regarding its renewal , for which it has received a prescriptive mandate from the Council .
The European Parliament welcomes the Commission 's proposal to open negotiations on the renewal of the protocol between the EU and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania , while underlining that it should be maintained only if it is mutually beneficial , adjusted appropriately and implemented correctly .
The European Parliament also welcomes the Commission 's proposal to introduce a human rights clause into this agreement .
in writing . - I voted for this report and in doing so , urge the Commission to ensure that fishing activities that fall under the Fisheries Partnership Agreement meet the same sustainability criteria as fishing activities in EU waters .
The report , moreover , calls on Mauritanian authorities and the Commission to ensure that strict sustainability criteria are respected by all vessels exercising fishing activities in Mauritanian waters ( either from the EU , Mauritania or third countries ) .
The current protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement with Mauritania expires on 31 July 2012 and needs to be renegotiated so that EU-flagged vessels can continue fishing in Mauritanian waters .
As such , it is a good opportunity for us to improve the already existing agreement .
Improvements in terms of infrastructure and of building adequate facilities for unloading fish along Mauritania 's central and southern coasts must be promoted , to enable the EU fleet to operate more efficiently , thereby facilitating the flow of investment and increasing this agreement 's impact on the local economy .
As regards the actual catches , they should be limited to surpluses and to those stocks that cannot be caught by Mauritania 's fishing fleet , so that the environmental equilibrium can be maintained and the activity can remain sustainable over the years .
Fisheries agreements with third countries should ensure a fair balance between economic interests and promoting sustainable fishing .
As such , it is important that the EU use the fisheries agreements it establishes to ensure best practices are followed in other countries , fully respecting the key principles of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
Combating illegal fishing , creating jobs , reducing poverty levels in third countries and supplying the EU market with quality products for its consumers are the key objectives that should be guaranteed under this agreement with Mauritania .
We also urgently need to ensure that Mauritania requires that third countries with which it establishes other agreements should respect the same rules followed by vessels flying the EU flag , so preventing competitive inequalities that put the EU fleet at a disadvantage .
in writing . - With this , the EP firstly welcomes the Commission 's proposal to open negotiations on the renewal of the protocol between the EU and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania , while underlining that it should be maintained only if it is mutually beneficial , adjusted appropriately and implemented correctly ; secondly , welcomes the Commission 's proposal to introduce a human rights clause ; thirdly , insists that any and all access negotiated for EU-flagged vessels to fish in Mauritanian waters must be based on the principle of surplus stocks as described in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea ; emphasises , in particular , that there must be a rigorous assessment of all stocks for which access is sought or which are likely to be caught by the EU fleet as by-catch ; stresses that any access granted to the EU must relate to those resources which are unable to be caught by the Mauritanian fleet ; emphasises that , should effort reductions be necessary , those third-country ( EU and other ) fleets causing the most environmental damage must be the first to make reductions ;
The Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania must be considered a strategic document of understanding that is very important as far as relations between the EU and Africa are concerned .
Today , therefore , we must implement a new protocol which is in line with the undertaking that European countries signed up to in 2002 and which is able to ensure a sustainable fishing practice that will also contribute to development in the countries concerned .
The priority is now to resume the negotiations that were already under way , but based on new premises and involving States which have , until now , been excluded from these negotiations .
We must also review some requests that go back to the negotiations on the original agreement , in which Mauritania , for example , made a last minute request for further biological rest periods on fishing in May and June , in addition to that already agreed for the months of September and October .
I voted for this proposal because I believe that it will benefit the EU , since a properly functioning procurement market is of essential importance in order to foster the Single Market , to stimulate innovation , and to promote a higher level of protection of the environment and climate , as well as social inclusion , throughout the EU .
Public procurement is of crucial relevance , serving as a catalyst for the revitalisation of the EU economy and , accordingly , for employment and welfare .
This is particularly true given the need to overcome the financial and economic crisis , and to protect ourselves against any future crisis .
I agree that a sound and well-considered process of optimising the legal framework for public procurement is of vital importance for the welfare of EU citizens , for EU consumers and businesses , and for national , regional and local public authorities , and thus for the acceptance of the EU as a whole .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
A well-functioning procurement market is particularly important for fostering the integrity of the Single Market and stimulating innovation , and for achieving optimal value for public authorities and tax payers .
This market is a particularly important part of the EU economy and has huge potential , but procurement rules and principles vary across the Member States and prevent companies , particularly small ones , from gaining access to cross-border procurement .
Similar restrictions also exist in terms of access to third-country tenders .
Despite the fact that the EU has opened up its markets , our companies face huge problems if they want to access public sector markets in third countries .
I feel that significant political attention must be given to this issue as a matter of urgency .
The Commission should conduct a detailed analysis of the problems relating to restricted access for EU companies to other countries ' markets and take appropriate action against trading partners which benefit from the openness of the EU market , but do not open up their own markets to EU companies .
Public contracts represent important economic opportunities for companies , are very important in the promotion of the Single Market , stimulate innovation , and promote the protection of the environment and climate , as well as social inclusion .
Public procurement policy should ensure that public money is used as efficiently as possible , and should keep public procurement markets open , thereby contributing to the relaunch of the EU economy , to job creation and to welfare .
Public contracts also play a key role in the Europe 2020 strategy , and are one of the instruments to be used to achieve the proposed goals .
This motion for a resolution calls on the Commission to approach the issue of balanced access to public sector markets and to undertake the revision of public procurement and concessions , so allowing the involvement of the European Parliament , the Member States , and of citizens and businesses .
It also calls on the Commission to give priority to modernisation of public procurement rules .
Equally important is its call for the Commission to go ahead with assessing the problems associated with extraordinary low bids and to propose appropriate solutions .
For all these reasons , I shall be voting in favour of this motion for a resolution .
I voted in favour of this report , not with the aim of putting up protectionist barriers , but because we can no longer have a situation in which the European Union is the only one respecting the rules of the game .
We can no longer ignore social and economic dumping in emerging countries , China in particular , which are winning contracts with rock-bottom prices in the countries of the Union , without regard for social rights and legislation on State aid , whereas the markets of these countries remain inaccessible to European companies .
We can no longer be naïve : the survival of our businesses and our jobs depends on this .
Finally , I am pleased that the amendments submitted by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament concerning respect , in the context of public contracts , for the labour , social and environmental standards in force in the Member States , have largely been adopted .
That demonstrates real awareness and represents a positive and necessary change .
It is now for the Commission to assess this call fully .
Given that public procurement represents millions of euro every year , its economic importance is in no doubt .
For this very reason , although there is a long tradition of EU legislation on such contracts , it will never be going too far to call for better , more effective laws that guarantee the total transparency of procedures ; that prevent all forms of corruption or manipulation of proposals to benefit one candidate ; that put a ceiling in terms of numbers and of value on the number of awards without a call for proposals or without negotiation ; and that guarantee proper competition on the Internal Market between candidate companies , irrespective of their country of origin .
This motion for a resolution of the European Parliament addresses equal access to public sector markets in the EU and in third countries , and the revision of the legal framework of public procurement including concessions .
The EU has adopted a number of documents on this issue : directives 2004 / 18 / EC , 2004 / 17 / EC , 93 / 13 / EC and 2007 / 66 / EC , resolutions ( European Parliament Resolution of 18 May 2010 ) , reports ( Mr Monti , A new strategy for the Single Market - At the service of Europe 's economy and society ) , the European Commission communication ' Towards a Single Market Act For a highly competitive social market economy ' , and the European Commission Green Paper on the modernisation of EU public procurement policy .
In order to overcome the current financial and economic crisis , a perfectly functioning public procurement market is of crucial importance to revitalising the economy and ensuring equitable treatment .
I hereby state that I voted for this resolution as I believe that it is in line with the principle of better law making , and prioritises the modernisation of the rules on public procurement and concessions , which constitutes a significant improvement in EU law .
This is yet another attempt to push through the liberalisation of public procurement .
This is a direction that the EU is doggedly following both at home and in third countries , using free trade agreements .
In all cases , the intention is the same : to prevent countries from protecting their own companies in public procurement , so as to make things easier for the big companies of the powers that also want to use competition , which is seen as the be all and end all , to dominate the awarding of public contracts .
We disagree with this approach .
Nevertheless , we acknowledge that there are important changes to be made in this area .
Therefore , some aspects of the resolution deserve our support , specifically the criticism of the lack ' of transparency with regard to the composition and work of the Commission 's internal advisory committee on public procurement ( ACPP ) and the role and competences of the Advisory Committee on the Opening-Up of Public Procurement ( CCO ) ' .
We also agree with the call for ' the Commission to take steps to ensure that the composition of both this committee and the planned new advisory committee on public / private partnerships is balanced , including trade unionists and representatives of the business community , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and that they work in a transparent manner ' .
With this resolution , the majority in Parliament wants to call for the liberalisation of public procurement on the pretext of relaxing and simplifying the rules and defending small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
Although there could be justification for this in some cases , in the majority of cases , it is not this that is at stake .
What they want is to prevent any country from protecting its own companies in public procurement , just to make things easier for the big companies of the powers that also wish to dominate the awarding of public contracts .
That is why we voted against .
However , there is another aspect of the resolution with which we agree , specifically , the criticism of the lack of transparency with regard to the composition and work of the Commission 's internal advisory committee on public procurement ( ACPP ) and the role and competences of the Advisory Committee on the Opening-Up of Public Procurement ( CCO ) .
We also support the call for the Commission to take steps to ensure that the composition of both this committee and the planned new advisory committee on public / private partnerships is balanced , including trade unionists and representatives of the business community , in particular , SMEs , and that they work in a transparent manner .
It also seems the importance of strengthening anti-corruption mechanisms in the context of the European Union 's commitments in the field of international public procurement should be stressed , as should the need to focus efforts on ensuring transparency and fairness in the use of public funds .
Moreover , we call for the European Parliament to be kept duly informed and receive all available information at every stage and at the end of the process .
Despite the openness of the EU public procurement market , access to third-country public procurement markets is still restricted to a large extent .
In this situation , European businesses do not have equal opportunities for competing for public tenders in other countries of the world .
For example , in 2009 , the Chinese authorities adopted a system of accreditation of innovative local products , which restricted yet further access on the part of international businesses to the Chinese market .
However , it is not only the Chinese market which is a problem , because highly developed economies such as the United States , Japan and Canada also pursue protectionist policies .
This is why I support the call for application of the principle of reciprocity in access to public procurement markets contained in the resolution which was adopted today and which I endorsed in the opinion of the Committee on International Trade , which I drafted .
I would , however , like the future European Commission proposal on the principle of reciprocity to contribute in particular to the opening of the procurement markets of third countries , and not just to restrict access for businesses from third countries to public procurement markets in the European Union , which might have an adverse effect on competitiveness in the Union market .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because a well-functioning procurement market is particularly important for fostering the Single Market and stimulating innovation .
Public procurement is of crucial importance , especially for overcoming the financial and economic crisis and protecting against any future crisis , because it serves as a catalyst for the revitalisation of the EU economy , and consequently employment and welfare .
The specific issue of safeguarding equal treatment and fair competition on public procurement markets in the EU and in third countries urgently needs more political attention , especially given current problems regarding access to public sector markets in third countries .
In my opinion , the Commission should give priority to the modernisation of public procurement rules and dealing with service concessions in such a way as to avoid further fragmentation of EU public procurement law according to the principles of better regulation .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am pleased at today 's adoption of the European Parliament joint resolution on equal access to public sector markets in the EU and in third countries and on the revision of the legal framework of public procurement , including concessions , a resolution of which I was a co-signatory .
The good functioning of public procurement markets is essential for stimulating the Single Market .
It is therefore important to clarify and improve the legislative framework regulating the awarding of public contracts , given their role as a catalyst for relaunching the economy of the Union .
Regarding access to the European Union 's public procurement markets by businesses from third countries , the European Union has a duty to act realistically and pragmatically and , above all , without naivety .
This is not about taking a stand against the opening-up of our markets , but rather the quite legitimate position of advocating mutual access in this area , not by closing our public procurement markets , but by ensuring that our partners outside the European Union open up their markets in an equivalent way and , if necessary , by developing appropriate mechanisms enabling us to achieve this objective of reciprocity and balance .
Equal access to public sector markets in the EU and the revision of the legal framework for public procurement are absolutely essential to boosting the Single Market in the Union and Member States , resulting in social and economic integration at EU level .
Looking at the situation from the perspective of the economic and financial crisis , I think that the strategy proposed in this resolution is a necessity , in particular , the point about achieving greater coherence for the European common external trade policy .
I should emphasise how important this legislative revision is in revitalising and stabilising the European Union 's economy .
in writing . - I supported this resolution as I believe the specific issue of safeguarding equal treatment and fair competition on public procurement markets in the EU and in third countries urgently needs more political attention .
The calling into question of public / public partnerships , the scaling down of standards by public authorities ( who are the guarantors of the general interest , need I remind you ) , the choices of these same public authorities leaning towards more competition ...
These are only a few examples of the wonderful ' progress ' promised by the European Commission 's Green Paper on public procurement .
Not content with endorsing such nonsense , this text makes the fight against any protectionist measure the central piece of its argument . So many policies that I object to .
I shall vote against .
A properly functioning procurement market is of essential importance in order to foster the Single Market , to stimulate innovation , to boost employment , growth and competitiveness , to promote higher levels of environmental and climate protection and protect social rights throughout the EU , and to achieve optimal value for public authorities , citizens and taxpayers .
With the objective of overcoming the financial and economic crisis , and of protecting against any future crisis , public procurement is of crucial relevance , serving as a catalyst for the revitalisation of the EU economy and , accordingly , for employment and welfare in the EU .
Therefore , a sound and properly thought-out process of optimising the legal framework for public procurement is of vital importance for the welfare of EU citizens , EU consumers and businesses , and for national , regional and local authorities .
A properly functioning procurement market is of crucial importance to promoting the Single Market , to stimulating innovation , to promoting a high level of environmental and climate protection , and of social inclusion across the EU , and to achieving the highest possible value for public authorities , citizens and taxpayers .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this European Parliament resolution on equal access to public sector markets in the EU and in third countries , and on the revision of the public procurement legal framework , including concessions .
In this sense , I join the proponents of this resolution in calling on the Commission to prioritise the modernisation of the procurement rules and to address service concessions in order to avoid the further fragmentation of EU law on public procurement , in line with the principles of ' better law making ' .
Public procurement plays a vital role in stimulating the Single Market , promoting innovation , strengthening growth and supporting EU employment and competitiveness .
However , to achieve this , these must operate effectively .
For that to happen , as pointed out by the text of this resolution , which I endorse , it is important that the question of simplification and clarification of the rules for awarding public contracts finds answers quickly .
It also seems essential to me that access to public contracts by SMEs - who account for 99 % of all European businesses and over 100 million jobs - be improved as soon as possible .
Moreover , in order to support their business , I invite the European Commission to implement the principle of reciprocity and to think of new ways of improving access by European companies to public procurement outside the Union , in order to ensure equal conditions for European and foreign companies who are competing for the allocation of public contracts .
in writing . - We finally abstained due to the fact that several EPP and ECR amendments , inadmissible to us , were adopted .
With a view to overcoming the economic and financial crisis , public procurement appears to be a catalyst for the revitalisation of the European economy , and of enterprise , employment and consumer welfare in Europe .
Due to a gradual liberalisation of special sectors ( water , electricity and gas ) , in order to protect the enterprises that operate in these areas , we need a qualification system for clients , aimed at ensuring that the competing enterprises are selected efficiently .
I am in favour of the motion for a resolution , since it is necessary , in a transparent regime , to keep the fragmentation of EU public procurement law in order to achieve the highest possible levels of competitiveness and efficiency , as set out in our targets .
in writing . - Public procurement provides a unique opportunity to channel investment into projects for the common benefit of citizens whilst , at the same time , achieving wider public policy objectives .
I would like to underline the importance of public procurement contracts in promoting environmental standards in buildings and transport , and the potential that this has to improve energy efficiency and therefore reduce carbon emissions , operating costs and air pollution .
I urge the Member States to use public procurement contracts to pursue these objectives , which will have wide-reaching and long-term social , economic and environmental benefits .
A properly functioning procurement market is of essential importance in order to foster the Single Market , and to stimulate innovation and investment .
With a view to overcoming the economic and financial crisis , public procurement is of crucial importance in boosting the EU economy and it contributes to job creation .
The European Union rejects the possibility of implementing protectionist measures , and seeks equal access to public sector markets in the EU and in third countries .
As such , the EU firmly believes in the principle of reciprocity , mutual benefit and proportionality in this area .
To that end , I advocate better coherence between common trade policy and practices in Member States accepting exceptionally low bids from companies whose countries are not signatories to the Agreement on Government Procurement ( GPA ) , to the disadvantage of companies from EU Member States .
I therefore reiterate this House 's call to prioritise the modernisation of public procurement rules in such a way as to avoid its fragmentation and to encourage companies to choose this option .
This vote is important because the Commission has to take the necessary measures to prevent unfair competition and non-reciprocity of access to public contracts in relation to third countries .
This is not about erecting protectionist barriers , but the Union can no longer be the only one to play by the rules .
Indeed , we can no longer ignore the social and economic dumping practised by companies in emerging countries who are winning contracts in countries of the Union , in defiance of social rights and legislation on State subsidies , while , in the meantime , the markets of these countries are closed to European companies .
However we must also not forget that the large industrialised countries , despite signing international agreements , do not play by the rules either !
After years of inaction , the Commission seems intent on acting , and that is necessary : the survival of our companies and jobs depends on it .
Finally , I welcome the adoption of the amendments put forward by the Group of the Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament with regard to compliance , in the context of public procurement , with working , social and environmental standards in force in the Member States .
It is now for the Commission to size up this call .
I am voting for this joint motion for a resolution .
I would highlight the measures I consider necessary : making use of all the possibilities and financial margins available under the EU fisheries budget in order to finance emergency support measures for this sector , thereby enabling it to overcome the difficulties posed by the rise in oil prices ; continued European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) aid to improve the selectivity of fishing gear and to replace engines on safety grounds , to protect the environment and / or fuel economy , above all , for small-scale coastal and traditional fishing ; the drawing up by the Commission of a medium- and long-term plan aimed at improving fuel efficiency in the fisheries ( including aquaculture ) sector ; and calling for the Commission to propose an action plan for coastal regions and islands which have an active fisheries sector to improve fuel efficiency in the fisheries and aquaculture sector .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
The recent rise in oil prices has affected the economic viability of the fisheries sector and European fishermen find themselves in a difficult situation .
Furthermore , owing to the European Union 's high degree of dependency on imports from third countries ( 60 % ) , producers have very little or even no influence on the price levels of fisheries products .
I agree that the ceiling on de minimis aid should be raised from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 per firm for a transitional period of three years , while ensuring that environmental and social sustainability are not undermined and that competition between Member States is not distorted .
I should like to express my deep sympathy with European fishers , whose salaries have been directly affected by an increase in oil prices , which has seriously exacerbated the economic fragility linked to the irregular nature of activity in this sector .
I consider it essential to introduce mechanisms that promote the boosting of prices paid at the production stage , whilst keeping prices paid at the final consumption stage as low as possible .
I am therefore voting for the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which duly emphasises the above points .
in writing . - While it is not a good idea to subsidise the fossil-fuel industry , fishermen across the EU are suffering due to the economic downturn and , unlike other modes of transport , they do not have any real alternative to fossil fuels .
Energy accounts for a significant proportion of the fisheries sector 's operating costs and the recent fuel price increase has caused the situation of the fisheries sector to deteriorate , with a direct impact on production costs in this sector .
In view of these facts , I believe that the European Commission must consider the means required to devise urgently and adopt suitable measures for easing the difficult economic situation which many European fishermen are in , also taking into account the financial difficulties currently facing a number of countries which have large fishing fleets .
The Commission must adopt urgent measures to remedy the difficult economic situation in which many European fishermen find themselves following the rise in oil prices .
In particular , it is about raising the de minimis public subsidy threshold from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 per three-year period and per beneficiary firm .
Beyond this compensation , we must put in place a longer term strategy to enable fishermen , but also professionals in other sectors , such as farmers and road hauliers , to reduce their dependency on fossil fuels .
That is why the Commission must provide incentives , both at European and national level , for investment in new technologies , in order to increase energy efficiency in maritime , land and air transport .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on the European fisheries sector crisis due to the rise in oil prices , as it has affected the economic viability of the fisheries sector , with a direct impact on fishers ' incomes .
Temporary emergency measures are needed that will enable European fishers to overcome their difficult economic situation , but the Commission should also draw up a medium- and long-term plan aimed at improving fuel efficiency in the fisheries sector , including aquaculture .
Fishing is an essential economic activity for the countries of Europe , particularly for maritime countries like mine .
As such , Parliament should be particularly mindful of the conditions affecting professional fishers .
The increasing price of fuel - an unavoidable cost for those involved in fishing - has enormously affected fishers ' incomes .
At a time of savage economic and financial crisis , in which there is little aid available to sustain companies and jobs , I welcome the proposal made in this resolution by my colleagues from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to support EU fishers by increasing the ceiling for de minimis aid from EUR 30 000 to EUR 60 000 per company for a three-year period .
This will enable the fishing industry to face increased operating costs linked to the price of oil .
This joint motion for a resolution of the European Parliament addresses the European fisheries sector crisis due to continually increasing fuel prices , which is having a very significant impact on the sector 's operating costs .
This increase is being felt , above all , by small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) - often family companies - whose workers are starting to see that their jobs are in danger .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this report and hope that the Member States will soon be able to increase aid for fishers , and that the European Union , through the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , will increase its subsidies aimed at improving and modernising vessels and equipment , and will create a fund to which SMEs can turn if they are in trouble .
Support for small-scale fishing is particularly important .
It is positive that Parliament has adopted this resolution .
The significant rise in oil prices has seriously exacerbated the crisis facing the fisheries sector and its economic viability , and has very significantly reduced the already scarce incomes of those working in the sector .
The current sales dynamic does not allow fluctuations in production costs , including oil , to impact on fish prices ; the current import policy contributes to this , amongst other factors .
In many cases , average first-sale prices have been stagnating or dropping for a number of years , and this has not resulted in a decrease in price for fresh fish for end consumers .
The current common market organisation ( CMO ) for fisheries products has not managed to contribute sufficiently to improving first-sale prices or to better distribution of added value across the sector 's value chain .
The economic situation of a large number of companies has deteriorated in recent years , even leading to many of them going out of business .
There is a real risk that thousands of fishing companies could go out of business and thousands of jobs could be lost because of increased oil prices .
Small-scale coastal fishing sectors are particularly vulnerable .
These measures need to be applied .
The fisheries sector is one of the sectors most affected by oil price increases , because fuel is a significant part of the operating cost of the fisherman , estimated at 30-50 % .
I fully support any measures that could be put in place to assist fishermen in this regard , particularly those engaged in small-scale fishing on coasts and islands .
The adoption of a Parliament resolution on the European fisheries sector crisis due to the rise in oil prices is an opportunity for me to remind you how urgent it is for us to come to the aid of fishermen .
In a context where recruitment is becoming more and more difficult , and where the practices that fishermen must adopt continue to become ever more restrictive , the increase in fuel prices makes conditions even more difficult in this crisis-hit sector .
The substantial increase in oil prices is having a strong impact on fishermen 's operational costs , and this caused their revenue to fall between 2008 and 2010 .
As the elected representative of a port town , it is all the more incumbent on me to call on the Commission to authorise an increase in the ceiling of the de minimis aid .
This measure would relieve the pressure on fishermen , thereby enabling them to make a decent living from their work without hindering the replenishment of stocks .
The upcoming reform of the common fisheries policy will have to gain the support of fishermen .
To show them today that the European Union is alert to their needs would be a good start .
I voted in favour of this document because the recent rise in oil prices has affected the economic viability of the fisheries sector and left many fishermen worrying about how to offset these additional costs , as the rise in oil prices is directly affecting fishermen 's incomes .
We need to make use of all the possibilities and financial margins available under the Community fisheries budget in order to finance emergency support measures for the industry , thereby enabling it to overcome the difficulties posed by the rise in fuel prices until such time as other types of measure are implemented .
The European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) should continue to grant aid to improve the selectivity of fishing gear and to replace engines on grounds of safety , environmental protection and / or fuel economy , above all , for small-scale coastal and traditional fishermen .
In my opinion , the Commission must urgently propose investments , at both European and national levels , in new technologies in order to increase the energy efficiency of fishing vessels and so reduce fishermen 's dependency on fossil fuels .
The resolution is an expression of Parliament 's concern for the state of the fisheries sector , the financial condition of fishing firms and the market price of fish .
It is an important sector , and fish is an important part of our diet .
I think Article 3 of the joint motion for a resolution , which expresses the will to increase aid to fishermen , is crucially important .
It is a solution which offers more advantages than the new guarantees proposed for the sector .
I hope the Commission and the Council will give the resolution serious consideration .
in writing . - I voted against this resolution because I do not believe the EU should increase subsidies for the European fisheries sector or any other sector on the basis of a rise in oil prices .
The recent rise in oil prices has affected the economic viability of the fisheries sector and left many fishers worrying about how to offset these additional costs .
We cannot forget that the rise in oil prices is directly affecting fishers ' incomes .
The incomes and wages of people working in the fisheries industry are insecure as a result of several factors , such as the irregular nature of fishing , the marketing approaches employed , and the way in which first-sale prices are set , which means that certain forms of national and EU public aid need to be maintained .
Moreover , the financial and economic crisis is having an impact on industrial sectors and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in particular , and is jeopardising activity and employment in primary and secondary sectors .
As in the past , we must now adopt temporary emergency measures to overcome the difficulties faced by the fisheries sector against the backdrop of rising oil prices .
I voted for the resolution and against all the amendments which were tabled .
New support measures need to be adopted in the fisheries sector , bearing in mind the combination of two factors : on the one hand , the high price of oil and , on the other , the low price of fish at first sale .
Fishing is an important economic sector for the European Union and needs to receive support at a time when the average price of a barrel of oil will remain at USD 80-100 .
The established global economic crisis , exacerbated by the political crisis in the Maghreb and the Middle East , has led to further oil price increases , with the price per barrel exceeding USD 100 .
Given the political instability that has been rocking the Arab world , this figure could still shoot up .
Its energy bill represents the fisheries sector 's most significant operational cost and , unlike other activities , the sector cannot offset the additional cost by increasing production because of the ceilings established by total allowable catches ( TACs ) and quotas .
Despite the diversity of opinions regarding how the sector should be managed , there is a point of agreement which it is important to stress : fishing is extremely important to the European population 's food supply and a source of employment for the majority of the EU 's coastal communities , where there are no other jobs .
In order to ensure the continuity of fishing , and avoid falls in supply and increased unemployment in the sector , the EU must raise the ceiling established by the De Minimis Regulation to closer to EUR 60 000 , as well as adopting other measures capable of alleviating the recent oil price increase .
The cost of fishing is very dependent on the price of oil .
As such , and since the recent rise in oil prices has affected the economic viability of the sector , it is important to adopt emergency measures that will enable European fishers to overcome their difficult economic situation .
The real problem with fishing today is that 70 % of stocks in Europe are overexploited , as a result of the fact that our fleet is clearly oversized .
It is an irresponsible mistake to spend public money to maintain this fleet .
In the framework of the reform of the common fisheries policy , it is necessary more than ever before to restructure the European fishing fleet in order to discontinue the use of ships that use large quantities of fuel and release large amounts of CO2 emissions , and also of fishing gear and practices that clearly destroy the environment , so that we can make headway towards a model that is less energy dependent , less destructive , and more sustainable in environmental terms as well as in social and economic terms .
Awarding more money to this sector to compensate for the rise in oil prices will only be an even greater incentive for fishermen to use high fuel consuming ships , particularly at a time when the increase in these prices is not transitory but clearly structural .
As a result of the deep economic and financial crisis that is affecting the industry and small and medium-sized enterprises , the price of a barrel of oil has increased , and its price is still uncertain because of the risk of political instability in the Arab world .
This crisis has also profoundly affected European sea fishing , because we import 60 % of our fish from third countries .
I support the resolution because I believe it is important to strengthen the security of our energy supply , informing the markets and giving consumers greater guarantees about the state of oil reserves .
I also think it necessary to implement a joint action plan in support of coastal regions active in the fisheries sector .
I was keen to vote in favour of this resolution , which calls on the Commission to take strong measures in support of the fishing industry .
The rise in the price of oil is causing a real crisis in the sector .
This crisis started off as a cyclical one but has now become structural and threatens the economic viability of the industry .
Operating costs have rocketed and are having a serious effect on fishers ' incomes , to such an extent that the whole production sector and all coastal regions are now affected .
Consequently , I welcome the call by our Chamber to introduce greater flexibility in the de minimis subsidy scheme .
Despite a difficult budgetary context , fishermen would not understand if the Union failed to address their concerns .
Furthermore , the resolution calls for special attention to be paid to small-scale coastal fishing and to the regions concerned .
To my mind , this is indispensable since , although the whole sector is being affected , rising energy bills will have a greater impact on traditional fishing than on industrial fishing .
I believe exceptional situations demand exceptional measures .
Therefore , I shall remain alert to the proposals that the Commission will put forward to reassure and support our fishermen .
I am voting in favour of this motion for a resolution of the European Parliament since it expresses its dissatisfaction with the Commission due to the fact that , by the end of 2009 , only 75 % of the total amount of EUR 21 billion worth of financial support had been made fully available for only 50 000 small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
The excessive administrative bureaucracy that is an obstacle to the majority of SMEs must be removed .
There is a need , not just for simplification , but also for an improved system for companies to access this financing .
The Commission is paying great attention to small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) : the 23 million SMEs that form the EU 's economic fabric and are a source of innovation and creativity , allowing Europe to continue to distinguish itself in world markets .
Little by little , red tape and legislation - which , until recently , nipped in the bud the development of innovative small companies - has been stripped away and young people are starting to see a glimmer of a stable future that is hopefully full of opportunities .
Entrepreneurship , training , flexibility , smart regulation and access to credit are the key words of the Small Business Act , a framework that defines the EU policy for SMEs through targeted assistance and training activities for young people .
Now that many initiatives have been defined , it is the responsibility of Member States and the European Union as a whole to implement them properly , providing SMEs with a greater freedom in their actions , allowing them to participate in public tenders , adopting the single European patent in the future and quickly implementing the directive on late payments .
Lest we forget , investments are necessary to avoid the efforts made so far being thwarted , because only investment can affect the proper functioning of the mechanism and European competitiveness .
The Small Business Act is based on a number of pillars , such as access to finance and access to the Single Market , international markets and public procurement .
The progress made within Member States in terms of taking concrete steps to improve the business environment for small and medium-sized businesses is variable and sometimes negligible , in spite of the declared political commitments featuring in this document .
In the European Union , 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises , which account for around 99 % of all businesses and provide more than 100 million jobs , make a fundamental contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation .
SMEs face significant problems in expanding their activities and improving their ability to innovate and their access to markets .
This is why I urge Member States to adopt without delay the proposal on the European Private Company Statute , which would enable SMEs to trade throughout the EU , while cutting costs and encouraging growth in this area , promoting a 25 % reduction in administration and stimulating business .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
There are 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the EU , which account for around 99 % of all businesses and provide over 100 million jobs .
They make a fundamental contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation , are a major source of innovation , and play a vital role in sustaining and increasing employment and helping to achieve the main aims of the flagship initiative EU 2020 .
The Small Business Act adopted in 2008 was a significant political step aimed at improving the business environment for SMEs , ensuring better and simpler regulation and simplifying market access .
However , SMEs continue to face serious problems expanding their activities and innovative capacities and it is difficult for them to access markets , above all , due to difficulties obtaining financing and administrative obstacles , which should also be reduced further .
The Member States should implement all the provisions of the Small Business Act as a matter of urgency in order to establish a clear and consistent business environment .
The Small Business Act ( SBA ) is the strategic framework for better exploitation of the potential for growth and innovation of EU small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
There are around 23 million SMEs in the EU , which account for around 99 % of all businesses and provide over 100 million jobs , playing a key role in economic growth , social cohesion and job creation .
This resolution , for which I voted , acknowledges that several of the SBA 's initiatives have been launched .
Nonetheless , much more can be done to help European SMEs , specifically : the swift implementation by the Member States of the Late Payments Directive ; better Commission mechanisms for encouraging the Member States to apply the principles of the SBA ; adoption by the Member States , without delay , of the last remaining proposal on the European Private Company Statute ; the regular application by the Commission and the Member States of the SME test as part of impact assessments ; the urgently needed reduction of the bureaucratic and administrative burden on SMEs ; and putting ' Erasmus for young entrepreneurs ' on a permanent footing , with a sufficient budget .
I voted for the draft resolution because I welcome the ' Single Market Act ' initiative , and especially the legislative measures enabling small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) to make use of all the advantages of the Single Market , such as the European rules for venture capital funds , the revised VAT regulations and the simplification of the directives on accounting .
At the same time , I feel there is a need to strengthen dialogue between SMEs and public procurement bodies in order to simplify the involvement of SMEs in public procurement procedures .
I would consider it appropriate in these circumstances to examine the options for helping SMEs to create partnerships and consortia , and to participate jointly in public contracts .
The Commission should produce an assessment of the impacts and consider the possibility of increasing the ceilings for EU public contracts , which would allow SMEs to take part in contracts that would otherwise be subject to special requirements , on account of which SMEs would not be able to participate .
I would also like to call on the Commission to consider how it might be possible in Europe to improve the publication of all public procurement notices and to eliminate the administrative burden which prevents European firms from taking part in transboundary public contracts .
The Member States then face the task of more systematically applying the European Code of Best Practices Facilitating Access by SMEs to Public Procurement Contracts .
I welcome the creation and development of the Small Business Act ( SBA ) , which , in my opinion , provides timely solutions for the main obstacles encountered by small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) as regards expanding their activities and becoming established .
Many of these obstacles are due to excessive bureaucratisation and difficulties in obtaining finance .
The SBA calls on the Member States to improve the business environment for SMEs , so its principles should be duly implemented and adopted .
in writing . - The Small Business Act has been one of the most proactive acts of the past three years , and it is important that the EU continues to focus on SMEs .
I voted for the European Parliament 's resolution on the Small Business Act Review as there are still further important steps to be taken to facilitate the proper operation of SMEs in the EU .
In economic terms , SMEs are what we call the ' backbone of the EU ' .
Indeed , 99 % of all businesses in Europe are SMEs , providing more than 100 million jobs .
The European Union encourages their development .
However , at domestic level , SMEs constantly encounter difficulties in obtaining financing or in coping with administrative tasks which often exceed the requirements under EU directives .
This is why I voted in favour of Member States stepping up their efforts in terms of implementing properly the principles featuring in the SBA .
SMEs are essential to the European economy 's dynamism .
There are 23 million SMEs within the EU ; they employ fewer than 250 people and their turnover does not exceed EUR 50 million ; they account for 99 % of European businesses and employ nearly 70 % of the workforce in the private sector .
In a context of difficult recovery and of increased international economic competition , establishing a European strategy would be welcome .
The ' Small Business Act ' is aimed at increasing entrepreneurship in Europe and helping businesses grow .
Therefore , it is an absolute requirement that we reduce administrative formalities and put in place a modern administration adapted to the needs of SMEs .
That is why the Commission must establish a unified system for setting up a business .
It would also be useful to introduce an ' SME test ' to assess the impact of all future legislation on SMEs and check that this legislation will not stifle the potential these businesses have for growth .
I welcome the adoption of the European Parliament 's resolution on the Small Business Act Review , which adapts the European support measures for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) to the new context resulting from the 2008 economic crisis , and ensures that they are able to meet the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
SMEs were the first to be affected by the financial and banking crisis that has taken place these last few years , which reduced their access to financing and to the markets .
This new version of the Small Business Act must therefore give more support to innovation among SMEs by diversifying the financing instruments and by reducing as much as possible the administrative burdens that they face .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) on their own account for around 99 % of all businesses and provide over 100 million jobs in the European Union .
Their role in economic growth , social cohesion and job creation is therefore vital .
The Small Business Act ( SBA ) is based on key principles , such as access to finance , access to markets and better regulation .
However , it is undeniable that SMEs continue to struggle against a series of problems , like the difficulty of expanding their activities , problems accessing markets , or the innumerable difficulties in obtaining financing .
As such , I welcome the conclusions of the Commission 's review , and I am very pleased to see the new proposals aiming to improve access to finance and markets , and to move forward with the process of cutting red tape .
This motion for a resolution of the European Parliament concerns a review of the Small Business Act ( SBA ) .
The SBA is a series of political principles aiming to support small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in terms of access to finance and markets , as well as of improved legislation .
The social , economic and financial role of SMEs in the European Union is unquestionable .
There are around 23 million of them in the EU , accounting for 99 % of all businesses and providing over 100 million jobs .
The current financial crisis has had a negative impact on these companies .
That is why there is a need to review the current legislation , so as to facilitate access to financing ; to reduce administrative costs and all bureaucracy ; to encourage energy saving , as only 24 % of companies currently recognise its importance ; to improve businesses ' technology through eco-innovation ; to promote improved levels of qualification , education and professional training ; and to promote internationalisation and good governance .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this resolution , and I hope that all SMEs will benefit from these measures and become prosperous , as all Europeans would benefit .
We have another resolution full of contradictions before us .
On the one hand , the appointment of the new Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises ( SME ) Envoy by the Commission is to be welcomed , and his mandate to monitor the progress of the Member States in the implementation of the Small Business Act ( SBA ) and to promote SMEs ' interests throughout the Commission , ensuring , in particular , that the ' Think Small First ' principle is being applied effectively , is to be supported .
It makes a positive recommendation by calling on the Member States to appoint national SME Envoys to coordinate SME policies and control the implementation of the SBA across the various administrations .
We also think that it is positive that it stresses that the administrative burden is relatively higher the smaller the company is , and therefore calls for differentiation between micro , small and medium-sized enterprises .
On the other hand , however , the resolution does not tackle - or fails to tackle sufficiently - a number of the constraints , direct and indirect , with which SMEs are currently burdened , many of which are the result of the policies dominant at EU level .
On the one hand , it ' welcomes the appointment of the new [ Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises ( SME ) ] Envoy by the Commission , and supports his mandate to monitor the progress of the Member States in the implementation of the [ Small Business Act ( SBA ) ] and to promote SMEs ' interests throughout the whole Commission , ensuring , in particular , that the ' Think Small First ' principle is being applied effectively ; calls on Member States to appoint national SME Envoys to coordinate SME policies and control the implementation of the SBA across different administrations ' .
On the other hand , however , it does not criticise or propose alternatives to the neoliberal and restrictive policies of the Stability and Growth Pact , which are causing so many problems for SMEs and the general public .
Nevertheless , it is positive that it stresses that the administrative burden is relatively higher the smaller the company is , and therefore calls for differentiation between micro , small and medium-sized enterprises ; and that it underlines that microbusinesses - with fewer than 10 employees - constitute 91.8 % of all EU businesses and therefore deserve more attention and the corresponding tailored approach .
We will monitor how its implementation turns out .
There are 23 million small and medium enterprises in the European Union , and they employ over 100 million people .
The Small Business Act is an important policy , and it aims to simplify access to funding and to the market and to improve regulation .
A very important part of the Act is reducing the red tape affecting SMEs in Ireland and the EU .
Today , the European Parliament has shown support for the 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the European Union , which represent more than 100 million jobs and provide an essential contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and the creation of jobs .
The goal was to assess the progress made and to plan new actions with the aim of responding to the challenges associated with the economic crisis .
We can note a marked improvement in the situation of SMEs , but progress still needs to be made .
SMEs continue to come up against considerable problems in expanding their activities , and sometimes even in surviving .
It is therefore necessary to reduce bureaucracy through strengthening control and through intelligent regulation .
A decision must therefore be made quickly on the European Private Company Statute , and similarly we must urgently move towards adopting a single European patent .
At the same time , we must make sure that the ' SME test ' is applied properly in all new legislative proposals , particularly at national level .
Finally , SMEs play an essential role in European innovation .
We should continue to simplify the financing of research and development in order to increase their capacity for innovation throughout the innovation cycle .
SMEs represent 99 % of businesses in the European Union .
As a result , I voted in favour of the review to the Small Business Act , which is a resolution that recognises the crucial role of SMEs in the European economy .
I support a strategic framework that goes even further in the help granted to SMEs in times of recession , and this in many areas .
Thus , I welcome an intelligent regulation which lightens the administrative burden borne by these key economic actors and which facilitates their access to finance and to new markets , so that they are able to invest and grow .
Finally , it is important to point out that research , innovation and training should be supported so that our SMEs can enjoy the full benefit from the Single Market .
As a representative of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I took part in the work and negotiations on the Late Payments Directive , which is one of the key legislative proposals announced in the original version of the Small Business Act .
I hope the Member States will take pains to implement its provisions as quickly as possible and correctly .
The Small Business Act is a good proposal for small and medium-sized enterprises .
However , I do have doubts over the qualitative assessment of work which has been done .
As an example , I would like to mention the Annex to the review drafted by the European Commission .
The Annex contains examples of some good practices , and among them , in the part concerning the Single Market , it mentions the fact that 22 Member States have set up operational one-stop shops ( points of single contact ) .
I would like to remind everyone that these points were set up pursuant to the Services Directive .
Barely three months ago , this House adopted a report on implementation of the Services Directive , in which we draw attention principally to the fact that the one-stop shops are not fully operational , that in most cases , they do not allow completion of formalities by electronic means and that they are not working in the way which businesses expect .
I hope that drawing attention to individual one-stop shops which are good examples will be followed by greater efforts to improve the operation of all of them , so that they really will serve small and medium-sized enterprises .
I voted in favour of this document because it welcomes the Commission review of the Small Business Act ( SBA ) and expresses support for the new proposals focused on further improving access to finance , enhancing market access and reducing the administrative burden , by strengthening governance and monitoring through smart regulation .
I believe that the Member States should adopt without delay the last remaining proposals on the European Private Company Statute , which would enable SMEs to trade throughout the EU while cutting costs and encouraging growth in this area .
We also need to promote the 25 % reduction of administrative burden indicated in the SBA , which would contribute to the effectiveness of the SBA , would counteract any protectionist economic policies of Member States and stimulate business across the EU .
Member States must swiftly implement the revised Late Payments Directive to effectively combat late payments and their negative impact , particularly on SMEs .
Member States should also avoid ' gold-plating ' by exceeding the requirements of EU legislation when transposing directives into national law .
The administrative burden is relatively higher the smaller the size of the company - a disproportionate and incorrect provision which reduces the setting up of SMEs .
There needs to be a differentiation between micro , small and medium-sized businesses .
I believe that small businesses should be assisted to increase their ability to compete in international markets by enhancing their ability to export , disseminating information concerning programmes and initiatives facilitating international market access and penetration of SME goods and services , and ensuring that the interests of small businesses are adequately represented .
in writing . - I welcome the Commission review of the SBA and express support for the new proposals focused on further improving access to finance , enhancing market access and continuing debureaucratisation through strengthened governance and monitoring and through smart regulation and measures such as the SME performance review
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted to review the Small Business Act project as I think that the European Union needs to continue the process of strengthening its support mechanisms with a view to removing the obstacles blocking the sustainable development of small and medium-sized businesses so that their potential can be tapped to the full .
Bearing in mind the crucial role which SMEs play in the European economy and their contribution to boosting economic growth , employment and social cohesion , measures must be implemented which aim at providing an ideal framework for the development of SMEs .
In this context , I would like to stress that Member States need to step up their efforts in supporting the policies aimed at promoting entrepreneurship and creating a favourable business environment for SMEs .
Consideration must also be given to the key role played by exchanging good practices within these policies .
Improving SMEs ' access to funding and the Single Market , cutting red tape , as well as ensuring better implementation of the Small Business Act by Member States , must be priorities at national and EU level .
The review of the Small Business Act ( SBA ) and the new proposals it contains are necessary tools to strengthen and revitalise the 23 million European small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which have proved to be the real bulwark against the economic crisis .
Within the European economy as a whole , SMEs account for 99 % of all businesses and provide jobs for almost 100 hundred million Europeans .
We need to continue working to strengthen and support SMEs to reinvigorate growth , while also focusing on improving competitiveness and innovation .
These proposals faithfully reflect these needs .
Of particular importance is reviving the SBA in accordance with the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy and all actions to facilitate SME growth through simplification and support , not only for investment , but also for the challenges that globalisation and climate change bring today .
Yet another text seeking to lower the standards of public authorities for the benefit of entrepreneurs .
The European ' Small Business Act ' and its review are concerned neither about the general interest nor about SME employees .
The only virtue of this resolution , which is supported by all political groups except mine , is to deplore this state of affairs and boast about energy efficiency that it undermines elsewhere by promoting unbridled exports .
Hypocritical and malevolent .
I am abstaining to encourage the intention and denounce the hypocrisy .
We cannot forget that the 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in the EU , which account for around 99 % of all businesses and provide over 100 million jobs , make a fundamental contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation , are a major source of innovation , and play a vital role in sustaining and increasing employment , and contribute to achieving the main goals of the Europe 2020 flagship initiatives .
The Small Business Act ( SBA ) is based on a number of important policy pillars , such as access to finance , access to markets - the Single Market , international markets , public procurement - and better regulation .
We must encourage the Member States to adopt its guidelines so as to help SMEs at this time of crisis .
I am very positive about this resolution concerning the Small Business Act review , as it contains the correct measures to undertake in order to make it easier for over 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises to do business .
The main points include the application of a new series of measures giving easier access to credit through public support for guarantee systems and a strong commitment to encouraging the cofinancing of micro-credit .
More than a raft of incentives and targeted funding , our small and medium-sized enterprises need greater and simpler freedom of action , hence less bureaucracy , and also certain guarantees .
On this latter point , we should call upon Member States to resolve the issue of late payments , which has created and continues to create serious problems and difficulties .
Finally , I would like to underline that internationalisation may be the new frontier for relaunching small and medium sized enterprises , and therefore any tools for permitting expansion beyond their borders will be very welcome .
It is a difficult challenge , particularly for smaller enterprises , and for this reason , it requires greater attention and more support from the European Union .
I voted in favour of this document because I believe that the incentives for small business set out in the Small Business Act are the way to increase the competitiveness of the European Union .
In particular , I would like to draw attention to two aspects of the resolution we adopted .
Firstly , attention to education and vocational training .
It is precisely young people who will create and participate in the EU 's future .
It is therefore particularly important for them to be enterprising and ready to create a vibrant and competitive EU economy .
Efficient use of resources is another aspect also related to the future quality of life in the EU .
We are always talking about this , but so far in practice , we have unfortunately taken too little action for our words to be translated into reality .
On the other hand , efficient use of resources as a measure on its own is not enough - in general , there needs to be a sustainable attitude to the environment at every stage of business development .
I therefore call on both the European Commission and the Member States to pay as much attention as possible to developing greater youth entrepreneurship and promoting efficient use of resources and other energy saving initiatives .
This resolution aims to provide the European Parliament 's perspective on the analysis of the Commission 's ' Small Business Act ' .
As such , Parliament is using this resolution to express its support for the new proposals aiming to improve access to finance and the markets for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) ; for the measures to continue the process of cutting bureaucracy through strengthened governance and monitoring ; for smart regulation ; and for measures such as the SME performance review .
As I have previously stated , strengthening SMEs is key to promoting economic growth .
In this regard , what Parliament is proposing in terms of research and innovation - specifically simplifying funding for research , development and innovation ( R & D & I ) , and promoting appropriate programme management , especially for SMEs - is particularly important , as is strengthening innovation capacities over the full cycle , including non-technological innovation within the future financial framework for research and innovation .
I also support investment intended to support local SMEs through , for example , the involvement of innovation centres , chambers of commerce , business associations and innovation clusters across the Single Market .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) account for around 99 % of all EU businesses and make a key contribution to economic growth : as well as a source of jobs and wealth , they are particularly suitable vehicles for innovation .
As such , it is essential to continue offering them conditions to be able to develop and become secure in the market , by guaranteeing them access to finance and to the potential benefits of the Single Market .
It is therefore important to congratulate the Commission on its analysis of the Small Business Act and support the new proposals put forward to pursue the objectives of supporting the SMEs .
Ninety-nine percent of European companies are SMEs .
Two-thirds of jobs in the private sector are provided by the SME base .
More than half of European added value is produced by SMEs .
There will be no genuine recovery of the economy , or long-term economic growth , without substantial action on the part of public authorities , whether local , national or European , in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises .
By adopting the ' Small Business Act ' in 2008 , the European Commission made the first decisive step towards small and medium-sized enterprises by introducing the ' Think Small First ' principle in all areas of legislation .
Despite the many proposals that have been seen through in the last three years - I am thinking of the Late Payments Directive in particular - a lot of progress remains to be achieved to make things easier for small and medium-sized enterprises , not only in respect of the administrative burden they have to deal with , but also the difficulty in accessing funding that they experience .
The European Commission must continue on the path it defined with the SBA in 2008 .
This is what this resolution , which I lend my support to , calls for .
in writing . - The resolution focuses , in particular , on : ( 1 ) the regulatory environment , calling for better implementation of the SME test - in particular , in Member States - and for a reduction in bureaucracy and administrative burdens ; ( 2 ) improving SMEs ' access to finance through additional funding and instruments within the EIB ( such as the RSFF and equity financing ) and an enlarged ( and independent ) CIP ; ( 3 ) improvements needed to ensure the participation of SMEs in public procurement ; ( 4 ) simplification and better targeted R & D & I programmes to promote SMEs ' innovation management capacity , access to R & D & I services and knowledge-based business services , through , for instance , technology transfer centres and universities ; ( 5 ) the need for more attention to be paid to skills needed and other social and labour market issues affecting entrepreneurship and SMEs ' capacities to fulfil their employment potential , in particular , managerial skills , digital skills and sustainability skills ; ( 6 ) action to improve resource efficiency : sectoral SME projects to identify resource efficiency innovation in the value and supply chains ; the adoption of an ambitious eco-innovation action plan and more funds for it through the CIP ; more cost-effective energy efficiency measures to help SMEs reduce energy bills ;
I support the report reviewing the Small Business Act as it aims to improve access to credit and access to the market for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
At this time of crisis for European businesses , we need to give assistance to SMEs , enabling them to increase their abilities and know-how , asking them to support management programmes designed to implement research , development and innovation .
The report acknowledges the key role of SMEs in the transition to an economy characterised by resource efficiency and it is also essential to acknowledge the role of young entrepreneurs .
For the latter , the EU should commit itself to institutionalising the Erasmus programme in order to give them an opportunity to develop .
I welcome the adoption of the resolution on the review of the ' Small Business Act ' with a resounding majority of the European Parliament .
SMEs , which represent 99 % of European businesses , provide two-thirds of jobs in the private sector and generate over half of the added value created , in total , by businesses operating in the EU .
SMEs play a key role in innovation , research and development .
By adopting the ' Small Business Act ' in 2008 , the European Commission made the first decisive step for these SMEs by introducing the ' Think Small First ' principle in all areas of legislation .
Many proposals have been seen through in three years , such as the Late Payments Directive .
However , we still have a lot to do to make life easier for SMEs with respect to the red tape they are faced with and access to funding that is often difficult .
This resolution appeals to the European Commission to continue on the path of greater consideration for the engines of prosperity and economic growth that are SMEs .
As the rapporteur accurately observed , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) are the backbone of European society and the engine of our economy .
This is also true of Lithuania , where 99.4 % of Lithuanian companies employ fewer than 250 people .
According to government statistics , in January 2011 , there were more than 66 500 SMEs operating in Lithuania .
What Lithuanians desperately need is smarter regulation , less bureaucracy and fewer administrative burdens .
Obtaining planning permission is one of the greatest problems faced by investors in Lithuania .
According to a report by the World Bank , 17 procedures need to be carried out in order to obtain permission and this may take 162 days .
In this area , according to the World Bank 's classification , Lithuania ranks 59th in the world .
Investor protection in Lithuania is an even greater problem ; in this area , Lithuania ranks 93rd .
This really is no good .
I believe that a successful strategy for promoting innovative SMEs should not just be supported by subsidies , but by the creation of a business environment , where SMEs would have more freedom and improved access to various sources of financing .
I also believe that SMEs should pay more attention to social and labour market issues , which have an impact on entrepreneurship and SMEs ' abilities to employ workers with the relevant skills .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution , which warns against too much bureaucracy and red tape for SMEs .
The 23 million SMEs in the EU provide over 100 million jobs and make a huge contribution to economic growth , social cohesion and job creation .
We need to make sure that these vital businesses are not hampered by red tape and bureaucracy , and I agree that the EU needs to renew its efforts to reduce administrative burdens .
I am pleased that almost all legislative proposals under the Small Business Act have been adopted but urge Member States to implement the revised Late Payments Directive without delay .
The resolution also outlines the energy savings potential that SMEs have - currently only 24 % of SMEs are engaged in actions to reduce their environmental impact-energy efficiency ; if SMEs applied cost-effective energy efficiency measures , they could reduce their energy bills and increase reinvestment .
I voted against the resolution on the Small Business Act Review , put forward by the European Commission in February 2011 .
This review - in particular , the reduction of administrative and bureaucratic costs and burdens - is consistent with the Act as it currently stands .
Its proposal to harmonise taxation systems must not result in yet another reduction in taxes on businesses - admittedly , small businesses - while salaries are hit by the austerity plans .
It is true that the review aims to improve SMEs ' access to financing , but it fails to mention social and environmental issues and does not even refer to the European Commission 's plan for a Social Business Initiative , announced for the end of this year .
It is true that the Small Business Act Review , in making this proposal , moves us a little way towards a social economy , but it does so through its weakness with respect to the challenges associated with these other forms of action .
Like the Audiovisual Media Services Directive , the Small Business Act Review does not learn the lessons of the Monti report for re-establishing citizens ' confidence in the European Union .
It therefore still conforms to the same ultra-liberal logic of European integration that we have been condemning for years , a logic which is , first and foremost , centred on the market and its needs .
The small and medium-sized enterprises of Europe are the lungs of our economic activity .
We must put their development , their modernisation and their competitiveness at the heart of our economic strategy .
I therefore voted in favour of the resolution on the Small Business Act Review , the aim of which is to liberate the growth potential of SMEs .
There is still much to be done to simplify the regulatory environment and the administrative procedures that are weighing too heavily on the activity and dynamism of our businesses .
I welcome the actions proposed in this report , such as the creation of a European Private Company Statute .
This would help our SMEs to draw the full benefits of the Single Market by allowing them to carry out their cross-border activities without requiring them to fulfil obligations which are often onerous and discouraging .
I therefore call on the Council to give its opinion on this initiative quickly .
Finally , we must come to the aid of innovative SMEs by facilitating their access to diverse forms of financing .
That will be achieved , in particular , by significantly simplifying the use of European credits , which are still lacking in flexibility .
These credits exist , and I think that they must be utilised in order to provide more effective support for the development of the real economy , innovation and employment .
I am voting for this proposal , as I agree with the rapporteur when she says that union is strength .
Joining forces to innovate and solve common problems in Europe means faster developments , efficiency ( cost-efficiency ) , and greater creativity .
The Innovation Union should also increase Europe 's competitiveness , to help find a way out of the economic crisis .
As Europe is very dependent on imports , the Member States are united in feeling the need to use intelligently and sustainably the raw materials and commodities required to generate energy or for use in industry or food production .
The ageing of the population is another challenge facing nearly every country in the EU .
With the aim of giving people more years of healthy life , with the appropriate care and medicines , but , at the same time , controlling costs , a joint approach may yield results more quickly .
Europe 's economies have become so interlinked nowadays that it is not only the stability of the euro that requires a common approach : so do efforts to increase the competitiveness of the Member States .
What is needed is a common path towards an equitable and stable economy .
Europe has been , is and will remain a cradle of global civilisation , education , research and culture .
What is certain , and is also mentioned in the Commission communication , is that Europe does not lack in potential , whether human , technical , commercial or financial .
My question is : what is Europe doing to utilise primarily its human resource potential ?
How does Europe intend to keep its human resources , which are so essential to innovation in Europe 's schools , universities and research centres ?
Before focusing on attracting experts from outside the European Union , I feel that our priority is to halt the exodus of researchers from Europe to other important centres across the world .
Establishing a modernised education system throughout the whole of Europe , placing strong emphasis on substantive research results and , of course , simplifying access to cross-border research programmes in Europe can raise the level of innovation in the EU .
However , to ensure that human resources remain here , Europe must focus on the following aspect : making researchers attractive offers , proposals which they cannot refuse .
In fact , it must persuade them that , at every level , there is nowhere better than home .
I endorsed this report .
The Innovation Union flagship initiative is the most significant and targeted Community attempt so far to introduce a strategic , integrated and business-oriented European innovation policy to supplement Member State efforts , whereby innovation is steered and progress monitored at the highest political level .
Innovations are particularly important for combating global challenges such as climate change , energy and food security , etc . , where there is a need to innovate and reinforce the existing scientific and technological base .
It is also necessary to modernise education systems and adapt them to the needs of the times .
Member States must take action to improve the entrepreneurship and skills of young European citizens and entrepreneurs by incorporating entrepreneurship and innovation into all areas of education and improving human capital .
Such action would enable them to play an active role in innovation .
The ' Innovation Union ' initiative still remains the most important Union initiative for developing an integrated European strategy in relation to research and innovation .
Increasing the pace of research and innovation is crucial for introducing a fair and competitive economic model , ensuring jobs for the future , moving towards sustainable resource management , facing up to energy challenges and stimulating a knowledge-based society .
In terms of jobs , the environment and development , innovation is thus one of the major challenges facing the European Union and will have concrete repercussions on citizens .
From now on , European citizens , as both the engines and the beneficiaries of innovation , must be able to participate fully in this ' Innovation Union ' in order to ensure that it is successful , as we emphasised in this report .
Finally , we wanted for that reason to highlight how essential an innovation policy is , as well as the added value of a coordinated approach at European level .
In order to face up to the shared major social and economic challenges that European society faces , we need ambitious initiatives .
Now , therefore , we await the legislative phase of the Commissioner 's actions on research and innovation .
The concept of innovation is multidimensional : it includes not only scientific research and experimental and technological development , but also the development of new processes , methodologies and organisational and behavioural models .
While welcoming the Commission communication on Innovation Union as a flagship initiative of the EU 2020 strategy for growth and jobs , I think there are still priority areas where we need a greater commitment to building capacities in science , technology and innovation : efficient resource use , recovery and recycling of waste , food quality and safety , and new epidemics .
According to the conclusions of the 2009 European Innovation Panel , the recent economic and financial crisis has had disproportionate effects in different countries .
I am concerned that the current budgetary constraints imposed on Member States may lead to greater restrictions on investment in research and innovation , with obvious negative effects on European growth and competitiveness .
I therefore call on the Commission to consider leveraging the resources of the common strategic framework for funding these sectors , particularly the research and innovation sectors of the European Union .
I have voted in favour of the ' Innovation Union ' initiative because it represents the only possibility to overcome the crisis in a global world .
Innovation means creating jobs , knowledge , technology , caring for the environment , extending social cohesion and public welfare .
All of the Union 's Member States must make a firm commitment to innovation , and they must bolster it by working together , sharing good practices and improving the dissemination of successful experiences .
There is a future provided that there is innovation .
Having said this , I have voted in favour of Amendment 1 because I am completely against using common agricultural policy funds to provide the resources needed for the programmes .
The agricultural sector , which is also immersed in the crisis , deserves those funds to drive its own innovation .
An innovative Europe can bring innovation to agriculture , so that it may build a future just the same as that of the other strategic sectors .
Everyone is aware that economic growth is closely linked to technological progress , which , in turn , is generated by people 's innovative aspiration .
However , this aspiration and potential are restricted by financial , bureaucratic and other kinds of obstacles .
I fully support the report on the Innovation Union because I think that it will allow us to knock down the barriers preventing innovative thinking in the European Union .
However , I feel that the most important aspect is for us to avoid the development of a two-speed Europe , which can be done , specifically by incorporating the Union 's economy into the common aspiration for innovation .
The call in the report for the introduction of the single European patent and the satisfaction it expresses over the adoption of enhanced cooperation regarding the introduction of the patent prevent me from voting in favour .
The introduction of an Anglo-Franco-German European patent is unacceptable for at least two reasons .
First , trilingualism would have a negative impact on the competitiveness of companies in the Member States not represented in the system .
These companies , including Italian ones , would have to await the completion of the translation process before being able to obtain the documents , at the expense of the ability to act quickly , which is of the utmost importance in business .
They would also have to shoulder the additional costs of translation .
In contrast , Anglo-Franco-German companies would not have to put up with any of these barriers , which would give rise to discrimination on the basis of language .
Furthermore , the introduction of a trilingual system does not seem to conform to administrative requirements and does not even seem to reflect the demographic weighting of the Member States , because in that case , Italy should also be represented .
Instead , it seems like an attempt to impose the prestige of Germany at the expense of the principles of parity and equality between Member States on which the EU is founded .
I have therefore decided not to support the report .
I voted for the resolution on the Innovation Union because , apart from other things , I believe that we must adopt measures both at the European and national levels for improving the entrepreneurial skills and professional training of Europeans by incorporating business studies , creativity and innovation into all areas of education .
It is necessary to make more use of Commission programmes such as ' Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs ' and , at the same time , to protect skilled trades as a source of innovation .
In my opinion , the Commission should cooperate more with Member States in drawing up medium-term and long-term outlooks in relation to the qualifications needed on the job market and in supporting partnerships between universities and the business sector , with the aim of making it easier for young people to enter the job market and helping in the creation of innovative companies based on knowledge , the development of applied research and better prospects for graduates on the labour market .
In this context , I support the proposal of the Committee of the Regions to create a ' virtual network of creativity ' which would be open to all ( businesses , local and regional bodies , the private sector and citizens ) and would provide advice , support and access to venture capital and technical services .
I would also like to draw attention to the current lack of improved and proactive interactions between universities and businesses , and I would like to call on the Commission to launch a new Europe-wide programme for professional training and education for senior staff at universities , and officials dealing with technology .
I welcome the focus given in this report to research and innovation as a means of overcoming the economic and social crisis Europe is currently experiencing .
In fact , new , sustainable ways for smarter and more efficient use of resources and commodities are increasingly necessary .
We therefore need to create space for new ideas and , most important of all , to create the mechanisms necessary to implement these ideas .
As such , I support the report tabled on Innovation Union , and would stress its importance with regard to the current situation and to European success in times to come .
Innovation in many respects is the key to economic growth .
Already by the second half of the twentieth century , the most respected growth economists had understood that innovation is one of the main variables for leveraging falling profits .
This is how we made the transition from the growth models of the 1950s , according to which the economy sooner or later stabilises and loses its momentum , to the endogenous growth models of the 1980s , in which technology and the design of constantly different and innovative products allow the economy to maintain a positive growth rate over the long term .
In order to set these leverage mechanisms in motion , which , from now until 2020 , will take the form of research , energy efficiency and internationalisation targets , particularly in small and medium-sized enterprises , there needs to be a strong political desire to activate incentives and orientation mechanisms .
These are the responsibility of the Member States , and European funding can provide them with valid support .
Resources are limited due to the crisis , and the directives in Europe 2020 need to go hand in hand with strong fiscal and industrial policies on the part of the European governments .
I voted for the report on Innovation Union as it highlighted the importance of innovation in terms of laying the foundations for a sustainable , competitive economic model and creating new jobs in the European Union .
At the same time , I tabled an amendment to this report , along with other fellow Members , in which I expressed my disagreement about funding the innovation policy with money hitherto earmarked for the common agricultural policy .
I voted for this report as I feel that it offers viable solutions for improving research and innovation in the European Union and , by extension , provides the conditions for a return to economic growth and the creation of new jobs .
Stimulating investments for research , facilitating access for SMEs to diverse sources of funding , and improving cooperation between universities , research centres and government are measures which will generate creativity and innovation in the medium and long term .
Particular attention must be focused on balancing the innovation and research potentials between the various Member States and regions as , at the moment , there is a great disparity between them , which affects the whole Union .
I voted in favour of this report as it introduces a range of measures to successfully address a number of societal challenges , specifically climate change , energy and resource scarcity , population ageing , and problems accessing public services and quality healthcare .
The EU must fully commit to achieving the proposed objectives .
It is estimated that 3.7 million jobs can be created by 2020 , and that annual gross domestic product ( GDP ) can be increased by around EUR 800 billion by 2025 .
This own-initiative report follows in the wake of the Commission communication on Innovation Union and is one of the initiatives of the Europe 2020 strategy , whose objective is to encourage innovation and competitiveness by creating robust policies that stimulate the exchange of ideas and solutions to a number of problems that cut across all the Member States
The kernel of this idea is to encourage and promote activities that are efficient and competitive , both during and after the crisis , enabling the Union as a whole to overcome the weaknesses that a number of sectors are demonstrating , especially industry .
Undoubtedly , then , this is an ambitious report , given the issues it tackles , from intellectual property rights to increased cooperation among the Member States and the Commission .
I would therefore congratulate the rapporteur on her commitment and hope that , with more such contributions , we will be able to achieve all the objectives proposed in the Europe 2020 strategy .
This report , drawn up by Mrs Merkies , proposes an Innovation Union as a means of preparing Europe for the world in the wake of the current economic and financial crisis .
The unprecedented global crisis , which is stubbornly persisting and could threaten the European project , requires everyone and , in particular , the European Union , to take a firm stance that motivates the public .
Therefore , as well as voting for this report , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work , which provides us with an optimistic view of the future and calls for the innovation capacity that we all possess .
It is important to implement the proposals advocated in this report , such as better access to credit and financial support , more investment in research and development , clearer legislation , less bureaucracy , a ' one-stop shop ' , better inter-regional cooperation , and a simple and cheap European patent .
The report addresses the importance of innovation in all its forms to the development of societies .
It does so whilst making significant contributions to a number of areas and making proposals - for example , on the increased dissemination and absorption of innovation in a number of sectors - which we consider opportune .
In the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which I drafted , I sought to summarise the main points of our view and concerns in this area .
On the basis of this draft opinion , it can easily be said that there are clear points of disagreement with the Commission communication .
In particular , these focus on aspects also included in this report , which is where some of the contradictions it contains are to be found : the view of innovation as essentially a business opportunity ; the emphasis given to the market , to competition , and to harnessing innovation for business purposes ; the advocating of the Internal Market and EU patents .
Those are the aspects with which we disagree .
As we said during the debate , another issue that was not tackled sufficiently was the risk - very clear from the results of the European Innovation Panel of 2009 - of an ' innovation divide ' between the countries and regions that innovate most and the rest .
The report sufficiently highlights innovation , which constitutes a necessary means of helping respond to many of the problems and challenges facing humanity today .
It should be a key element of public policy in areas like the environment , water , energy , transport , telecommunications , health and education , and should help resolve problems like the scarcity and efficient use of resources , waste recovery and treatment , food quality and security , demographic changes , new epidemics , and conservation of nature and biodiversity .
However , the report includes a number of contradictions because it is founded on neoliberal ideas , defending the Internal Market and advocating EU patents , with which we disagree .
The constraints currently imposed on the Member States could result in increased restrictions on investment in science , technology and innovation ( STI ) , particularly in the most vulnerable countries .
Instead of the announced ' Innovation Union ' , the result could be a veritable ' innovation divide ' between the countries and regions that innovate most and the rest .
Where there should be public interest , development , cohesion , progress and social welfare , what has ended up predominating are so-called business opportunities , the market , competitiveness , competition , and the harnessing of innovation for business purposes .
We must encourage third level institutions , research organisations and private sector companies to seize the opportunities available under the EU 's Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development ( FP7 ) .
FP7 is the largest publicly funded research programme in the world and we must continue to highlight the benefits associated with it for SMEs .
From an Irish perspective , this FP7 programme is helping to develop research , research that is creating jobs and making goods and services available that are necessary and in demand .
Irish organisations have already availed of EUR 270 million from this programme , in the agricultural , food , fishing , health , energy , transport and ICT sectors .
This is crucial for both Ireland and Europe , especially in the present difficult economic times .
in writing . - I am in agreement with the Merkies report because I strongly believe that innovation and creativity are key to the economic recovery of the Union and that the importance of converting the Union 's scientific technological breakthroughs into new goods and services cannot be overstated .
Moreover , I am convinced that in a post-crisis Europe , any Single Market strategy has to be formulated in such a way as to maintain and enhance social cohesion , ensure market integrity and economic sustainability and foster innovation .
This is why I endorse the Commission 's initiative for a European Social Innovation pilot which ensures that innovative ideas for the creation of products , services and business models are linked to and , more importantly , meet the social needs of the EU 's citizens and consumers .
Confronted with a global economy which is in crisis , the European Parliament has stressed the importance of making Europe more innovative and efficient by adapting to the new challenges of the 21st century .
It is essential to encourage maximum involvement from all of the actors involved , including small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , industry , universities and governments .
All have their role to play .
Thus , we must , for example , modernise our education systems and fill in knowledge gaps in the sciences and in engineering .
We will only emerge from the crisis if we support innovation .
The European Union must enable the creation of new financing instruments promoting research spending and private investments .
Furthermore , collaboration between the public and private sectors , through the implementation of partnerships , is an important way of encouraging a more innovative economy .
I believe that it is essential to adopt the single European patent in order to encourage a move towards commercial exchanges outside the Union .
Patents are currently far too expensive ; we absolutely must reduce the costs associated with creating them .
Finally , faced with the ' brain-drain ' phenomenon , it is important to encourage the retention of researchers in Europe .
Without them , financing and other mechanisms are of no use .
European scores in terms of innovation have remained rather poor until now .
Yet innovation should help us rise to society 's main challenges , such as an ageing population , the need to manage resources sustainably , or economic recovery .
That is why I voted in favour of this own-initiative report , which highlights , in particular , the concept of social innovation and emphasises the active role that regions and local authorities can play in innovation .
Finally , we must promote a system for protecting intellectual property rights that is balanced and respects inventors ' rights while , at the same time , offering our citizens the widest possible access to knowledge : such are the challenges to be met and which innovation could contribute towards in future .
I voted in favour of this document , because under Article 179 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , the Union shall ' encourage undertakings , including small and medium-sized undertakings , research centres and universities in their research and technological development activities of high quality ; it shall support their efforts to cooperate with one another , aiming , notably , at permitting researchers to cooperate freely across borders and at enabling undertakings to exploit the internal market potential to the full , in particular , through the opening up of national public contracts , the definition of common standards and the removal of legal and fiscal obstacles to that cooperation ' .
I am utterly convinced that the EU must take an offensive stance and take a firm front runner position in competitiveness , and must therefore invest in an innovation blast .
The European Commission must translate the current ' Innovation Union ' strategic document into an action plan with specific objectives and with measurable and time-framed targets .
The Commission must monitor progress regularly , assessing obstacles and putting forward a mechanism to improve the regular provision of reports to the European Parliament and the Council .
The Spanish Socialist delegation has voted in favour of the Merkies report on the Innovation Union : transforming Europe for a post-crisis world , because we agree with and are committed to the fundamental principles the report sets forth , which lay down the groundwork for transition to an intelligent , sustainable and fair European economy .
Nonetheless , I wish to point out that our vote in favour of the report as a whole does not mean that we support the agreement reached by the majority of the Council on enhanced cooperation , as it excludes the Spanish language from the European patent .
Our vote against the section introducing enhanced cooperation bears witness to our strong opposition to this matter .
The instrument for enhanced cooperation will have a direct impact on the internal market , territorial cohesion and the right of the citizens of the Member States to an EU patent governed by language regulations that provide sufficient legal certainty .
Further to this , the proposal to create a European and Community Patents Court is ' incompatible with European Union law ' according to the Court of Justice of the European Union .
Innovation may result in the development and reinvention of the European Union once the current crisis is over .
However , we must be totally realistic and propose specific working instruments which will allow the correlation of innovation efforts at European , national and regional level .
European innovation policy must be focused mainly on devising and specifically meeting objectives relating to the major challenges which the European Union is facing .
I think that a reassessment is needed of the complexity of the tasks and responsibilities which local and regional government authorities have .
In future , we will have to provide good quality technical assistance and financial support to ensure sufficient administrative capacity is available where required .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Joining forces to innovate so as to solve common problems in Europe means more focus , more rapid development , efficiency , including cost-efficiency , and greater creativity .
The Innovation Union is intended not only to provide an answer to shared problems facing our societies but , at the same time , to increase Europe 's competitiveness and point to ways out of the economic crisis .
Innovation is solving common problems in Europe , meaning greater focus , faster developments , efficiency ( cost-efficiency ) and greater creativity .
The Innovation Union should not only provide an answer to shared problems , but also increase Europe 's competitiveness and find a way out of the economic crisis .
As Europe is very dependent on imports , the Member States are united in feeling the need to use intelligently and sustainably the raw materials and commodities required to generate energy or for use in industry or food production .
Europe 's economies have become so interlinked nowadays that it is not only the stability of the euro that requires a common approach : so do efforts to increase the competitiveness of the Member States .
What is needed is a common path towards an equitable and stable economy .
Only a united Europe will be able to realise the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
In the past , innovation has primarily been envisaged in the field of research .
It should not be forgotten , though , that innovation can come from any EU citizen .
These concepts - which often start out simply as ideas - should be supported at EU level by means of easier access to funding , simplified authorisation procedures and cheap and straightforward patents , amongst other things .
That will enable the citizens themselves to exercise influence and help shape a sustainable society .
Moreover , innovations of this kind , where the focus absolutely should remain on research , would help to maintain high living standards in Europe .
The report received my vote because allowing individual citizens to play a part in shaping society represents a positive step .
Furthermore , the signs of the electronic era point more and more towards personal innovation , which is very much worth noting .
The report clarifies what goes without saying ; that it is impossible to support innovation without supporting research and education .
Although there are no foregone conclusions as to when the economic crisis will abate , the targets set by the Member States for 2020 in the research sector will not be achieved as things currently stand , just as the targets set in the previous European strategy , the Lisbon strategy , were not achieved .
Data available to date illustrate that - roughly - a mere 2.7 % of European GDP will be channelled into research at the end of the decade , despite the Member States ' clear commitment to spend at least 3 % for that purpose .
At the same time , the Member States are citing the crisis as the reason for cutbacks in spending on education .
In other words , the two basic pillars of innovation are being undermined , rather than strengthened , and this should be a source of concern to national governments .
This report ' on Innovation Union : transforming Europe for a post-crisis world ' includes a series of measures that constitute major social challenges .
The rapporteur introduces the key idea of creating a union between all Europeans for innovation .
Indeed , as is argued , finding solutions for common problems in Europe is a challenge for faster development , greater cost efficiency and increased creative strength .
Innovation Union also aims to boost the competitiveness of Europe as a whole , in order to find a way out of the economic crisis .
Given the widespread dependence on imports , the Member States feel a common need to seek methods for the smart and sustainable use of those resources and raw materials needed to produce energy , as well as for industry or food production .
The ageing population issue is another challenge being faced by almost all EU countries .
A joint approach on issues like health could ensure a longer life , with proper care and medication , all while reducing costs .
These are only the major examples of common standards among the 27 Member States , as encouraged by this initiative , and are the basis of my vote for it .
in writing . - More investment in research and innovation is essential to guarantee a sustainable and competitive future for our economies .
As a share of GDP , the EU invests less than the US and Japan in research and development , and venture capital investment is also lacking .
We need to be able to hold on to our best researchers and innovators .
Reaching our target of investing 3 % of our GDP on R & D by 2020 could mean a return of 3.7 million jobs and almost EUR 800 billion .
Given its importance for improving quality of life and well-being , there is a role for both public and private initiative in innovation .
Innovation is essential to any area or community .
In fact , the ability to recreate something offered to us and , on that basis , give rise to something new , is fundamental to the development of any economy and , above all , to achieving social welfare .
That is why Innovation Union is one of the flagship initiatives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
It is a path that clearly needs to be followed in order to establish Europe on the international stage and satisfy the needs of the European public .
Those are the reasons why I am voting in favour .
Innovation is to European politics what education is to young people : a passport to the future , a virtually comprehensive insurance for a society that is making progress and preserving social cohesion .
This phrase takes on its full meaning in this post-global recession period during which we are seeing speedier economic recovery in the United States and still unashamed growth in the emerging powers referred to as the BRIC group .
One thing is clear : the European Union is lagging behind and the labour market is struggling to recover .
The ultimate irony is that Switzerland , which is not a member of the EU , remains the European champion of innovation .
That is why the call today by the European Parliament ( the Merkies report ) for a genuine ' change in mentality ' is important , because innovation is not just about technological inventions or the number of patents filed per inhabitant .
First and foremost , it is about building on the SME base , which is the main generator of wealth in Europe , through venture capital , guarantee facilities , assistance with loans and simplification of the legislative environment .
On this condition , perhaps the aspiration of 3 % of GDP to be devoted to R & D will become a reality ?
in writing . - We broadly supported the draft report and submitted a series of amendments which have mostly been included , for instance : an emphasis on green priority objectives : energy and climate change , resource efficiency , regeneration of biological resources and promoting social cohesion ; addressing eco-innovation at all stages , including design , through the adoption of a properly funded and ambitious eco-innovation action plan , as well as the adoption of a strategy for promoting product / service systems and function-oriented business models ; promoting the use of open standards as drivers for innovation and open access to publicly funded research , as well as focusing public financing on socially valuable fields where knowledge is created as a public good , such as inducement prizes in the health sector ( we also tried , with varying degrees of success , to propose better wording for IPR issues ) ; we managed to retain the wording welcoming the Commission 's efforts to prevent IPR from constituting a barrier to competition and innovation .
Europe has been emerging from a crisis in recent months and also has to deal with very strong global competition .
In this context , innovation is a necessity but , above all , it is a priority .
If we fail to transform Europe into an Innovation Union , the economies of the 27 Member States will , in fact , be destined to decline , resulting in a loss of talent and ideas .
Innovation is the key to achieving sustainable growth and helping to create a more just and environmentally friendly society .
Innovation is essential to create a modern economy and it is the main tool for creating new jobs .
We need a shared commitment to a deep-seated change in Europe 's capacity for innovation .
Only then will we be able to create stable and well-paid jobs that can withstand the pressure and the competition inherent to globalisation .
The Union is about innovation .
It is not just a play on words but a real hope that must materialise .
in writing . - I support this report as it is key to the post-crisis recovery and to addressing the major challenges in society .
During the vote on the parliamentary report on Innovation Union , I was keen to support the amendment rejecting the idea of controlling innovation by channelling towards innovative activities the resources from the structural funds and from certain sections of the common agricultural policy funds .
Of course , innovation should be encouraged , but this should not be done in a manner that is detrimental to other fundamental policies for the European Union 's future , such as the common agricultural policy .
The CAP should be reformed by concentrating on a few fundamental objectives , but the only integrated policy of the European Union must not be plundered .
The Research and Innovation Union scoreboard mentions that Japan and the United States invest a greater percentage of gross domestic product ( GDP ) in innovation than the EU , with the gap increasing over the last four years .
Compared to the BRIC countries , the EU invests more , with the differential having decreased for Brazil and China , and increased for India and Russia .
I therefore consider it essential that the European Union adopt a true innovation strategy , taking into account the Europe 2020 strategy of smart specialisation , with a view to reinforcing support for research , development and innovation ( RDI ) as a key element of the Union 's future , extending it into all the areas , sectors of activity and social agents of which it is comprised .
An innovation policy that is consistent and integrated , and has a long-term vision will enable us to leverage strengths and resolve weaknesses detected at regional level .
It is vital to adapt and simplify development policy , for example , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) and the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) .
The new strategic agenda will enable the construction of an increasingly modern and competitive Europe that plays a leading role in the world .
As innovation is a fundamental objective of regional policy , in future , Europe must adopt a strategic management approach , establishing appropriate policy instruments that will enable its evolution to be monitored and the necessary adjustments to be made .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report because I believe that the Innovation Union can help to address today 's societal challenges .
It is also essential in increasing competitiveness as the EU overcomes the economic crisis .
I agree with the report that Member States should make use of the structural funds to support research , development and innovation ( R & D & I ) objectives that target social challenges , with the aim of increasing prosperity in Europe .
Enhancing cross-border cooperation is also imperative , as is encouraging citizens to create innovative new businesses .
This can be achieved by cutting red tape and establishing a simple and coherent system that focuses on societal challenges .
The Union has not been able to make up its shortfall in terms of innovation , in spite of the Lisbon strategy .
In a context of budgetary restrictions - which rules out public money as a solution - and increased global competition , Europe must react in order to get itself back into the innovation race .
I think that it is essential to focus on structural reforms that will eliminate the obstacles holding back the considerable potential for innovation in Europe .
I therefore supported this report , which notably points the finger at the high costs associated with the filing of patents in all Member States , and calls for a speedy agreement on the single European patent .
I am also pleased to see that proposals by my political family have been taken up - in particular , the creation of a European innovation fund , which will simplify access to European credits for our small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
Liberating the capacity for innovation in Europe requires setting a minimum spending threshold , in terms of research and development , in each Member State .
This would ensure an equitable division of efforts and prevent the development of a two-speed Europe , which would disrupt the cohesion and governance of the EU .
This is essential if Europe wants to remain at the highest level of the global economy .
I voted for Mrs Merkies ' report because the final version provides a better balance than the original version , which was too focused on the enabling roles of citizens instead of enterprises .
Indeed , enterprises deserve a leading role in research and innovation , partly because we must remember that EU policies on the subject grew and developed through the promotion of policies aimed at strengthening collaboration between industry , educational systems and research institutions .
I therefore believe that the report we have voted on represents a useful contribution to the ongoing debate on a future joint strategic programme to support research and innovation in the EU .
I am voting for this proposal given that the crisis has been wiping out millions of jobs and has increased job insecurity and poverty ; that 17 % of EU residents are at risk of poverty ; that 23 million EU residents are unemployed ; that much domestic work takes place in the informal economy , under precarious employment conditions and / or as undeclared work and that , in addition to this , in industrialised countries , domestic work accounts for between 5 % and 9 % of all employment ; that the vast majority of the people employed in that sector are women ; that such work is undervalued , underpaid and informal ; and that domestic workers ' vulnerability means they are often discriminated against and subjected to unfair or abusive treatment .
I welcome and support the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) initiative to adopt a convention supplemented by a recommendation on decent work for domestic workers .
I call on the EU countries that are members of the ILO to adopt these instruments at the ILO conference in June 2011 .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
The crisis has wiped out millions of jobs and has aggravated job insecurity and poverty - 17 % of EU residents are at risk of poverty .
In some countries , much domestic work takes place in the shadow economy , under precarious employment conditions and / or as undeclared work .
The vast majority of the people employed in this sector are women and such work is undervalued , underpaid and informal .
Domestic workers are often discriminated against and can easily be subjected to unequal , unfair or abusive treatment .
I welcome the ILO initiative to adopt a convention supplemented by recommendations on decent work for domestic workers .
The Member States must ratify and implement this convention and recommendations quickly , because its implementation would address the needs of one of the most vulnerable categories of worker and would tackle the problem of undeclared work .
While most domestic workers are precarious workers , who are often discriminated against and sometimes exploited , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has decided to press for the adoption of a resolution while questioning the European Commission about its actions in relation to this category of workers .
In June , the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , which is to have its annual conference , should adopt a convention on domestic workers requiring that they enjoy equal treatment with other workers , and that all the conditions for dignified work are met .
Through our resolution , we support the ambition displayed by the ILO .
Note , however , that this is only the first stage : now we must ensure that the Member States ratify this convention once it is adopted .
I fully support the ILO 's initiative to adopt a convention supplemented by a recommendation on decent work for domestic workers .
Many of these workers are undocumented migrants , which means that they are more likely to be mistreated , paid irregularly or subjected to violence .
Moreover , undocumented workers do not dare to contact the authorities to seek protection , claim their rights or access health services because they fear being returned to their home country and / or punishment by their employer .
All domestic workers , regardless of their origin , must have decent access to work .
The International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) is currently working on drawing up a convention on domestic workers .
Adopting this ILO convention on domestic workers will be an essential element in ensuring that domestic workers ' human , social and employment rights are respected .
Domestic work makes up between 5 % and 9 % of total employment .
This work is often insecure , undervalued and undeclared .
I voted in favour of this report to enable the transformation of a report which is all too often about exploitation and the law , in an area which represents between 5 and 9 % of all jobs within the European Union .
All those who work with our elderly people must be able to enjoy freedom of association and rest time , and must not be subject to harassment and arbitrary practices .
That is why we wanted to send a strong message of support to the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) and the trades unions prior to the negotiations on the adoption of these new instruments , which will commence in June at the 100th International Labour conference .
We regret , however , that the right is happy to express concerns about illegal domestic workers while refusing to recognise that all too often , such situations involve workers with no papers , who are the main victims of precarity and abusive practices .
in writing . - I supported this resolution on the ILO convention on Decent Work for Domestic Workers .
This convention aims to provide legal recognition for domestic work as work , to extend rights to all domestic workers , and to prevent violations and abuses .
The European Parliament resolution further calls on the EU countries which are members of the ILO to adopt these instruments at the ILO conference in June 2011 and calls on the EU Member States to ratify and implement the convention and recommendation quickly .
In some countries , much domestic work takes place in the informal economy , under precarious employment conditions and / or as undeclared work .
In industrialised countries , domestic work accounts for between 5 and 9 % of all employment , with the vast majority of the people employed in that sector being women .
Indeed , the trend towards an increase in the proportion of non-standard or atypical contracts has a strong gender and generational dimension .
The adoption , ratification and implementation of the ILO convention can have an impact by reducing the numbers of working poor and improve the position of the large number of women on the labour market .
In Europe , close to two immigrant women out of three have low-skilled jobs , often in the sector of healthcare or domestic work .
These women contribute to our economy , yet they suffer very poor working conditions and violations of their most basic rights .
The International Labour conference , which will take place in June this year , will be the chance for members of the International Labour Organisation to adopt a ' Convention on decent work for domestic workers ' .
This instrument is a step in the right direction for the rights of workers across the world since it extends labour law standards to domestic workers , a category who , until now , were excluded from these standards .
The ball is now in the court of the Member States , as they have to commit to ratify this convention .
At European level , we will also need to stop considering separately and systematically the immigration and labour policies .
It is not right for domestic workers to be coerced into informal work , regardless of their rights , because of an immigration regulation that is too strict and ill-adapted .
It is well known that domestic work is often insecure and informal , and this insecurity and informality seriously jeopardises the rights of those providing these types of services , even though they participate in the economic activity of their respective countries and should be considered workers like anyone else .
The level of trust between employer and employee required by such activity makes it advisable not to overload the working relationship with excessive formality but , at the same time , means that the worker should be able to exercise their profession with dignity .
The International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) convention , supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers , could be another step in the right direction .
This European Parliament resolution addresses the proposed International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) convention , supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers .
In June , another ILO conference will take place in Geneva at which the problem of domestic work will be tackled .
Although the EU is formally barred from participating because it is the Member States that are members , it is aware of its responsibilities to cooperate with the ILO and did not therefore want to fail to contribute to an area that we could say comes under the heading ' fundamental rights ' .
The importance of domestic work is indisputable .
It is work carried out in the home - childcare and elderly-care facilities - that is included in the Europe 2020 strategy and represents 5 % to 9 % of all work undertaken in the EU , with the trend being towards growth .
However , domestic workers - the majority of whom are women and immigrants - are often subjected to exploitation by their bosses , who do not guarantee their social rights .
That is why I voted for this motion for a resolution .
The adoption of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) convention , supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers , is a significant step forward , and we view it positively .
In the various Member States , as was clear during the debate , the majority of these workers are women , and an increasing percentage of them are illegal immigrants .
These two groups are the most vulnerable and the most susceptible to violence or sexual abuse .
It is important that measures be taken in this regard at the upcoming ILO conference .
The severely exploitative and discriminatory conditions under which they work are well known .
Many of these domestic workers work in scarcely decent conditions , are subject to intense exploitation , and are not guaranteed rights such as the right to social security , to health and safety protection , to maternity protection , working time limits , to rest , and to freedom of association and representation .
There is therefore an obvious need to regulate domestic work .
As such , effective measures to combat insecure jobs , falsified invoices , undeclared work and illegal work urgently need to be taken .
We consider it important to move towards the adoption of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) convention supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers , the majority of whom are women , and an increasing percentage of them illegal immigrants .
These two groups are the most vulnerable and the most susceptible to violence or sexual abuse and it would therefore be very positive if a decisive step were taken on this matter at the upcoming ILO conference .
The severely exploitative and discriminatory conditions under which many of those engaged in domestic work operate are well known .
There is therefore an obvious need to regulate domestic work , so that they do not remain exposed to scarcely decent conditions , and are entitled to rights such as the right to social security , to health and safety protection , to maternity protection , to working time limits , to rest , and to freedom of association and representation .
As such , effective measures to combat insecure jobs , falsified invoices , undeclared work and illegal work urgently need to be taken .
It is therefore essential to transform all unstable jobs into stable ones with rights and decent wages .
I fully support the adoption , ratification and implementation of a convention on domestic work by the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) .
For the most part , domestic workers work under precarious conditions , frequently find themselves in legally dubious administrative situations which make their situation even less stable , and are often victims of discrimination , inequality and unfair or abusive treatment .
However , their services are essential to our society , from infancy to help for elderly people .
We must obtain a legal framework which enables us to improve the rights of these workers and to promote decent working conditions .
I voted in favour of this document because the crisis has wiped out millions of jobs and has aggravated job insecurity and poverty - 17 % of EU residents are at risk of poverty and 23 million EU residents are unemployed .
In some countries , much domestic work takes place in the shadow economy , under precarious employment conditions and / or as undeclared work .
The vast majority of the people employed in this sector are women and such work is undervalued , underpaid and informal .
Domestic workers ' vulnerability means they are often discriminated against and can easily be subjected to unequal , unfair or abusive treatment .
Domestic work should be legally recognised as work , we should give all domestic workers more rights and prevent violations and abuses in order to establish a legal framework for all domestic workers and ensure that their work does not take place outside the regulatory framework .
The adoption , ratification and implementation of the ILO convention would not only improve the position of a large number of women on the labour market for domestic work by guaranteeing them decent working conditions , but would also enhance their degree of social inclusion .
It might be necessary to adapt legislation to create flexible and secure contractual arrangements which guarantee equal treatment .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which ' considers that the problem of undeclared work needs to be tackled ; states that the domestic work sector is characterised by a high level of informality and undeclared work , that many migrant workers are employed in this sector , and that their rights are often violated ; further , considers it essential to combat precarious work in general , given that this problem affects migrant workers in particular , thus worsening their already vulnerable position ' .
The casualisation of male and female workers is at the heart of the oligarchy 's domination logic , in Europe as elsewhere .
Among the various forms of organised insecurity , there is one that is more difficult to eradicate than others : domestic employees .
This report supports the drafting of an ILO convention to protect the rights of these workers and especially of these hidden female workers .
It also condemns the growing number of atypical contracts , a sign that work is increasingly becoming insecure .
I give my vote to this initiative , while deploring the fact that this initiative will have no real impact .
Given that domestic work accounts for between 5 % and 9 % of all employment ; that the vast majority of the people employed in that sector are women ; that such work is undervalued , underpaid and informal ; and that domestic workers ' vulnerability means they are often discriminated against and can easily be subjected to unequal , unfair or abusive treatment , solutions must be found to eliminate this type of situation .
I therefore welcome this International Labour Organisation convention , which warns of problems involving domestic work .
With this resolution , the European Parliament intends to express its support for the initiative of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) to adopt a convention supplemented by a recommendation on decent work for domestic workers .
In fact , migrant workers accepting low-skilled temporary jobs on the edges of the labour market or jobs as domestic workers are exposed to multiple forms of discrimination .
These workers are often exposed to poverty and irregular conditions , are more likely to be victims of mistreatment , paid irregularly , or subjected to violence or sexual abuse , and are less likely to approach the authorities to seek protection and claim their rights , for fear of being returned to their country of origin and / or punished by their employers .
This situation is the reason why I voted for the resolution .
I support the aim of the convention to take steps towards legal recognition of domestic work as a professional activity , extending rights to all domestic workers in order to prevent violations and abuse , and in order to establish a legal framework that guarantees that work cannot take place outside a regulated setting .
in writing . - I support this resolution on the proposed International Labour Organisation convention on domestic workers .
A significant part of domestic work is undeclared , precarious and underpaid , and domestic workers , mostly women , are vulnerable to abuse , especially when working abroad .
The adoption of this ILO convention can help reduce the numbers of working poor , improve working conditions and facilitate the social inclusion of some of the most vulnerable workers .
We need to apply core labour standards to domestic work and ensure that those performing it are entitled to social security and protection against abusive practices .
Domestic workers are often penalised for the informal nature of their work .
Therefore , since they are outside the formal structures of economic activity , there are often restrictions on their rights as workers .
This situation must be fought determinedly .
in writing . - With this , the EP : ( 1 ) welcomes and supports the ILO initiative to adopt a convention supplemented by a recommendation for decent work for domestic workers ; calls on those EU Member States which are members of the ILO to adopt these instruments at the ILO conference in June 2011 ; calls on the EU Member States to ratify and implement the convention and recommendation quickly ; ( 2 ) considers that the adoption , ratification and implementation of an ILO convention on decent work for domestic workers can have an impact by reducing the numbers of working poor ; ( 3 ) considers that the adoption , ratification and implementation of such a convention would address the needs of one of the most vulnerable categories of workers ;
Yesterday , Thursday , 12 May , the European Parliament voted through the resolution on the proposed ILO convention supplemented by a recommendation on domestic workers .
Throughout the world , and in poor countries in particular , domestic services are among the lowest paid jobs .
These jobs often lack correct contracts and social benefits .
Highlighting this service sector separately in a recommendation in association with an ILO convention is therefore right and proper .
The reason why I voted against the European Parliament 's resolution is the wording in paragraph 13 , in which the EU Member States are called on to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families , something that no EU Member State has done as yet .
In my opinion , the six key UN conventions , which are universal and cover all people , do not need to be supplemented by further instruments .
There would then be a high risk of the legitimacy of the conventions that have already been adopted being undermined , which is something that I do not wish to be party to .
I would rather work to increase compliance with the key human rights conventions , the content of which clearly also applies to domestic workers .
This is something that far too many signatory states seem to be ignoring today .
Domestic work , often insecure , undervalued and undeclared , represents 5 % to 9 % of total employment in industrialised countries .
The majority of these domestic workers are women and immigrants , who are easier to exploit and underpay .
Adopting this ILO convention on domestic workers will be an essential element in ensuring human and social rights are respected , by granting domestic work the same status as any other work and by providing a legal framework for domestic workers .
The parliamentary resolution adopted today sends a strong signal to all the Member States for them to sign this convention , which has the power , I sincerely hope , to strengthen workers ' social inclusion by granting them access to standard social rights to which all workers are entitled .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament 's resolution inviting the Member States to commit regarding the ILO 's draft convention on domestic workers .
This convention will enable us to better fight against the unacceptable working conditions of too many employees in this sector , who are overwhelmingly women and , for many , immigrant workers , in particular , undocumented immigrants .
It will supplement other conventions of the ILO or of other international organisations .
The European Parliament also advocated the ratification by the EU and its Member States of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers .
Nevertheless , I regret the fact that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) managed to pass , in particular due to the abstention of a number of socialist MEPs , an amendment which refuses to put immigrant workers , especially undocumented immigrants , on an equal footing with other workers .
This amendment is consistent with this ever more negative perception of immigrants which fuels xenophobia .
It will then remain for the provisions of this convention to be actually implemented , which will not be easy , but let us consider nonetheless that the approach is positive .
The International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) is a specialised agency of the United Nations and acts on behalf of social justice , human rights and workers ' rights .
The main function of the organisation is to establish international labour and social standards .
For the ILO , 2010 was the year of domestic workers .
Minimum standards have therefore now been established , as domestic workers form the largest unregulated sector in the world .
I am voting for this proposal , given that antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) is an animal health issue for the European livestock sector , especially when treatment failure occurs ; that guidelines on the prudent use of antimicrobials have already been issued in several Member States , which has led to a reduction in the usage of antimicrobials ; that the livestock sector - dairy , beef meat , pig and poultry meat , eggs , sheep and goat milk and meat production - plays a major role in the European agricultural economy ; and that farmers ' primary goal is to keep their livestock healthy and productive through good agricultural practices relating to hygiene , proper feed , appropriate husbandry and responsible animal health management .
I therefore call on the Commission to develop a broad , multiannual action plan against AMR within the framework of the EU animal health strategy ( 2011-2015 ) .
Antibiotic resistance is an animal health issue for the European livestock sector , especially when treatment failure occurs .
Guidelines on the prudent use of these substances have already been issued in numerous Member States , which has led to a reduction in their usage .
When used properly , antimicrobials are a useful tool to help farmers keep their livestock healthy and productive and ensure their well-being .
Although these substances are prescribed for use in animals , they affect both humans and animals .
The ultimate objective of this motion for a resolution is to maintain antimicrobials as an effective tool for combating disease , both in animals and in humans , while restricting their use to cases where it is strictly necessary .
I voted in favour of this report .
The main aim of farmers is to ensure the health and productivity of their livestock , and it is through employing good agricultural practices that they achieve it .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it requests that further research be done on antimicrobials and other options , which will help farmers to achieve the abovementioned objectives .
An agenda must be established for sharing research , knowledge and best practices .
I support the request that further research be done on animal welfare and agricultural practices , such as improving herd management , early prevention of disease and the breeding of robust varieties of animals .
It must be ensured , however , that the financial and administrative burden on farmers is not increased because of any increased surveillance and monitoring of antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) in food producing and companion animals .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
Antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) is a major animal health issue for the European livestock sector .
Given the huge importance of the livestock sector for the European agricultural economy , it is essential to address this issue properly .
I agree that the Member States should perform regular systematic surveillance and monitoring of AMR in food producing animals , without creating additional financial or administrative burdens for farmers or other animal owners or veterinarians .
The Food and Veterinary Office and the European Food Safety Authority should carry out further inspections and analyses in this field and submit recommendations .
I agree that the Commission must hold talks at international level in order to ban antimicrobials as growth promoters in animal feed , and to bring this matter up in its bilateral negotiations with third countries .
It is positive that a reduction in antibiotic use has been recorded , and the publication of guidelines on the prudent use of antibiotics in a number of Member States has contributed to this .
Any decision leading to the administration of antimicrobials , whether to humans or animals , should be carefully considered and take into account the potential threat of antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) .
In fact , this resistance affects both humans and animals , and can be transmitted from human to animal and vice versa .
I am well aware that AMR in humans is often caused by inadequate doses of antibiotic medicines and incorrect treatments , but it can also be through the transmission , via animals , of pathogenic bacteria carrying AMR genes , with serious consequences for public and animal health .
We are therefore faced with a truly cross-cutting issue requiring a coordinated approach at EU level that must seek to ensure that antimicrobials can remain an effective tool for combating disease , in both people and animals , must encourage prudent and responsible usage , and must limit any recourse to them to cases where it is strictly necessary .
Antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) is an animal health issue for the European livestock sector , especially at a time when guidelines on the prudent use of antimicrobials have already been issued in several Member States , which has led to a reduction in the usage of these substances .
Since farmers ' primary goal is to keep their livestock healthy and productive through good agricultural practices ( hygiene , proper feed , appropriate husbandry , responsible animal health management ) , I think that more research needs to be carried out on the new antimicrobials , as well as on other alternatives ( vaccination , biosecurity , breeding for resistance ) and on evidence-based strategies for avoiding and controlling infectious diseases in animals , which are deployed in the European Union 's research framework programmes .
I voted for the motion for a resolution on antibiotic resistance because I believe that the Commission and the Member States need to adopt measures to address the growing problem of antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) in animals , given that the use of antibiotics in animal feed also contributes to antibiotic resistance in humans .
Resistance to antibiotics is a serious problem affecting the livestock industry , so I share the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's concerns on this issue and agree with its proposals , not just to reduce animals ' resistance to treatment with antibiotics , but also to encourage other means of combating animal diseases that do not necessarily involve the use of antibiotics .
As regards the use of antimicrobials as growth promoters in animal feed , I would draw attention to the fact that this endangers the health , not only of the animals , which become resistant to the antibiotics , but also of people , as products of animal origin enter the food chain , thereby affecting humans .
A study of the possibility of banning the use of antimicrobials in animal feed is therefore urgently needed , as is promotion of measures to reduce resistance to antibiotics , thereby ensuring better animal health and increased food safety .
This European Parliament resolution tackles the problem of animal resistance to antibiotics , which is a situation with disastrous consequences .
This issue has implications in terms of human health , particularly for those who work with these animals , but also of economics , as the competitive future of EU animal husbandry is at stake .
Parliament has already debated this issue more than once and has adopted a number of initiatives , like the database , which should be continuously updated .
However , the time has come to move from words to actions so that the legislation in force ceases to be a dead letter .
Therefore , it is essential that the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) takes this problem into account and encourages good animal husbandry practices .
As such , I voted for this joint motion for a resolution , adopted by a broad majority in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as it is a very balanced text whose proposals not only protect human health and defend animal welfare , but also ensure companies ' viability .
Antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) is an animal health issue for the European livestock sector , covering dairy , beef , pig and poultry meat , eggs , sheep and goat milk and meat production .
Antimicrobials , when used properly , are a useful tool to help farmers keep their livestock healthy and productive .
AMR in humans is often caused by inadequate doses of antibiotic medicines .
Transmission of pathogenic bacteria constitutes a particular threat to farmers and farm workers , who are in a daily contact with animals .
This report contributes to orienting joint data collection activities in this area , analysing results and proposing solutions .
Its aim is to create a full picture of when , where , how and on which animals the antimicrobials are actually used today , without creating additional financial or administrative burdens for farmers or other animal owners , taking into account the fact that farming practice and intensity is different from one Member State to another .
We would stress the importance of developing systems for animal husbandry , which reduce the need for antimicrobials to be prescribed , as well as research into new antimicrobials .
We consider the content of the resolution positive , as it is oriented towards the prudent and responsible use of antimicrobials .
Antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) is an animal health issue for the European livestock sector , covering dairy , beef , pig and poultry meat , eggs , and sheep and goat milk and meat production .
Antimicrobials , when used properly , are a useful tool to help farmers keep their livestock healthy and productive .
AMR in humans is often caused by inadequate doses of antibiotic medicines , whose transmission of pathogenic bacteria constitutes a particular threat to farmers and farm workers , who are in daily contact with animals .
This document contributes to orienting joint data collection activities in this area , analysing their results and proposing their respective solutions .
As such , its aim is to create a full picture of when , where , how and on which animals the antimicrobials are actually used today , without creating additional financial or administrative burdens for farmers or other animal owners , taking into account the fact that farming practice and intensity is different from one Member State to another .
It is also important to undertake research into new antimicrobials , as well as into other alternatives , and we would stress the importance of developing effective systems for animal husbandry which reduce the need for antimicrobials to be prescribed .
I voted in favour of this document because the ultimate objective is to maintain antimicrobials as an effective tool to combat disease , both in animals and in humans , while only using antimicrobials when absolutely necessary .
In my opinion , we need to establish good practices for animal husbandry which minimise the risk of antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) .
These practices should apply , in particular , to young animals which are brought together from different breeders and thus increase the risk of communicable diseases .
The Commission should work towards an international ban on antimicrobials as growth promoters in animal feed , and bring this matter up in its bilateral negotiations with third countries such as the United States .
We must emphasise the logical connection between animal health and the use of antimicrobials , as well as the link between animal health and human health .
Today , the most important thing is for us to ensure a maximum level of food safety .
For a long time , antibiotics were seen as a wonder drug that cured infectious diseases .
In most European countries , antibiotics are the most-used class of drugs after analgesics .
Around 50 % of the antibiotics prescribed in Europe are used in veterinary medicine .
If antibiotics were not used , animal diseases and epizootics could quickly spread and become epidemics , causing enormous economic damage .
Unfortunately , the uncontrolled use of antibiotics in both human and veterinary medicine comes at a very high cost .
The excessive use of antibiotics leads to resistance and adaptation among pathogens .
Many of the well-known antibiotics have today become either ineffective or unreliable .
I therefore strongly endorse the resolution of this House that expressly calls on the Commission and the Member States to tackle the growing problem of antibiotic resistance amongst animals in a responsible way .
in writing . - This resolution recognises that antimicrobials , when used properly , are a useful tool to help farmers keep their livestock healthy and productive and to ensure the animals ' well-being .
However , it also acknowledges the need for tight control and monitoring , and I was therefore able to vote for it .
Antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) is an animal health issue for the European livestock sector , especially when treatment failure occurs .
Guidelines on the prudent use of antimicrobials have already been issued in several Member States , which has led to a reduction in the use of antimicrobials .
Despite positive results , there is still much to be done in relation to this problem .
That is why common European policies leading to the eradication of this problem are needed .
Today , Parliament adopted an important decision on antibiotic resistance .
In my opinion , it is very important to collect and analyse information on the use of animal health products , including antibiotic substances .
It is also necessary to ensure that these products are used effectively and moderately and do not pose a risk to the effectiveness of measures for combating human illnesses when antibiotic agents are chosen as a treatment in medicine .
Although , from 2005-2009 in the EU , tests for monitoring the residues of antibacterial agents in animals and animal foodstuffs show positive results , we can still say that there is no controlled trend towards reduction , only fragmented fluctuations .
Particularly worrying is the fact that according to 2009 data , the majority of discrepancies as regards antibiotic agents were found in honey , rabbit and farmed fish samples , in other words , products that are frequently considered to be valuable foodstuffs and are often used in Europeans ' daily diet .
Thus , the aim of carefully applying antimicrobial treatment and implementing comprehensive monitoring in order to better coordinate sources of human and veterinary research is very important for guaranteeing human health and animal welfare .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
Every year , 25 000 people die across Europe from causes linked to or associated with antimicrobial resistance .
Animals and food of animal origin could play a role in the transfer of antimicrobial resistance to people .
This is why antibiotics need to be used with caution in animal husbandry .
The measures proposed by this resolution on providing more information to vets and farmers must be implemented as vigorously as possible .
The resolution on antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) comes at a time when AMR represents an animal health problem for the European livestock sector , which needs to be able to rely on antimicrobial treatments being safe and effective in the near future .
The administration of antimicrobials to animals has to take into account the potential threat of AMR in humans , frequently caused by inadequate doses of antibiotic medicines , by incorrect treatments and through the constant exposure of pathogens to antimicrobial agents in hospitals .
I voted for the report because the transmission of pathogenic bacteria carrying AMR genes constitutes a particular threat to people , through the intake of said bacteria and / or through daily contact with animals .
I believe that commitment to research is essential , as it contributes to the development of antimicrobials as an effective tool in the fight against diseases afflicting both people and animals .
However , the use of antimicrobials should be limited to cases where it is strictly necessary .
in writing . - Antibiotic resistance is a serious public health issue .
Antimicrobial administration to both humans and livestock entails the risk of resistance when used incorrectly and at inadequate doses .
Antimicrobial resistance can be transmitted from humans to animals and vice versa .
Hospital patients and farmers are at particular risk of exposure to resistant bacteria .
There is a need for better coordination of human and veterinarian research on resistance , as well as further research on new antibiotics , alternative treatments and animal disease prevention and control practices .
Animal husbandry plays a key role in the European economy .
Antibiotics are used frequently to ensure animal health .
The problem that can arise is that both humans and animals can develop antimicrobial resistance ( AMR ) , the human health impact of which could be serious .
It is therefore necessary to adopt appropriate strategies as a precaution against such risks .
in writing . - With this , the EP : 1 .
Welcomes the efforts made by the Commission and its agencies as regards joint data collection activities in this field , in particular , the initiative in 2009 to create ESVAC ( European Surveillance of Veterinary Antimicrobial Consumption ) ; regrets that not all Member States have yet joined the ESVAC network and calls on more countries to do so ; calls on the Commission to provide the ESVAC network with sufficient financial resources to perform its tasks ; calls on the Commission to without delay provide an adequate legal framework in order to give Member States the authority to perform an efficient data collection ; 2 . Calls on the Commission to strive for a data collection which is harmonised and comparable , also with activities undertaken in third countries such as the United States .
Antibiotics are naturally occurring metabolic products of fungi or bacteria that are used to counter bacterial infections .
Amongst other uses , they are fed to animals on a preventative basis .
Resistance means the loss of an antibiotic 's ability to kill bacteria or inhibit their growth .
In order to prevent this , it is necessary to follow medical instructions .
Resistant animal germs can be passed on to humans , however , and represent a major health risk - the result may even be antibiotic resistance in humans .
It was therefore only right to vote in favour of this report in order to finally promote livestock production that manages without antimicrobial substances .
It is common knowledge that , just like humans , animals that are given antibiotics are sometimes resistant to their effect .
This resistance may be transferred from animals to humans , and thereby pose a risk to health , or complicate the treatment of some diseases .
It is therefore important to monitor in detail the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry and the keeping of pets .
This is about consumer protection and the security of food production , which must be ensured to an equally high standard in all EU Member States .
It is appropriate for a European Parliament made up of the elected representatives of the people to demand that the Commission take action .
We can react rapidly and effectively only if we know the true situation .
I have therefore supported the report submitted and I expect the Commission to submit in the near future a proposal for measures to monitor the use of antibiotics in the animal husbandry sector .
I am voting for this report because culture can be a key element in international relations by contributing to development , inclusion , democracy and conflict prevention .
It should therefore be included in the development of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
In this new digital economy , the cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) represent great potential and are capable of encouraging the expression of European cultural diversity and the spread of economic and social progress .
In addition , culture and creativity are the keys to safeguarding and enhancing our cultural heritage and landscapes and are useful in raising the cultural level of citizens .
We should not underestimate the fact that these industries make up one of the most dynamic sectors in Europe and contribute 2.6 % of EU gross domestic product by offering quality employment to some 5 million European citizens .
With the Green Paper published by the Commission one year ago , the cultural and creative industries obtained their rightful recognition , carving out a crucial role in a European vision of culture based on the information society , innovation and entrepreneurship .
Unfortunately , a lack of investment , under-capitalisation of companies , the lack of a regulatory framework to set aside hurdles to the mobility of artists and creatives and the increasing prevalence of piracy are some of the factors that weaken the establishment of a European cultural space .
We must not forget that the worldwide success of European industry is founded on the great professionalism and creativity of our artists , who should be protected and encouraged via tangible incentives to keep up their good work .
The fundamental aspect of European culture is that it is not intended to be promoted in external relations in a simplified way , but as something vibrant and alive thanks to its particular features .
Just as we talk about European values , rights and freedoms , we must also talk about Europe 's cultures , their diversity , creative plurality and the role of European ambassador which each creative element of national culture can play to promote Europe as a whole .
Before we start promoting these cultures outside Europe , even we ourselves have to want to become familiarised with all those cultural elements which are typical of Europe .
In this respect , I believe that every citizen of the European Union is the best ambassador for Europe 's cultures .
The only condition is that they should be offered beforehand the simplest possible opportunity to find out about the cultural wealth in the area where they live .
I voted in favour of this report .
The EU is a culturally diverse community of values in which successive EU enlargements , personal mobility in the shared European area , established and new migratory flows and exchanges of all kinds with the rest of the world help foster that cultural diversity .
Culture plays a role in bilateral agreements on development and trade , and through measures such as the European instruments for Development Cooperation , for Stability , for Democracy and Human Rights and for Pre-Accession , the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) , the Eastern Partnership , the Union for the Mediterranean and the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) , which mostly allocate resources to various cultural programmes .
I agree that there is a need to strengthen cultural and educational exchanges with third countries , which would strengthen civil society , foster democratisation and good governance , promote human rights and fundamental freedoms and provide building blocks for lasting cooperation .
This report sends a clear message : the European Union must incorporate a consistent and coordinated cultural strategy into its foreign policy .
The bonds that unite more specifically Europe and the countries south of the Mediterranean are going through deep changes .
A wind of freedom is blowing on the Arab world .
Culture is a significant asset .
It contributes to a lively and long-lasting democracy .
Cultural and educational exchanges encourage the emergence of an organised civil society .
Cultural cooperation is also one of the keys to the Union 's success for the Mediterranean .
It leads nations to share and interact with one another , respect and better understand each other every day .
It was important for the European Parliament to provide a strong reminder of how much we must promote diversity , heritage and cultural exchanges in all the EU 's external actions .
As a creator of integration , tolerance and mutual comprehension , culture is an essential component of our societies which we must promote in our diplomatic efforts in favour of human rights and democracy .
This report emphasises , however , that the cultural dimension of external actions still remains underdeveloped and undercoordinated , and that it is necessary to adopt a common and coherent strategy in this area .
We have also renewed our support for a free Internet by condemning Internet censorship and the threats that it poses to human rights , as well as to access to and sharing of global cultural heritage .
While European citizens share a range of common cultural values , we will be best placed to serve European interests if we speak with a common voice .
The European Union is known for its variety of cultural forms .
In my opinion , European values such as respect for human rights , democracy and fundamental freedoms , are also conveyed by our cultural products .
Knowledge and international skills , as indicated in the EU 2020 strategy , are critical to the education systems .
Multilingualism , e-skills and cultural awareness allow us to seize many opportunities offered by today 's global labour market .
Culture should therefore be integrated across the board in the wide spectrum of actions that make up the EU 's foreign policy .
A coherent , coordinated EU strategy on culture in the EU 's external actions does not currently exist .
We also see fragmentation and diffusion , not only between Member States , but also between different departments and institutions of the European Union .
This fragmentation , without a common strategy , prevents the efficient use of resources and budget allocations for the cultural sector .
I therefore urge the Commission to consider the integration and simplification of culture both in the EU 's external actions and within the European institutions .
I support this report by my group colleague because it underlines the cross-cutting nature and the importance of culture in all aspects of life , and argues that culture needs to be taken into consideration in all EU external policies .
I consider the cultural aspect of European policies which strives for increased European cohesion important .
I therefore welcome all cultural programmes whose objective is to create a European identity from shared values and mutual understanding .
As such , I believe in the power that certain cultural initiatives can have on relations within the Union , as well as diplomatic relations with third countries .
The cultural elements of the various countries can be used as bridges towards peaceful cooperation with a view to stability .
in writing . - The cultural dimensions of EU external actions should not be overstated , and it is important that Commissioner Ashton continues to build this into her work with the EEAS .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon led to the establishment of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , whose activities should include a coordinated and consistent cultural diplomacy strategy .
This report , which I support in general , is on this important issue .
In fact , many of the proposals included in this report , such as promoting exchanges for young people and strengthening ties with civil society organisations in third countries , are proposals that I advocated in my report on the Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Southern Dimension and were adopted by this House .
From this report , I would also stress the respect for the preservation / promotion of linguistic / cultural richness in every Member State ; the importance of disseminating European cultural values as a means of promoting fundamental rights , democracy and good governance ; and , finally , the importance of there being a cultural ' attaché ' in each of the EU 's representations abroad .
There are many who wonder whether there is such a thing as a European culture , often contrasting it with a Europe of cultures or a ' Europeanisation ' of cultures .
For those , and I am one of them , who think that Europe has an identity , values , the answer is obvious : there is indeed a European cultural identity .
It is this cultural dimension that the EU should take more into account in its diplomatic efforts , particularly with a view to promoting human rights , democracy and development in third countries .
To achieve this , the High-Representative should set up a ' Cultural diplomacy ' Directorate-General within the European External Action Service , and appoint someone to be responsible for cultural relations and for promoting European culture in every EU representation in third countries .
At the same time , we should consider introducing cultural visas for artists and for all those working in the cultural sector .
As well as an economic power , the European Union is also a cultural power whose influence goes far beyond its borders .
The fact that various countries have traditional historical ties with European Member States strengthens Europe 's ability to permeate other cultures and to make itself understood in other parts of the world .
The importance of the factor of language as a vehicle for maintaining and deepening these contacts cannot be overstated .
I regret that , despite all the declarations of intent , the European Union continues not to understand the extent to which it should promote the teaching of the European languages that are particularly suitable for communication in its institutions .
Instead , the EU has chosen an inward-looking language policy .
I should like to see this trend reversed .
A foreign policy like the one that the Union is proposing to develop cannot neglect the cultural dimension , but rather must keep it in mind as an asset ; as a value that is not always tangible but is particularly important in a world increasingly susceptible to the ' soft power ' of states and international organisations .
The European External Action Service ( EEAS ) will have an important role to play in this regard .
I hope it will be up to the challenge .
This report , by Mrs Schaake , is on the cultural dimensions of the European Union 's external actions .
Although it may seem strange to talk about culture , which is a non-essential good , when many Europeans are faced daily with problems obtaining goods essential to their survival , we cannot neglect it : instead , we must think that , in addition to being fundamental to our quality of life , it can and must be an opportunity for economic development and creating jobs for young people , as well as being , obviously , a factor of unity and cohesion between peoples .
The EU has to be a community of cultural values in which diversity is an asset , and a factor in unity and cohesion , or , as the rapporteur puts it , ' an instrument for global peace and stability ' .
We therefore urgently need to review the lack of a foreign policy on culture .
I am voting for this report , as I agree with its proposals and hope that culture helps find solutions for emerging from the crisis , and that it will be an asset to the welfare of the European public .
This report confirms the understanding of culture current in the European Union : an exploitative vision of culture that considers it at the service of foreign policy through the concept of cultural diplomacy .
In other words , culture is seen as a sort of vanguard for advancing and communicating the interests of the European Union and the Member States in the world ( point 22 ) , and look where this vision is headed : for promoting international trade ( point 23 ) .
How often is this not synonymous with policies and practices that cancel out or disrespect each country 's identity and cultures ?
This report also has an underlying fallacy that keeps cropping up in EU discourse on culture : that there is a single European identity and a single European culture , and , even more so , that it is based on values like liberty , democracy , tolerance and solidarity .
Culture , like all historical phenomena , is not founded on any homogenous and shared identity : quite the contrary , it is the expression of antagonisms , conflicts and situations of cultural domination .
European culture is , as is well known , indebted to many cultures in various parts of the world , like the people subjected to European colonialism , for example .
This is a report that misrepresents and exploits the notion of culture .
This report confirms the understanding of culture current in the European Union : an exploitative vision of culture that considers it at the service of foreign policy through the concept of cultural diplomacy .
In other words , culture is seen as a sort of vanguard for advancing and communicating the interests of the European Union and the Member States , and promoting international trade .
How often is this not synonymous with policies and practices that cancel out or disrespect each country 's identity and cultures ?
This report also has an underlying fallacy that keeps cropping up in EU discourse on culture : that there is a single European identity and a single European culture , and , even more so , that it is based on values like liberty , democracy , tolerance and solidarity .
Culture , like all historical phenomena , is not founded on any homogenous and shared identity : quite the contrary , it is the expression of antagonisms , conflicts and situations of cultural domination .
European culture is , as is well known , indebted to many cultures in various parts of the world , like the people subjected to European colonialism , for example .
The European Union cannot put our cultural diversity at risk , or misrepresent and exploit the notion of culture
I voted in favour of this resolution because cultural diplomacy is a cornerstone for building trust and long lasting relations with citizens in third countries .
Culture should be a vital and horizontally integrated element among the broad spectrum of external policies which make up the EU 's foreign policy : from the EU 's trade relations to its enlargement and neighbourhood policy , to its development cooperation policy and its common foreign and security policy .
Culture equally has economic value : Europe 's cultural industries contribute to European entrepreneurship , innovation and business and the EU 's diverse cultural landscape makes it the most attractive global tourist destination in the world .
A vibrant cultural climate makes living in the EU attractive for businesses and people alike .
A coherent , coordinated EU strategy on culture in the EU 's external actions does not currently exist and needs to be developed .
It is not a luxury but a necessity to sustain and foster Europe 's attractiveness in a globally connected and competitive environment .
Fragmentation and diffusion is seen not only among Member States , but also between different departments and institutions within the EU .
This fragmentation without a common strategy hampers the full and efficient use of cultural resources and budgets .
Consequently , this strategy is absolutely essential for the EU .
Europe is the cradle of an exceptionally rich and varied culture .
The European Union should make use of this heritage in the promotion of integration and cooperation in countries which do not belong to the Union .
We should not forget that the European Union is made up of 27 very different Member States .
It is important that we cultivate and preserve this multiculturality .
I agree that a common European policy requires the development of a coherent strategy on external cultural actions .
It is important for Europe to make good use of its potential in the process of promoting itself in the world .
' United in Diversity ' is the motto that we all share as European citizens and that represents the sense of belonging to a great European community : a crossroads of peoples , cultures and customs that are united despite their economic , religious and other differences .
My support for Mrs Schaake 's report is dictated precisely by the boost that we need to give to reinforcing this shared awareness .
Culture should play a unifying role externally as well as internally , and therefore , in the relations of the Secretariat for Economic Monitoring ( SEAE ) , European culture could be the standard-bearer of European values , which , through dialogue with cultures outside Europe , should contribute to peaceful cooperation and constructive understanding between peoples .
I would like to express my approval for the inclusion of cultural matters in the actions of EU diplomacy .
It is important for the world to experience the culture of the EU 's Member States in the diversity of its content and form .
Personally , I hope this presentation will be geographically balanced in character , so that the culture of each of the Member States will be present in the right proportion .
To this end , the Commission should present a proposal for such actions , which will then be recast as an official document .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Europe is a community of freedom , responsibilities and democratic values .
Culture , identity , values and the EU 's position on the global stage are intertwined .
European interests are served when cultural aspects are strategically devised through cooperation and partnership : both through cultural programmes and when cultural aspects are an integral part of economic , foreign and security and development policies .
Through the sharing of literature , film , music and heritage , doors of understanding are opened and bridges between people are built .
European identity in all its diversity , as well as European values , are manifested through these cultural expressions .
In addition , the EU has important experiences to share when it comes to overcoming conflict and building stability through shared interest and mutual understanding .
The report on unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries is closely connected in many respects with the report on the Innovation Union .
I would like , in particular , to draw attention to the significance that is given to the education of citizens , involving , among other things , a better understanding of the issue and respect for the protection of works involving intellectual property rights .
We must strongly support and develop this broadly neglected area not just of education but also of training , both at the EU level and where Member States are concerned .
I have reservations over the current labelling of cultural works as goods and services .
This is misleading and can be seen as a manifestation of economic neoliberalism in the cultural sphere .
For example , a literary work , or even a work of art or music is , first and foremost , an essential manifestation of the talent of the artist and a social response .
It is not only philistine but also aberrant to regard them merely as goods or services .
Unfortunately , a coherent , coordinated strategy on the role of culture in the EU 's external actions does not currently exist .
As is well known , our interests can be best served when we speak with one voice .
Our common foreign policy must be based on cultural diplomacy as Europe 's position in the world can be strengthened through culture , as an integral part of its economic , development and security policies .
We will provide a better understanding of our continent by means of distributing films , music and literature .
Furthermore , the EU 's diverse cultural landscape gives us the distinction of being the most attractive tourist destination in the world .
I welcome the concrete suggestions presented in this report for the involvement of civil society , artists , educators , students and entrepreneurs in shaping the content of external cultural relations .
At the same time , we absolutely need to take into account the huge potential offered by new technologies , which are both a source of information and a channel facilitating the freedom of expression .
I think that it would be useful for the European Parliament to include culture on the agenda of discussions with other parliaments in the world , in order to help establish a general practice for European external action .
Europe is a community of freedom , responsibilities and democratic values .
Culture , identity , values and the EU 's position on the global stage are intertwined .
European interests are served when cultural aspects are strategically devised through cooperation and partnership , both through cultural programmes , and when cultural aspects are an integral part of economic , foreign and security and development policies .
Through the sharing of literature , film , music and heritage , doors of understanding are opened and bridges between people are built .
European identity , in all its diversity , as well as European values , are manifested through these cultural expressions .
In the development of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , it is important to explore and anchor the role culture has and should have in the EU 's external actions .
Mainstreaming culture can lead to mutual understanding , peaceful cooperation and stability , as well as to economic benefits .
If globalisation has incontrovertibly favoured the proliferation of exchanges , we must fight against the danger of a uniformity of cultures .
Culture is a vector of openness and a motor of democracies , counteracting every nationalist reaction , racist temptation and the exclusions that are nourished by the economic and financial , and climate and food crises .
Cultures have a calling to enrich one another in a spirit of mutual respect .
They are a source of inexhaustible renewable energy .
Most of the time , cultural creation describes or expresses a vision , a commitment , a taking of sides that can be pertinent or impertinent .
It represents the exercising of a right , including the right to denounce .
We have a great need of artists , of their critical view of the world , of their role as the educators of our societies .
They anticipate the future and forecast the evolution of society , because they see more quickly and further than politicians .
We must work to create a pluralistic world that keeps its aptitude for creation intact and that can give rise to the new and to diversity .
We must rethink the system of global governance .
We must create a new political space of global dimensions , taking account of the political dimension of cultural diversity .
Europe 's cultural riches represent a precious commodity that it is important to preserve .
We always hear that cultural diversity must be promoted .
We have hitherto been concentrating far too much on promoting cultural diversity via the Muslim immigrant population without ensuring that our own culture , in turn , is recognised in the countries of the Islamic world .
If European cultural aspects are to be more prominently included , as is proposed , as an integral part of economic , foreign , security and development policy , it depends on what explicit form this is to be given .
Certainly , there is no reason to oppose an exchange of literature , film , music and the like , but the expectations in respect of the Islamic world must not be overly inflated - you only need think of the ban on music , which stems from the Koran .
What will be most important is to keep Christian roots in mind and to give greater priority in foreign and development policy to the protection of Christians in other countries , as they are , in the end , the most persecuted minority around the globe .
There can be no doubt that cultural diplomacy helps to build trust and cultivate lasting relations between citizens of the EU and citizens of third countries , and there can be no doubt that Europe 's comparative advantage in the culture sector is strong and is therefore a valuable political tool for its foreign policy .
New technologies bring new opportunities to spread the European cultural heritage and strengthen transnational ties .
As the Internet is a global meeting place , the EU should develop specific policies to promote European culture .
The Europeana website is a move in this direction ; unfortunately , however , it has not realised its potential as yet .
Nor should the contribution of culture to the economies of the European countries be overlooked .
It is estimated to account for 2.6 % of European GDP at present .
Clearly , countries with a rich history , tradition and culture , such as Greece , have nothing to lose by promoting their cultural heritage and values .
This report is on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions .
I agree with the rapporteur in that we need a common strategy for the cultural dimension .
It is not a question of more investment but rather one of better investment .
To promote culture is to promote democracy .
The proposed coordination may help ensure the more efficient use of resources , especially at a time when budget cuts are being made , particularly in the cultural sector .
The existing European Union National Institutes for Culture network should function as an important partner for the sector .
The members of this network have significant experience , not only of working in the field , but also of organising cultural activities with appropriate distance from the governments , which is crucial in this sector .
In addition to coordination , there is also cultural diplomacy at Member State level .
However , there are many third countries seeking to specifically address the European Union and not solely the individual Member States .
As such , only a common strategy will prevent the existing fragmentation , which impedes the complete and efficient use of the resources and budgets dedicated to culture .
For all these reasons , I voted for this report .
Culture plays an extremely important role in the European Union , which is an area aiming to be ' united in diversity ' .
First of all , we should stress its undeniable integrationist aspect , which enables the existence of shared areas : that is , points at which people with different cultural perspectives find themselves with shared representation .
It is no accident that the report 's explanatory statement begins with an interesting citation : ' Rock and roll , culturally speaking , was a decisive element in loosening up communist societies and bringing them closer to a world of freedom ' ( Andras Simonyi ) .
Secondly , the undeniable economic impact that could result from a commitment to disseminating European culture should be stressed .
It is , then , a case of disseminating and protecting European values at global level , and of guaranteeing , on the widest possible range of levels , respect for their core aspects , such as freedom of expression on the Internet .
Those are the reasons why I am voting in favour .
In voting for the report by Mrs Schaake , I am making a plea for the institution of a genuine European cultural diplomacy in order to promote our values outside the EU .
Thinking of culture as a strategic element of foreign policy would , in fact , enable Europe to make up the deficit with regard to certain states .
China , in particular , invests heavily in cultural diplomacy to improve its image and attract tourists .
Europe must do the same if it is to continue playing a major role on the world stage .
This report contains several proposals to achieve this : the proposal to designate a person in every EU representation in third countries , for example , to coordinate cultural relations and interaction between the EU and those countries , or the proposal that the draft European External Action Service ( EEAS ) organisational chart contain posts tailored to cultural aspects and that a coordination unit be set up .
Moreover , it seems opportune that third countries be involved to a greater extent in EU programmes devoted to culture as much as mobility , youth , education and training : the accessibility to these programmes on the part of young nationals of those countries must be facilitated .
in writing . - The report did envisage at first the field of external relations at the EU level almost exclusively under the new media perspectives .
This is still quite present , as well as the idea that the EU should export its culture .
The Greens insisted on the promotion of ' cultural cooperation ' instead .
Some of the recommendations adopted in the Committee on Culture and Education do not really create something new , like an information website on EU culture programmes and external relations , together with the calendar of EU events in the whole world plus contacts with Civil Society .
Some articles , like Article 44 on supporting national efforts to implement the protection and preservation of cultural heritage , illegal trade of heritage or products of cultural creation , do not give much sense to the issue itself .
In a nutshell , the report fails really to tackle the issue and assembles bits and pieces alongside the present existing possibilities to put culture on the agenda both for the EU and between the EU and third countries .
It is a new chapter in an effort to fully use culture as a tool for peace .
The sharing of cultural heritage between individuals is important both within the EU , for the consolidation of a European identity , and in terms of the Union 's relations with third countries .
This is why I support strengthening external action in that direction .
Resources for culture are often scattered across a host of projects .
Efficient use of these funds is further hampered by political fragmentation .
We therefore need the European External Action Service to immediately adopt a coherent and unified strategy of cultural diplomacy , including the appointment of an EU special representative to third countries .
Lastly , I believe that we should increasingly emphasise the use of new technologies , which can increase the number of ways to access cultural content .
It is essential for the EU to play a leading role in this context , developing definite policies that can protect the Internet against forms of censure typical of repressive regimes .
In 1990 , in his book Bound to Lead , the eminent American professor , Joseph Nye , invented the concept of ' soft power ' .
What does it mean ?
Soft power is the capacity an international player has to influence others by non-coercive means , such as cultural dynamism .
Why , after a quarter of a century , does the United States remain the superpower that we know it to be ?
Because , besides its military arsenal , it succeeds in exporting its culture and its ideas and in making them attractive .
Europe must do the same ; it must defend its cultural model and its values on the international stage .
Thanks to this report , the European Union is taking stock of the influence Europe can have if it succeeds in adding a cultural dimension to its diplomacy .
I therefore support the recommendations contained in this report .
It is the case that , in waiting for the implementation of a genuine common diplomacy and a genuine European defence policy , European soft power and its cultural diplomacy are some of the few means of influence at our disposal .
I endorsed the report on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions .
In particular , I would like to stress the necessity of conducting a review of existing programmes with a cultural component and of drafting a Green Paper and a communication from the Commission outlining concrete policies for the role of culture in the EU 's external actions .
Currently , cultural cooperation of Member States with third countries takes place on a bilateral basis .
There is a lack of shared and coordinated principles and actions , which renders it impossible to make effective use of Europe 's cultural resources and the Union 's creative potential .
A common strategy can foster the development of Europe 's cultural resources , the forging and deepening of social relations , the exchange of good practices and improvement of the EU 's cultural position in the international arena .
I strongly support inclusion of cultural aspects in the draft organisation chart of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
It is also important to provide for the appropriate training of EEAS staff with regard to cultural and digital aspects .
Culture is also an important factor in the fight for human rights and the support of democracy .
Cooperation in this area will help to establish dialogue with societies from different cultures .
I am also a supporter of what is called ' brand Europe ' , and the development and promotion of this , in such areas as support for talent , tourism and the propagation of universal values , for example , should be based on closer collaboration between the EU 's Member States .
I am pleased that the report on the cultural dimensions of the EU 's external actions , which affirms that culture must be at the heart of European diplomacy , has been adopted .
For all their diversity , Europeans share a great number of strong values , such as respect for human rights , democracy and the rule of law , which must be extended to the international stage .
This ' brand Europe ' must be borne by true ambassadors .
I also welcome the new proposals , such as creating a cultural division within the European External Action Service or the nomination of a ' cultural attaché ' for every Member State .
It is by coordinating national initiatives that a cultural Europe will be able to emerge .
The development of new information technologies is making culture accessible to the greatest number .
The European Union must , in my opinion , seize this opportunity to assert its cultural uniqueness and encourage creativity .
I am bound to vote in favour of this report , which regards our culture no longer as a heritage of the past but as one of the driving forces of the European diplomacy of tomorrow .
I am voting for this proposal as I believe there is a need for EU-wide momentum to encourage cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) , which is why they must adopt innovative economic models and have access to new , legal on-line service provision .
It is therefore necessary to create a genuine single market for on-line content and services , take specific measures aimed at increasing the role of the CCIs as catalysts for innovation and structural change , bring together actors at regional , national and European level and create new products and services to generate growth and jobs .
In Europe , the cultural sector plays a key role and attracts citizens , enterprises and investment , thereby highlighting Europe as a dynamic , stimulating place to live and work .
An energetic , growing cultural sector is clearly necessary for Europe 's success as a creative , knowledge-based economy .
The cultural sector also attracts well-qualified , creative people .
Cultural and creative industries are currently also important drivers of economic and social innovation in many other sectors .
I voted in favour of this report .
Cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) should be at the centre of a new European policy agenda , in line with the economic needs of the sector and measures aimed at adapting to innovations in the digital age .
I agree that in order to increase this sector 's potential , the European Digital Agenda initiative must be implemented successfully in order to enable European CCIs to benefit fully from , and to adapt successfully to , all the opportunities created by far-reaching , high-speed broadband and by new wireless technologies .
It is very important to expand the European digital library and develop it as a focal point for Europe 's cultural heritage and creativity and to protect and support its cultural heritage .
The cultural and creative industries are crucial for European citizens because of their economic and cultural nature .
This is because these industries , as well as participating in the promotion of cultural and linguistic diversity and the development of a European cultural heritage , also contribute to economic development by stimulating jobs , economic growth and wealth creation .
Through this vote , we are clearly committing ourselves to a greater recognition of the cultural sector by emphasising that its potential remains great because it always copes with legal or economic obstacles .
In order to increase this potential , therefore , we are proposing concrete solutions such as a pan-European licensing system and the improvement of access to credit and microfinancing .
We also note the considerable progress that the Internet represents for our societies , even if it brings new challenges such as guaranteeing access for all and the economic model of the cultural sector .
Thus , the European Parliament , which is aware of the crucial role of culture in European society , has made a clear appeal for increasing support for cultural actors .
It is important to unlock the potential of cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) .
We need to analyse CCIs and the impact of their activities on the European economy , identifying , defining and describing them each in turn , in order to highlight their characteristics , better understand their goals and problems and implement more effective measures .
I voted in favour of this report , which aims to acknowledge and enhance the economic and social importance of the cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) .
Focusing EU attention on these industries and organising their potential through a coherent strategy , including funding , meets at least two of the priorities that Lega Nord has always upheld .
These are , firstly , the promotion and revival of local cultural heritage , which may be linguistic , musical , architectural or artistic in the broadest sense , in order to safeguard diversity and individuality of intellectual horizons in an age of generalisation , or rather trivialisation and devaluation of the cultural message .
Secondly , an institutional commitment to cultural and creative industries would enable talented young people to constructively channel their skills and ambitions , offering them launch platforms , some professional , that would then lead to new job opportunities , while saving them from frittering away their talents in areas that are culturally stagnant or simply unfit for purpose .
I therefore support the report in question .
The cultural sector plays a crucial role in Europe and is a source of attraction for ordinary people , businesses and investment , thereby highlighting Europe as a dynamic , stimulating place to live and work .
An energetic , thriving cultural sector is clearly necessary for Europe 's success as a creative , knowledge-based economy .
The cultural sector also attracts well-qualified , creative people .
The cultural and creative industries are currently also important drivers of economic and social innovation in many other sectors .
There are states which are already tapping into the multifaceted resources of the cultural and creative industries to a broad extent .
However , the European Union still needs to develop a strategic approach to make its cultural assets the basis of a powerful creative economy and a cohesive society .
This is a good time for the European Commission 's Green Paper to prompt discussion on unlocking ' the potential of the cultural and creative industries ' , officially endorsing the importance of this sector .
The growth of the cultural and creative industries in the European Union since the 1990s has been exponential in terms of job creation and their contribution to GDP .
I voted for the report by Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , which contains proposals for encouraging the development of cultural and creative industries .
The report asks for the creation of the status of European artist , so that artists may be able to enjoy satisfactory working conditions and appropriate measures with regard to tax systems , their right to work , social security rights and copyright , in order to improve their mobility across the EU .
I am also at one with the rapporteur in emphasising the need to preserve the specific nature of certain trades and the transfer of know-how , especially in the cultural , creative and crafts sector , and to guarantee mechanisms for knowledge transfer .
I welcome the interest shown in the potential of cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) .
I believe in the positive impact that their development can have both in economic terms , by creating jobs and contributing to gross domestic product ( GDP ) , and in social terms , through the social and cultural integration of members of the public .
I therefore welcome the intended support for the creative sector , because I think this is the right path towards the lasting and sustainable growth of the European economy , given the global situation these days .
Innovation , structural cohesion and creating new products and services must be a priority that is considered when constructing any European policy .
I welcome the adoption of the Sanchez-Schmid report concerning the development of the cultural and creative industries .
With almost 14 million jobs involved , and with sustained growth even during the crisis , it remains essential to show unfailing support for these industries , so great is their economic and cultural contribution .
Creating a European statute for artists , introducing a reduced VAT rate for cultural goods and improving the distribution of legal digital offers are appropriate and essential measures for ensuring the international cultural influence of the European Union .
In the last two decades , the growth of the cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) has been exponential in terms of job creation and contribution to the gross domestic product ( GDP ) of the Member States .
It is for that reason , and because of the extremely favourable time in which we find ourselves , that it is important to exploit and increase these industries ' potential .
There is therefore a need to exploit the potential of the digital age , to create an EU-wide momentum , and to stimulate the cultural sector , in order to equip these industries with innovative economic models .
I should like , therefore , to congratulate the rapporteur and get behind her call for a more ambitious Commission Green Paper that leads to the appearance of a true Internal Market , making it possible to create jobs and guarantee greater social cohesion .
This report , by Mrs Sanchez-Schmid , addresses how the European Union can unlock the potential of cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) .
This is a debate launched by the European Commission Green Paper at a time when the digital age is invading our lives and globalisation is becoming a challenge for the CCIs .
If the EU can create an EU-wide momentum that stimulates these companies by supporting innovation and modernisation , we will be able to promote employment and social cohesion and , as the rapporteur mentions , make the European Union ' the economy which is founded on the most competitive and most dynamic knowledge-base in the world ' .
I therefore voted for this report , because I believe in the potential of these creative industries and in their promising future .
Nevertheless , so that they are not in a position to be overtaken by international partners , there is a need to commit , quickly and firmly , to new technologies - in particular , information technology - and to development and innovation factors .
The EU should also support and encourage artistic creation , as well as the mobility of culture professionals , so that it becomes increasingly universal and globalising .
I voted in favour of this document because unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries necessitates the development , inter alia , of high quality artistic and cultural education , territorialisation , local partnerships , creation and creativity , the sharing of expertise , financing , public / private partnerships and the exchange of good practices .
We must create competitiveness between cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) , whilst bearing in mind the characteristics of each branch and the fact that they require different forms of support .
The European Union must introduce measures to support the creative sector .
We would like to see this Green Paper having a short and long-term impact through specific developments at European level in such areas as taxation adapted to on-line cultural goods and services and the possibility of exploiting the financing facilities available through the EIB and the EIF .
If cultural and creative industries are to maximise their role as a driving force , financing facilities backed up by solid expertise in the characteristics of cultural industries and an adapted taxation system must be introduced .
Member States must be strongly committed to protecting and supporting their own cultural heritage .
In view of the ever-increasing importance of CCIs , as well as the objective of strengthening this sector , which is of strategic importance for the achievement of the Europe 2020 goals , the Commission should draw up a White Paper which would unlock cultural and creative potential .
I voted in favour of this report because I consider it essential that the Commission pursues its efforts to ensure a better definition of the creative cultural industries ( CCIs ) as part of their greater recognition by civil society .
I foresee great potential for the CCIs , especially if we consider the possible and necessary cooperation with universities , research centres and art schools , with which we can set up a network of joint training programmes and lifelong learning .
It is essential and important , ladies and gentlemen , to disseminate practices and know-how and enhance learning through ad hoc vocational training programmes dedicated to the cultural and creative sector .
I think we need to ensure multi-disciplinary teaching programmes and insist on cooperation and partnership not only between educational institutions , students and professionals in the cultural and creative sector , but also between businesses of all sizes , between the public and the private sector , and between craftspeople and financial institutions .
The cultural and creative industries contribute in terms of both growth and jobs in the EU .
They are part of the plan for meeting the 2020 objectives , and it is therefore important that we create good conditions for this sector - particularly within the area that I would like to highlight , namely copyright .
As pointed out in several places in the report , we should , of course , ensure that artists receive fair remuneration for their work .
At the same time , it is absolutely crucial that we ensure that a large number of online services are available to consumers .
The best way to do this is to create good conditions for legal , operationally sound alternatives .
There are currently already several good examples , and they should be made more visible .
Creating effective alternatives is the best way to combat piracy .
At the same time , it is vital for the Commission to come up with an ambitious proposal on copyright - something that we look forward to with anticipation .
One of the things we point out in the report is that a pan-European approach should be taken .
It is no good us operating with 27 different systems in this important area .
I therefore believe that the Commission should take a holistic approach and look at the connection between licensing , private copyright fees and piracy .
I hope that this report can help to get this started and I look forward to an ambitious proposal from the Commission .
in writing . - I voted for this report because I believe this is a good time for the Commission 's Green Paper , officially endorsing the economic and social importance of the sector , to prompt discussion on ' unlocking the potential of the cultural and creative industries ' .
The growth of cultural and creative industries in the European Union since the 1990s has been exponential in terms of job creation and of their contribution to GDP .
It is precisely the cultural aspect of our common heritage which differentiates Europe from the other regions in the world .
At a time when we are faced with major economic challenges , it is important for us to think about ways in which to tap the potential offered by the cultural and creative industries , especially as a significant number of European citizens are involved in such activities .
Let us not forget the significant contribution the creative sector makes not only to the development of information and communication technologies , but to economic and social innovation as well .
However , this sector raises a number of issues which need to be clarified .
One important aspect is the digitisation of cultural productions , along with the need to create a proper single market for online content and services which will generate additional jobs .
In this same context , we also talk about resolving the issue of copyright , funding the cultural and creative industries , artists ' mobility or the release of cultural productions .
One relevant example is cinematography , where European films , including a number of Romanian productions , have won prestigious prizes at high-profile festivals .
There is a need for EU-wide momentum to encourage cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) , which is why they must adopt innovative economic models and have access to new , legal on-line service provision .
It is therefore necessary to create a genuine single market for on-line content and services , take specific measures aimed at increasing the role of the cultural and creative industries as catalysts for innovation and structural change , bring together actors at regional , national and European level , and create new products and services to generate growth and jobs .
By developing the CCIs , we are contributing to sustainable economic development and job creation .
It is doubtful , given the multiplicity of wrong turns taken by the EU , whether information and communications technologies are enough to create a European identity .
Just as unconducive to this European identity is the EU 's democratic deficit and the unidirectional understanding of democracy among the Brussels elites , who simply let the populace keep voting until it gives the ' right ' result .
When it comes to direct democracy , the European Union could learn much from Switzerland , which stands up for democratic decisions even when the rest of the politically correct mainstream world criticises it to the hilt .
It is doubtful whether , as it is so eloquently put in the report , an ' energetic , growing cultural sector ' represents an ' important driver of economic and social innovation ' .
Rather , a trend can be perceived whereby migration and migrants are being increasingly placed at the heart of support for culture while native culture and tradition are pushed to one side .
Yet the much-discussed topic of integration must not take the form of doing without Christmas , Easter , St. Nicholas ' Day and similar traditions in the name of adaptation to Muslim immigrants in our nurseries and schools - to do so would mean the loss of our cultural identity .
We need to go back to paying more attention to ensuring that our customs , traditions and moral values are upheld , and respected by others .
As this report fails to offer any reversal of the trend , I decided to abstain .
The culture and creativity sectors have a dual role : they have an economic role , by supporting employment , growth and the creation of wealth and , above all , they have a cultural role , by contributing to the social and cultural development of citizens .
However , two basic conditions need to be satisfied if they are to realise their full potential .
Firstly , we need to encourage the mobility and attractiveness of cultural factors , such as the mobility of artists , cultural workers and works of art and , secondly , we need to ensure that specific funding and economic support policies are put in place in the cultural sector , such as access to funds via the European Investment Bank .
This report on ' unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries ' ( CCIs ) is based on the European Commission Green Paper on the same topic and I voted for it , as it is official recognition of the economic and social importance of this sector .
Within the European Union , and since the 1990s , the growth of the CCIs has been exponential in terms of job creation and its contribution to gross domestic product ( GDP ) .
Coordinating and leveraging synergies in this growing sector may be crucial to the EU 's economic development .
The cultural and creative industries have great potential to be one of the engines of growth in the EU .
in writing . - Cultural and creative industries are not only a source of wealth and employment but also contribute to Europe 's social and cultural fabric .
Artistic trades are part of our heritage and this knowledge needs to be passed on .
We should foster multidisciplinary education and allow for more exchanges between higher education institutions in this sector .
The Commission needs to ensure legal security in information and communication technologies so as to protect consumers and innovative creators .
It should also help local and regional authorities to develop networks to cooperate in the field of cultural tourism .
Ireland , in particular Ireland South , has a rich cultural and creative history .
We need to help to ensure that these cultural and artistic trades are encouraged and made available to a wider audience .
The cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) make a number of contributions .
Firstly , their intrinsic value in the recreation of cultural templates and in contributing to the construction of a common European identity .
Secondly , however , they constitute an economic activity that enables the creation of jobs and of products in circulation : in other words , it is a source of wealth in economic terms , too .
Nevertheless , there need to be incentives for this type of activity , such as the recognition of the rights to exploit these products economically , whilst fully protecting the position of the creators .
Moreover , it is a commitment that will allow the affirmation - and differentiation - of the added value that the EU is able to offer .
Therefore , I voted in favour of this report .
The cultural and creative industries represent 5 million jobs and 2.6 % of the EU 's GDP .
They are also one of the principal drivers of European growth , since they create new jobs and stimulate innovation .
They also bring an added value as a factor of social cohesion and play a major role in the promotion of the cultural and linguistic diversity of the EU .
It is therefore crucial from an economic as much as a social viewpoint to support these industries .
That is why I am voting in favour of this report .
In this way , I should like to encourage Member States and the European Commission to promote both artistic and cultural education among all age groups , from primary education through to higher or vocational education , and the entrepreneurial skills of professionals in the cultural sector , including in the context of lifelong learning .
In order to enable the deployment of these industries , it is equally essential to improve access to funding for professionals in this sector : to introduce microfinancing , develop patronage and public / private partnerships , consider introducing new , innovative funding instruments , and train professionals in the banking sector in the specific characteristics of these industries .
in writing . - This is a good time for the Commission 's Green Paper , officially endorsing the economic and social importance of the sector , to prompt discussion on ' unlocking the potential of the cultural and creative industries ' .
The growth of cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) in the European Union since the 1990s has been exponential in terms of job creation and their contribution to GDP .
The challenge of globalisation and the arrival of the digital age are providing these industries with major new opportunities to develop , and can improve their hitherto largely untapped potential to create growth and jobs .
There is a need for strategic investment to enable cultural and creative industries to invigorate cultural diversity , social and territorial cohesion , growth and employment .
To this end , there must be adequate funding , support for CCIs to develop in their local and regional environments , and a move towards a creative economy by catalysing their spillover effects on a wide range of economic and social contexts .
The greater the availability of European audiovisual content , the greater the potential of characteristically European content to influence cultural diversity .
In addition , the creative sector makes a significant contribution to the development of information and communication technologies , and plays a major role at local , regional and national levels .
I voted for this report because I believe that the cultural and creative industries should constitute an added value for the Union .
A European statute for artists based on favourable working conditions and tax regimes would promote Europe as a dynamic and challenging environment in which to live and work , making it attractive to skilled and creative individuals .
Furthermore , a knowledge-based economy will help to protect European cultural diversity and to carry us towards social cohesion and employment .
In this context , to unlock this potential as well as possible , we must facilitate both the transfer of creative knowledge to new generations , but also the mobility of artists throughout Europe .
The cultural and creative industries sector is made up of enterprises with great economic potential because they generate employment , growth and wealth , and are responsible for the social and cultural integration of citizens .
In accordance with the European motto , ' United in diversity ' , the presence of industries that use culture as an input is essential as they promote intercultural dialogue , thus safeguarding European diversity .
Promoting these industries will create significant new opportunities for regional development , local partnerships and possible partnerships with the private and public sector .
The European Commission Green Paper on unlocking the potential of cultural and creative industries ( CCIs ) aims to contribute to the European Union 's economic growth and to job creation in its Member States .
In the report adopted today , the European Parliament advocates a genuine EU-wide strategy in this sector through the creation of new areas for experimentation , innovation and entrepreneurship ; of support for mobility ; and of promoting access to finance , to new financial instruments , and to greater involvement in regional and local collectives .
The rapporteur proposes the creation of pilot projects under the Erasmus and Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs programmes , as well as the creation of a European-level platform to promote the exchange of experiences .
The initiatives , which are of great interest to the regional- and local-level crafts sector , also include the development of a best practices network for regional and local collectives , and the implementation of consultation services on finance , to offer the sector 's small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) better information on producing and distributing cultural and creative goods and services .
Today in the European Parliament , we have voted through the report on the potential of the creative industry .
It is a report which shows clearly that the creative industry is responsible for 5 million jobs in the EU and for generating almost 3 % of the EU 's GDP .
The creative industry , in principle , influences every sector of the EU economy , instilling innovation wherever possible - the innovation without which it would be difficult to speak of an improvement in the competitiveness of the EU on the international arena , which we all desire so much .
I voted against this report , which draws cultural goods into a logic of the market and competition .
The ' cultural industries ' and , as a consequence , the cultural goods that they produce , cannot be likened to enterprises like any other , on the grounds that they are producers of wealth and potentially job creators .
They must first , and above all , continue to be recognised as means of liberation for the greatest number of people and as instruments for sharing knowledge and know-how .
There is therefore an urgent need to reassert the principle of cultural uniqueness in all areas , if the fine phrases on the creative industries as driving forces , the recognition of the status of artist or the desire to find an equilibrium between the dissemination of digital works and fair reward for creators , are not to remain pious wishes in the face of the cultural desert that will ensue .
The evolution of our model of development , focused from now on on the knowledge economy , makes culture a strategically important sector .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which proposes ways of making better use of European cultural resources .
In my view , unlocking the potential of creative industries must particularly involve a reform of the European system of managing copyright , in order to enable the creative industries to draw a greater benefit from the single market .
Licensing procedures , as the report emphasises , are far too complicated , and it calls for the introduction of a one-stop shop for the clearance of rights .
It is also necessary , I believe , to stimulate creation by adopting a specific tax system for innovative products , such as digital cultural content .
It is not right that these products should be subject to VAT at the full standard rate while other cultural products benefit from tax reliefs .
With my vote , I wanted to call on the Commission and the Council to respond to the European Parliament 's demand for specific measures to enable us to enjoy the full benefit from the growth potential of this sector .
Only an ambitious and joint approach can preserve the uniqueness of European culture .
I voted for Mrs Sanchez-Schmid 's report on the potential of the European cultural and creative industries , which has not yet been fully unlocked .
These industries are an asset for the EU , partly because their exponential growth over the past 25 years has created tens of thousands of jobs .
It is therefore necessary to build a European strategy for these industries in which they have the opportunity to express their potential and gain recognition for their dual role as bearers of culture and entertainment and as creators of business and jobs .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution , and would express the same conviction as the rapporteur that awarding the title of European Capital of Culture to a city which was the site of such tragic events in the course of the 20th century would be an important step towards transcending historical European divisions and showcasing the new Europe .
I endorsed this resolution .
The European Capitals of Culture project helps to support the richness and diversity of European cultures and the features they share , as well as to promote greater mutual understanding between European citizens .
Although the decision on the European Capital of Culture for the years 2007 to 2019 applies only to the EU Member States , I agree with the resolution 's call to award the title of European Capital of Culture exceptionally to Sarajevo in 2014 .
I believe that this would be an important step towards transcending past European divisions by awarding the title of European Capital of Culture to a city which was the scene of such tragic events in the course of the 20th century .
Anyone who followed with horror the events that made victims of the inhabitants of the martyr city of Sarajevo during the war in Bosnia , and which damaged its buildings , cannot fail to welcome the city 's designation as European Capital of Culture 2014 .
Without forgetting what happened , I hope that this event will enable Europeans to have other , more agreeable memories of Sarajevo , and that it will contribute , above all , to bringing together the various ethnic groups of the country itself .
I hope that the programme of Sarajevo Capital of Culture will celebrate life , and the human capacity for survival and rebuilding , and that it will prove to all of us the extent to which the human spirit can cultivate and transmit the good and the beautiful , even after experiencing the most profound suffering .
This resolution addresses Bosnia and Herzegovina 's application for its capital , Sarajevo , to be considered European Capital of Culture in 2014 .
The EU initiative ' European Capital of Culture ' was created to highlight Europe 's cultural richness and diversity , sharing it out and promoting mutual understanding amongst Europeans .
In 1992-1996 , Sarajevo - the martyr city where , in 1914 , the First World War started - would become the victim of destruction during the time it was besieged .
It now has images that are known the world over , like the one of ' The Cellist of Sarajevo ' who , dressed in black and in the midst of the destruction of war , wanders the streets seeking to ease the suffering of a martyred people who cannot leave the city .
Despite adversity , the city maintains its cultural spirit .
I consider it positive and fair that Sarajevo be European Capital of Culture .
I voted in favour of this document because a Community action entitled European Capital of Culture has been established in order to highlight the richness and diversity of European cultures and the features they share , as well as to promote greater mutual understanding between Europeans .
In addition , it is noted that Sarajevo has a special place in European history and culture and will commemorate several important anniversaries in 2014 , and the City Council of Sarajevo and local cultural operators have undertaken extensive preparations in their candidature for this title .
I therefore believe that the Council should award the title of European Capital of Culture exceptionally to Sarajevo in 2014 .
This would be an important step towards transcending past European divisions and showcasing the new Europe by awarding the title of European Capital of Culture to a city which was the scene of such tragic events in the course of the 20th century .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which calls on the Council to award the title ' European Capital of Culture ' exceptionally to Sarajevo in 2014 .
I believe that awarding the title to a city which was the site of such tragic events in the course of the 20th century would be an important step towards transcending past European divisions and showcasing the new Europe .
Sarajevo was a magnificent city in which three peoples , three cultures and three religions cohabited .
The siege of the city and the ethnic and religious war which lasted for four years ( 1992-1996 ) profoundly disrupted this capital , which was ' Islamised ' in religious terms and ' Bosniakised ' in linguistic terms .
Our challenge now is to rebuild the bridges between the communities .
Culture can contribute to this .
By the way , it was culture that helped them to endure four years of war .
Culture is a vector of openness and a motor of democracies , counteracting every nationalist reaction , racist temptation and exclusion .
It can help them now to achieve European multiculturalism once again .
This mosaic-like city was and can once more become the living metaphor for Europe .
We must work to create a pluralistic world that keeps its capacity for creation intact and that is able to give rise to novelty and diversity .
I am using my vote in favour to express my support for the European Parliament 's call to the Council for Sarajevo to be named European Capital of Culture in 2014 .
In fact , I agree with what the resolution says about how awarding the title of European Capital of Culture to a city which was the scene of such tragic events during the 20th century represents an important step towards overcoming Europe 's past divisions and promoting the new Europe .
Although the decision establishing a Community action for the European Capital of Culture 2007-2019 only currently covers EU Member States , the truth is that the opportunity to win the title of European Capital of Culture has already been granted to cities of third countries on a number of occasions .
As such , and given the special place that Sarajevo occupies in European history and culture , I believe awarding it the title of European Capital of Culture 2014 would be justified , even for its symbolic value .
Sarajevo , a multicultural city embodying a genuine model of tolerance , incontestably occupies a particular place in history and in European culture .
It was in Sarajevo that the assassination that sparked off the First World War in 1914 was carried out .
It was also in this city that , between 1992 and 1996 , during the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina , the longest siege that a capital city has endured in the history of modern warfare took place .
As the city , which wishes to turn its back on the past and looks forward enthusiastically to its future in Europe , will be marking several important anniversaries in 2014 , I should like to see Sarajevo designated as the European Capital of Culture for that year .
in writing . - With this resolution , Parliament : ( 1 ) calls on the Council to award the title ' European Capital of Culture ' exceptionally to Sarajevo in 2014 ; and ( 2 ) asserts its belief that this would be an important step towards transcending past European divisions and showcasing the new Europe by awarding the title ' European Capital of Culture ' to a city which was the site of such tragic events in the course of the 20th century .
As a member of the delegation from the Committee on Culture and Education to Sarajevo , I support the city 's candidacy as a European Capital of Culture 2014 .
Sarajevo deserves to be given the chance to demonstrate its huge potential .
It is an exceptionally multicultural city .
Sarajevo is surrounded by an atmosphere which is both multicultural and European .
It is the only city in the world where in an area of one square kilometre , you can see buildings belonging to five religions : there are mosques , a Roman Catholic cathedral , an Orthodox church , a synagogue and a Protestant church .
Bosnians , meanwhile , are characterised by great friendliness and hospitality .
I recently read the reminiscences of a Polish student who took part in a student exchange in Sarajevo - she did not meet a single foreign student who was there as part of the exchange who did not like Sarajevo .
Since the end of the war in 1995 , Sarajevo is also being rebuilt , mainly with financial assistance from the European Union .
Sarajevo is looking to its European future with great enthusiasm .
It wants to demonstrate its huge potential and promote itself to Europeans .
There is no doubt that this city deserves this chance , and we should support it in this .
Sarajevo occupies a very important place in Europeans ' historical consciousness .
I support awarding the title of European Capital of Culture exceptionally to the city in 2014 .
The initiative , which , for over 25 years , has allowed promotion of the riches and diversity of European cultures , will also help rebuild the city 's tourist industry and economic base .
Sarajevo witnessed important historical events and was severely damaged as a result of the hostilities in the 1990s .
It was also the scene of the murder which started the First World War .
The 100th anniversary of that event falls in the very year we are talking about - 2014 .
Awarding the city the title of European Capital of Culture at this juncture would not only help in the cultural regeneration of the city and in improving the city 's image in other countries , but would also help to commemorate important aspects of European history and identity .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13 : 15 and resumed at 15 : 00 )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Sri Lanka : follow-up of the UN report ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Sri Lanka .
author . - Mr President , in the brutal war of the Sri Lanka Government against the Tamil minority , at least 40 000 Tamils were killed within the space of a few weeks and hundreds of thousands were detained in open air prison camps .
The UN report at long last publicly acknowledges the crimes that were committed against the Tamil people .
Unfortunately , there should be no illusions that the report will change the conditions of Tamils in Sri Lanka .
The day after its publication , it was reported that the UN Secretary-General would only launch an international investigation if the Sri Lankan Government agrees or an international forum such as the UN Foreign Security Council calls for an inquiry .
Given the nature of the Sri Lankan Government , it is obvious that it will not allow any international investigation .
It highlights once again the need to campaign for a genuinely independent inquiry into the war crimes and for the Rajapaksa regime to be held responsible .
On 18 May , there will be protests around the world organised by many groups , including the Tamil Solidarity Campaign , to mark the second anniversary of this bloody war .
A united struggle of Sinhalese and Tamil people is still needed to defeat this regime and fight for the right of self-determination for the Tamil-speaking people .
author . - Mr President , we only have to hear those opening remarks to understand why I very much regret that we are having this debate today .
It is being promoted by extremist elements in the Tamil diaspora , the same people who have helped sustain the LTTE terrorist campaign over many years through political activity , and often from the proceeds of crime .
Of course , the final stages of the LTTE campaign were awful .
The UN 's Darusman report , which is the immediate pretext for this debate , states clearly that in those final stages , the LTTE used the civilian population as human shields , intensified the forcible recruitment of civilians , including children , into its ranks , executed civilians who attempted to escape the conflict zone and deployed artillery in proximity to displaced civilians and civilian installations such as hospitals .
This does not excuse the shelling of civilian targets , but it does put it into context and shows where the blame lies .
Instead of trying to bring together the peoples of Sri Lanka , there are those who seek to continue a campaign of hatred and division .
They see this Darusman report as a weapon in this campaign , and just want to put the Sri Lankan Government in the dock .
This approach is malicious and counter-productive .
The government of Sri Lanka and the Commission have set up the LLRC to investigate human rights allegations .
Let us do all that we can to support them and the peoples of Sri Lanka , instead of attacking them .
Mr President , from the very first words , you have all understood that the debate would be quite lively and that there would be two views .
I should say that my group aligns itself neither with one side nor with the other , but simply with the side of justice and of reconciliation .
I believe that there can be no reconciliation , in those countries , like Sri Lanka , but there are certainly many others , which have experienced atrocious wars , unless justice is done .
Well , what does this United Nations report to which Mr Van Orden refers do ?
It simply restates the facts and calls for there to be a mechanism for international justice , which one knows must be approved by the government .
That is the very least .
How would you like there to be reconciliation of a people ?
It is on both sides , Mr Van Orden .
It is not only on the Tamil side .
There have been crimes on both sides .
Both sides are responsible .
It is by both sides that justice must be done .
The report also states , and I apologise for this , that the reconciliation commission that has just been mentioned did not have an investigative element of a sufficiently high standard .
Finally , I fear that a national organ of justice will not finally result in a clarification of the facts .
That is why , quite simply and in the name of all those who have suffered on both sides , I say that this House can only support this report in order to shed more light and have more justice .
That is the only message that I should like to pass on today .
I shall not have used up all my allotted time , but that is the essential message for this House .
Mr President , in February , I went to Sri Lanka with the Delegation for Relations with South Asia .
Whilst there , we witnessed the enormous efforts to overcome the consequences of a 25-year civil war .
The European Union , the United Nations and NGOs are providing help , from the clearing of landmines by the HALO Trust through to the resettlement of the Tamils in their former home .
We call on the government there to respond positively to the recommendations of the UN 's panel of experts , which highlighted war crimes and crimes against humanity on the parts of both the Sinhalese and the LTTE .
It is encouraging that the government has set up a commission to deal with reconciliation , establish legal jurisdiction , solve language problems and deal with former front-line soldiers .
The consistent willingness to cooperate , the will to integrate minorities and the assurance of maintaining international legal norms form the basis for the development of a country that , without violence and terror , has a real future .
We emphatically call on the EU 's High Representative to support efforts of this kind .
author . - Mr President , the conflict in Sri Lanka may be over , but many questions remain unanswered .
An end to a conflict does not necessarily mean that the conflict is over in people 's minds .
Victory is not the same as peace .
It takes time , effort and especially commitment and strong will to overcome the scars of a conflict .
Reconciliation is imperative .
Justice is vital for a new beginning .
Therefore , the Sri Lankan Government should immediately start investigations on the violations of international humanitarian and human rights law .
Both sides need to be investigated .
International conventions to which Sri Lanka is a party require investigations on the alleged violations and the prosecution of those who are responsible .
Only by means of an open and honest investigation and through justice can the Sri Lankan people heal the wounds of a long and difficult conflict and continue their lives in peace .
The ALDE Group applauds UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon 's report and initiative on Sri Lanka .
We fully support the UN recommendations .
author . - Mr President , on 23 May 2009 , the UN Secretary-General , Ban Ki-moon , and the President of Sri Lanka , Rajapaksa , signed a joint statement in which Sri Lanka agreed to guarantee accountability for alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity during the war which ended in May 2009 .
After this agreement was not honoured by the Sri Lankan Government , the UN Secretary-General appointed a panel of experts to advise him on modalities for an accountability process .
The report , which was published very recently , made credible allegations that both government forces and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam failed to respect the norms of international law .
The report stressed the need for accountability on both sides .
The Sri Lankan Government has dismissed the panel 's report , calling it illegal and biased .
I believe that it is an objective reason for further investigations .
At a time when the creditable and legitimate work of international human rights bodies is being discredited , it is for this House to step up and defend international law .
War crimes must never go unpunished , no matter where they occur .
Mr President , the civil war in Sri Lanka lasted 25 years and ended with the defeat of the Tamil Tigers .
The last stages of the war were especially bloody and thousands died in its last few months .
According to the new report by the UN , it is very likely that the Tamil Tigers and government troops will be found guilty of serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights committed in the final stages of the conflict .
The Tamil Tigers are suspected of shooting civilians trying to flee .
The government killed civilians in shellfire .
These are both serious crimes and they cannot be ignored .
That is why it is important that the UN can carry out an impartial and open investigation into the matter .
Unfortunately , the Sri Lankan Government has been unwilling to allow the investigation to go ahead without its approval , unless the UN Member States unanimously insist .
It is extremely important that Sri Lanka adopts a constructive attitude and is willing to cooperate .
A sense of responsibility is vital for the reconciliation process .
The EU must support efforts to strengthen Sri Lanka 's sense of responsibility .
The conclusions of the Darusman report for the United Nations ( UN ) point to the massacre of tens of thousands of civilians , war crimes and crimes against humanity , alongside other terrible humanitarian law violations , committed by both the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ( LTTE ) and the Sri Lankan Government .
Carrying out an independent investigation and bringing those responsible to justice is not a political choice but an obligation under international law .
The Reconciliation Commission established by the government does not meet basic requirements for independence .
Therefore , the international community - specifically the European Union and the UN Security Council - must offer their unconditional support for the report 's recommendations and take urgent steps towards the creation of an independent international mechanism to monitor the Sri Lankan Government 's actions , ensure that crimes committed on both sides are investigated , and seek justice for the Sri Lankan people .
Mr President , I wish to support this resolution on human rights violations and war crimes committed in Sri Lanka .
It is crucial , in addition to expressing our solidarity with the victims and condemning the violence , and given the concerns regarding the judiciary 's lack of independence , to promote a serious , impartial , transparent investigation to be undertaken by an independent body so that the people responsible on both sides of the conflict can be identified and punished .
Impunity for war crimes must end if we want to prevent them from being repeated in the future .
In Sri Lanka , the civilian population was bombed , among other atrocities .
Seventy-four years ago in my own country , Franco 's troops bombed the town of Guernica , killing more than half of the population , an episode famously depicted by Picasso .
Ever since , Guernica has been a universal symbol for peace and resistance .
However , it is everyone 's wish to make progress towards reconciliation .
We must therefore encourage , help and also push the Sri Lankan Government to continue these prosecutions so that true peace and justice can be attained .
Mr President , the United Nations report , published on 11 April , throws light on the war crimes and the crimes against humanity committed in Sri Lanka in the conflict between the government forces of Mr Rajapaksa and the Tamil Tiger independence movement .
The clashes in May and June 2009 gave rise to war crimes and crimes against humanity , and thousands of civilians lost their lives .
We cannot accept the impunity of those responsible and of the authors of these crimes .
The government of Mr Rajapaksa has done everything in its power to prevent publication of the UN report and it even contests its conclusions .
In Sri Lanka , the press is muzzled , and journalists are subject to intimidation and arbitrary detention .
The main opposition Internet information site has had its access blocked by the judicial authorities , while access to refugee camps is still currently extremely restricted , including for the United Nations .
The Tamil minority is the victim of a genocide that dare not speak its name .
We must urgently send European Parliament observers to the north of Sri Lanka to see what is really happening there and reassert the principle of the self-determination of peoples .
( The speaker agreed to take two blue card questions under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President : I heard it directly in French and the word used was ' génocide ' , which means ' genocide ' , and that has a particular significance in international law .
If such were the intent of the Sri Lankan Government , how come they have just released 200 000 Tamils who were prisoners ?
It is absurd to accuse the Sri Lankan Government of genocide .
I would hope that the Member would retract that statement .
( FR ) Mr Tannock , I used that word by way of a metaphor , above all , to label the phenomenon .
However , I have made it clear that it was not the name .
The facts have to be established .
In any case , what is happening to the Tamil minority cannot be shrugged off as a simply anodyne act .
Mr President , the previous speaker mentioned that she is calling for some sort of commission to go to Sri Lanka to look at what is going on on the ground there .
Could I just remind her that the South Asia delegation has just been to Sri Lanka - and I see several members of that delegation in the Chamber .
Indeed , my colleague , Mr Mann , referred to the visit there : the previous speaker is obviously not listening to what is going on in this debate .
People have been to Sri Lanka .
They know Sri Lanka and they know what is going on .
I do not know where Ms Delli is getting all this nonsense from .
( FR ) You are right , we have already sent a mission and I acknowledge the formidable character of that mission , seeing that you worked on it .
However , we can also exert pressure , which means that we must absolutely repeat this type of operation .
Mr President , Sri Lanka is a ravaged land .
The civil war officially ended nearly two years ago , and we know in what conditions it took place .
In that country , the United Nations failed badly .
The reports from non-governmental organisations are damning .
Thousands of civilians were killed between January and May 2009 .
Atrocities were committed by both camps , but it seems to be accepted that the pro-government forces knowingly shelled zones where they had encouraged the civilian population to take refuge .
Since that time , the Sri Lankan Government has been manoeuvring to exonerate itself and impede access to justice by those who must be called , at the very least , victims of war crimes .
It has not ceased to try and underestimate the number of civilians present in the war zone while it has even deprived them of all humanitarian aid , including food , water and healthcare .
The Tamil Tigers have their share of the responsibility for these horrors .
They conscripted child soldiers and used the civilian population as a human shield , but that does not in any way alleviate the responsibility of the governmental authorities on the spot .
It justifies nothing .
The UN waited for a long time before denouncing the situation in that country .
What is worse , the Sri Lankan Government has multiplied its machinations to prevent the publication of the latest report in particular and to have its conclusions rejected .
We can only welcome the report of 11 April .
The resolution before us today is going in the right direction .
For my part , I should have liked it to go even further .
It is high time that international justice did its work , in Sri Lanka as elsewhere .
Mr President , the long-running military conflict between the government forces and the armed groups of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , which has had very cruel consequences for the civilian population living in the conflict zones , came to an end in 2009 .
After the end of the war , the Sri Lankan President , Mahinda Rajapaksa , promised to investigate all suspected violations of military law and international humanitarian law during the military conflict .
The UN report published in April this year states that both sides in the conflict carried out military operations without taking steps to protect the rights and lives of civilians .
Despite this , the responsible bodies in Sri Lanka have not held to account the people responsible for serious violations of humanitarian law , two years after the end of the war .
The judicial authorities are , in many cases , inactive , and we therefore need to support through our resolution UN efforts to uphold the law and establish accountability for the killing and torture of thousands of civilians during the vicious fighting between the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and government forces in Sri Lanka .
( PL ) Mr President , the dramatic events in Sri Lanka which are described in the UN report show what kind of problems can be caused by armed conflict .
What took place there is further proof that solving differences by violence and force of arms generates other colossal problems .
In Europe , there has , for centuries , been reflection about the concept of a just war .
What is particularly painful is the fact that in the modern world , even a war which is theoretically just inevitably entails the suffering of innocent and unjustified victims .
This happens irrespective of how we define a just war .
In the case of Sri Lanka , growing amounts of data show that the war was not a just one for either side .
The victor is not always right , although they always try to prove they are right .
If there is really to be a reconciliation , as the Sri Lankan Government has declared , then the basis of such a reconciliation must be the truth about what happened during the struggle with the Tamil Tigers .
There will be no genuine reconciliation without exposing the war crimes which were committed , irrespective of which side it was that committed them .
There will be no reconciliation if the sides consider their own sins to be taboo and do not allow them to be mentioned .
Mr President , many in this Chamber have been involved in the politics of Sri Lanka , and indeed the politics of the diaspora of Sri Lanka and of the Tamil community .
What we are discussing today is a report by the Secretary-General 's panel of experts on accountability in Sri Lanka .
I have not heard anyone in the Chamber as yet cast doubts on the intrinsic integrity of that report .
I have read the report and I have spoken to many about the report on both sides .
If we are saying that we should leave the report on the table , and we should not have investigations into what happened between January and May , and indeed not open the door to investigate many allegations on both sides , what is the point of a report of this nature ?
Indeed , I find it compelling that one diaspora organisation of the Tamil community , the Global Tamil Forum , has said that credible allegations against the LTTE - and they have made this very prominent - should also be investigated .
We have a report which ought to have a follow-up , and I speak firmly in favour of the need for a genuine process of accountability which would bring truth , justice and reconciliation to Sri Lanka following what will be a painful investigation , but an investigation which must happen .
Mr President , it is appalling that during the protracted military conflict in Sri Lanka that ended in 2009 , nearly 100 000 people were killed , including tens of thousands of civilians , most of whom died in the final phase of the conflict .
The international community should demand a robust international investigation into credible reports of atrocities committed on both sides .
It is a pity that countries like China and Russia opposed discussion of the issue in the United Nations Security Council and the UN Secretary-General taking more robust action to investigate the crimes committed .
The UN Panel of Experts clearly indicated that both the government of Sri Lanka and the Tamil rebels committed serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law , possibly amounting in some cases to war crimes and crimes against humanity .
So I fully support the immediate establishment of an international justice mechanism as proposed by the UN report .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is apparent from the UN report that in the final bloody months of the civil war in Sri Lanka , which went on for 25 years , thousands of civilians died in artillery fire from government troops .
The UN also said that Tamil rebels had used more than 300 000 civilians as human shields and shot civilians trying to escape .
Both sides therefore seriously contravened human rights and international laws in a war situation .
It is important now that reconciliation talks get under way , so that an impartial and independent investigation into war crimes can be carried out by the UN .
Parliament 's resolution is wellbalanced in its wording and will encourage the parties to achieve reconciliation and build peace .
( RO ) Mr President , the conclusions from the UN report published on 25 April 2011 level serious accusations concerning the numerous violations of human rights and norms of international law , both by the Sri Lankan Government and by the rebel forces defeated in the civil conflict which lasted well over 28 years .
Indeed , the report states that government forces killed tens of thousands of civilians by bombing populated areas , hospitals and even humanitarian aid centres belonging to the UN .
On the other hand , the rebel forces used numerous civilians as human shields , with those who tried to escape the conflict zone being shot on the spot .
Like other speakers before me , I think that an independent international mechanism needs to be created to investigate the war crimes in this country , as well as the other serious human rights violations .
An impartial , transparent investigation is required , which will shed light on who is responsible for these crimes that have shocked the international community .
Mr President , this well-researched report shows us - in addition to all its conclusions - that , once again , the first casualty of war is truth .
What it fails to do is to outline the policies needed to heal the hurts of that nation .
Too many countries for too long turned a blind eye to what was going on .
The right policies are needed now , through a concerted effort by the international community , to seek release and justice for all of those who have been so terribly affected .
Mr President , Mr Watson is quite right in saying that the first casualty of any war , and specifically this one , is truth .
Obviously , we also have to admit that the civilian population is a victim in this kind of conflict , and the UN panel has shown clearly that there are responsibilities on both sides : mainly that of the government but also that of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , and both need to be investigated .
What we are saying is that a proper inquiry is very unlikely if the investigating commission comes from the government .
What we are asking for is an independent commission to investigate these allegations , identified by the UN panel , of war crimes and crimes against humanity .
If we do not understand the need for this , we will not have a solution , because peace will come only when justice arrives ; justice is possible only on the basis of truth ; and truth will come only if we have an independent investigation .
Mr President , finally , Sri Lanka is enjoying peace after a quarter of a century of terrorist insurgency , and the UN report on the Sri Lankan army 's defeat of the Tamil Tigers is heavy on criticism and light on substantive , proven facts .
The approach taken in the report seems to be undermining the efforts now undertaken by the government of Sri Lanka to promote truth and understanding , not least through the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission , and the government actually having released more than 200 000 detained Tamil prisoners .
Of course , any deliberate atrocities against civilians by the military must be punished .
I agree with that , but there is no clear evidence that this was deliberate government policy .
I would like to remind the House that the LTTE refused a supervised international surrender offer and preferred instead to choose a bloodbath as their kind of exit strategy , which was appalling .
The consequences now of the international community 's ambivalence towards Sri Lanka are clear : a loss of influence and an inability to shape developments .
Meanwhile , China has stepped into the breach and become Sri Lanka 's closest friend and defender at the UN .
I hardly need remind colleagues here of China 's approach to human rights .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on 25 April 2011 , the United Nations made public the advisory report of the panel of experts appointed by the UN Secretary-General on accountability in relation to the armed conflict in Sri Lanka .
The panel found credible allegations which , if proven , would indicate that serious violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law were committed by the Sri Lankan military and the LTTE , some of which would amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity .
The panel also makes a series of recommendations to the UN Secretary-General and to the government of Sri Lanka which , in the panel 's words , will serve as the framework for an ongoing and constructive engagement between the Secretary-General and the government of Sri Lanka on accountability .
Recommendations include the launch of genuine investigations by the government of Sri Lanka and the establishment of an independent international mechanism by the UN Secretary-General .
The UN has stated that the UN Secretary-General is carefully reviewing the reports , conclusions and recommendations , and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has urged the Sri Lankan Government to quickly carry out the measures suggested by the panel and ensure justice .
The government of Sri Lanka , on its side , has rejected the report in the strongest terms .
Earlier this week , High Representative Catherine Ashton issued a declaration on behalf of the EU reiterating the EU view that an independent process to address these extremely serious allegations should contribute to strengthening the process of reconciliation and ensuring lasting peace and security in Sri Lanka .
The High Representative has stressed that the issue of accountability should be seen as an essential part of the process of national reconciliation .
The EU therefore hopes that the government of Sri Lanka will recognise the constructive objectives of the report , and encourages it to engage with the UN Secretary-General on its contents .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The conflict between the government of Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ( LTTE ) ended in May 2009 and resulted in more than 90 000 deaths .
Numerous Sri Lankans who had been displaced by the violence in their country have returned to their homes following the end of hostilities .
However , there are still 75 000 refugees who continue to lead difficult lives in camps in Tamil Nadu , India .
Sri Lanka has a double challenge to overcome .
It has to recover from a long-lasting crisis .
The United Nations ' experts ' report , made public on 25 April , found the allegations of violations of international humanitarian law and human rights credible .
In the interests of justice and reconciliation in Sri Lanka , it is essential to set up an impartial , transparent and independent enquiry .
It also has to prepare for the various natural disasters , such as flooding , landslides , cyclones and also drought , to which the country is exposed .
2 .
Azerbaijan ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Azerbaijan .
Mr President , this is another occasion when we find ourselves looking into the situation in Azerbaijan .
The democratic situation in that country is dramatic enough .
However , this is a country that is a not insignificant partner within the European Union 's Eastern Partnership .
Opposition parties and non-governmental organisations continue to denounce attacks on human rights and the political repression which is rife there , not to mention the corruption of the regime in power .
The values of democracy and human rights form an integral part of the values of the European Union , in theory .
Should we not draw lessons from what is happening in what are called the Arab countries and not demand of our Eastern partners what we did not demand of some governments , notably those of Tunisia , Libya or Egypt ?
Should we not , Mr Andor , see to it that democracy can finally rule in those countries , that we have minimum requirements in the matter ?
For my part , I find that the resolution we have before us is , at best , a resolution with as low a profile as it is possible to have .
For this reason , we have dissociated ourselves from it and we shall make do with abstaining on the vote .
author . - Mr President , Azerbaijan is , regrettably , a one-party , semi-authoritarian state where political opposition to the dynastic rule of the Aliyev family is barely tolerated .
Last December 's elections predictably delivered an overwhelming majority for Heydar Aliyev 's New Azerbaijan Party .
In response , the OSCE stated that the conduct of these elections overall was not sufficient to constitute meaningful progress in the democratic development of that country .
The OSCE 's report went on to say that freedom of expression was limited and that normal political discourse was almost impossible , partly because of tight constraints on the media .
Now we are hearing new reports about the targeting of opposition parties and journalists .
This is nothing new , but it is good from time to time in this House to remind ourselves of the true nature of the Aliyev regime .
After all , this is a country which , like all EU countries , enjoys membership of the Council of Europe and is part of our eastern EU partnership .
Supposedly , Azerbaijan is committed to democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
The truth is quite different .
Azerbaijan spends countless petro-dollars trying to convince outsiders of the benign nature of the regime but I , for one , am not fully taken in .
Mr President , I will begin with some encouraging news .
I am referring specifically to the release of the two bloggers , Adnan Hajizade and Emin Milli , whom we have discussed in this Chamber .
Otherwise , however , the situation is more than worrying in Azerbaijan .
We are hearing about the harassment of journalists and the intimidation of human rights activists , who are facing criminal charges .
In addition , there were 200 arrests made in the wake of the recent protests in Baku in March and April .
All these incidents raise serious question marks with us , especially as we must not forget that Azerbaijan has signed up to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
The Azeri authorities have seemingly failed to understand that dialogue needs to be established between them and civil society , and not pressure being exerted by the authorities on society .
Nevertheless , I hope that ultimately , we can establish cooperation within the Eastern Partnership and in the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly .
author . - Mr President , while we welcome the release from prison of Adnan Hajizade and Emin Milli , the good news about Azerbaijan ends about there .
The European Parliament is very concerned about the massive crackdown on freedom of expression and assembly carried out in Azerbaijan following the peaceful protest against the government in March and April of this year .
Young people , civil society activists , media professionals and opposition politicians are being harassed and intimidated .
Some demonstrators have been sentenced in mass trials which took place late at night and while people did not have access to a lawyer .
Most of these lawyers , in turn , were not informed of the locations where the trials were being held .
The Human Rights House of Azerbaijan has been closed down by order of the Ministry of Justice .
This climate of fear and intimidation and the breaches of human rights must end .
The Azerbaijani Government is losing its credibility by breaching conventions it has itself signed up to , such as the Council of Europe and the European Convention on Human Rights .
We want President Aliyev to keep his word .
Europe also loses credibility if we do not act upon these breaches .
They should have real consequences for the relations between the EU and Azerbaijan .
Mr President , a few days ago , we celebrated the grand opening of Euronest at the European Parliament in Brussels .
Azerbaijan is a founding member of that assembly and as such , has committed itself to democracy , human rights , the rule of law and freedom of assembly and the media .
This is also a fundamental element of the negotiations on an association agreement between the EU and Azerbaijan that have been taking place since July 2010 .
In light of this , it is really quite staggering how the Azerbaijani Government has behaved towards peacefully demonstrating people over the last two months .
Here we have young people - who organised themselves via social networks like Facebook - arrested and sentenced to up to two and a half years imprisonment because they peacefully demonstrated under the slogan ' drug abuse ' .
Others are threatened with a similar fate .
At least 30 people , who likewise protested peacefully , have been sentenced to five to eight days of imprisonment without being able to contact their legal representatives in a cloak and dagger operation that excludes the public .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , that is unacceptable !
In a joint resolution of the five largest groups in Parliament , we are calling for all these people to be released immediately and for the rule of law , freedom of expression and of the media to actually be ensured so that , as President Aliyev assured us years ago - in 2005 - ' No journalist is persecuted in Azerbaijan ' .
He must finally keep these promises .
I really hope that , by the time of the inter-parliamentary assembly scheduled for June , we will succeed in having all these people released , including newspaper editor Eynulla Fatullayev , and that the government and the governing parties finally keep to their promises .
Otherwise , there must be consequences .
Mr President , the democracy and human rights situation in Azerbaijan is raising legitimate concerns .
These include freedom of expression , media freedom , freedom of association and many other areas .
We are monitoring incidents involving arrests and political pressure on democratic activists , journalists and the political opposition .
Azerbaijan and other countries in the region need to get a clear signal that violations of human and civil rights cannot be tolerated under any circumstances .
If they want to be partner countries of the EU , they must respect its values .
The debate on violations of human rights and democratic standards should therefore cover the entire region of the South Caucasus .
In this context , I would also like to draw attention to the re-escalation of tension between Azerbaijan and Armenia in the region of Nagorno-Karabakh .
This situation now represents a security risk for the entire region .
It is therefore important for this reason as well to adopt the resolution now .
The Union should take a more active and more responsible approach , not only in Azerbaijan , but also in the whole region .
We should learn from the experience of the conflict between Russia and Georgia , and prevent a repeat of similar tragedies .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , it is true that the situation in Azerbaijan is difficult , and we have reasons for concern .
Here , I would specially mention the case of Mr Hajiyev .
I think the authorities should understand that peaceful demonstrations are a natural part of political life in any democratic country and that the pluralism of opinions and political beliefs is a fundamental part of a democratic society .
On the other hand , I must say that it is rather unfortunate that we have put the urgent issues of Azerbaijan and Belarus one after the other - one week after Azerbaijan became - and was welcomed as - a founder of the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly together with us , the European Parliament .
We need engagement both with the authorities and with civil society , and we have to do more , in addition to adopting urgent measures and resolutions .
The Eastern Partnership and the Euronest Assembly are a good platform for such an engagement , and I feel that there is a new wind coming from Azerbaijan , a renewed wish for political dialogue .
The PCC , which is going in June to Azerbaijan , should use this opportunity to raise the human rights issue but also to establish a more consistent dialogue with the country .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I venture to suggest that were Azerbaijan known as Azeria , as with Georgia and Armenia , European citizens ' concern for democratic standards there would be higher .
However , my group cannot share Mr Vigenin 's view .
The media in Azerbaijan is not free .
Its elections are not fair .
Its people are subject to arbitrary and sometimes violent treatment by officials .
Peaceful demonstrations in recent weeks have met with repression more common to an Arab than to a European country , from an 18-year-old regime which has slowly stifled hope of progress .
This country 's continued participation in the European Neighbourhood Policy must be made conditional on democratic reforms rather than on its willingness to supply oil for the Nabucco pipeline .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , democracy and respect for human rights and the rule of law are an integral part of the new association agreement which is currently being negotiated between Azerbaijan and the European Union .
Without respect for these principles , it is impossible to see how Azerbaijan can have a common future with its European partners .
Let me also join those colleagues who point out that we need to be very clear and objective when we talk to our partners in the Eastern Partnership countries .
We should not believe that we can get away with simply bashing Belarus , because there are severe problems in Azerbaijan and in several other Eastern Partnership countries , and I hope that the forthcoming study commissioned by the Subcommittee on Human Rights will give some guidance on how we should talk to these countries about their human rights situation .
Mr President , Azerbaijan is one of the special partners of the EU and a founding member of the Euronest grouping , and therefore benefits considerably from privileged relations with the EU .
As a country with such an exceptional status , however , it has promised , in the signing of mutual agreements as a partner of the EU , to uphold the principles of democracy , human rights and the rule of law , which are fundamental preconditions for such cooperation .
The unjustified arrests of journalists , representatives of youth organisations and civil activists , the banning of peaceful protests and the use of physical force against protestors are therefore unacceptable .
I expect that the High Representative and Vice President of the Commission , Baroness Ashton , as well as the Commission itself , will convey and represent to the Azerbaijani Government our disquiet over the suppression of democracy in the country , and demand immediate corrective action .
By adopting the drafted resolution , we will give both the Commission and the High Representative the necessary mandate for this .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is somehow grotesque that our Euronest partners , Azerbaijan and Belarus , are both being discussed in succession here as urgent human rights cases .
Surely the partnership ought to require a respect for European values .
According to the human rights organisation , Amnesty International , the Azerbaijani authorities are trying to stifle critical voices with a view to preventing wider protests , the like of which have been seen in the Arab world in recent months .
In the past few weeks , the Azerbaijani police have broken up several demonstrations in the country and have also arrested representatives of the opposition on trumpedup charges , frequently , the possession of drugs .
The Savalan case and the cases of demonstrators arrested recently show how basic rights in Azerbaijan remain weak and how far the authorities are prepared to silence dissidents .
Mr President , the situation in Azerbaijan is very disappointing .
Here is a country that has not really moved forward in terms of political rights since the break-up of the Soviet Union .
There are just too many examples of lack of freedom - freedom of speech and freedom of the press , which are fundamental to any properly functioning democracy - as well as evidence of the torture of prisoners , court cases where illegally acquired evidence is always admitted , and so on .
Because we have a close relationship with this country , we certainly have to engage in dialogue , but my position is closer to Mr Watson 's thinking : that we need to take a tough hand as well , because if you go ' softly , softly ' on a continuous basis , you will get nowhere .
So I would hope , yes , for dialogue and , yes , for engagement , but we have to up the ante in terms of making demands for freedom : freedom of expression , freedom of speech and , above all , freedom of the press .
( FI ) Mr President , freedom of speech and freedom of assembly are universal fundamental rights and the cornerstones of a democratic society .
It is sad that harassment , intimidation and arrests are used as a means of suppressing the diversity of civil society .
Azerbaijan is party to the European Convention on Human Rights and a member of the Council of Europe , and it has a responsibility to safeguard its citizens ' human rights and respect them .
Bloggers , journalists and civil society activists are denied freedom of speech in Azerbaijan and peaceful protests are prevented .
Young people are prevented from using new communications technology and social media , and are even punished if they do use them .
This is ironical , because the state would definitely benefit from an active and diverse civil society .
Azerbaijan should be supported in its democratic and human rights development within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Eastern Partnership .
Mr President , the resolution on Azerbaijan expresses our concern about eventual North African echoes in this , a European partnership country .
The leadership there should avoid , in its approaches to the opposition and peaceful protestors , any similarity with the regimes in North Africa , Russia or Belarus .
That suggestion and warning can be read in the document before us , certain points of which could express that criticism with more clarity .
The wording on the worsening human rights situation and the increased number of incidents should be preceded by the word ' recently ' , as this is not about general developments over the years going from bad to worse .
On the contrary , until the spring events , Azerbaijan was making relatively good progress and was not listed by Human Rights Watch among such poorly-viewed states as China , Iraq , Israel , Russia , Saudi Arabia or Uzbekistan .
As it was not mentioned , Azerbaijan looked better , but now we need a little more balance .
( RO ) Mr President , not only as an active partner of the European Union within the European Neighbourhood Policy and Eastern Partnership , but also as a founding member of Euronest , Azerbaijan must fulfil the commitments it has made to the European Union .
This includes having respect for democracy , human rights and the rule of law , as well as for the basic freedoms guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and other international treaties to which Azerbaijan is party .
A country aspiring to become a globally recognised democracy cannot operate without allowing its citizens to demonstrate peacefully , especially young people .
It is not normal either to ban them from taking their exams just because they hold different political opinions to those of the country 's current leaders .
We European partners would like to see in Azerbaijan an ongoing dialogue with civil society , a press which enjoys freedom of expression and can report without any political pressure so as to provide the public with correct information , as well as free , uncensored access to the Internet to facilitate communication between Azerbaijan and Europe .
( LT ) Mr President , there are two faces to modern Azerbaijan .
On the one hand , Azerbaijan demonstrates impressive economic growth , which highlights the huge amount of oil , progress in negotiations with the European Union on an association agreement and participation in the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly .
On the other hand , there are arrests , press restrictions , in other words , a situation that is dangerously reminiscent of the one in Belarus , which my fellow Members spoke about .
I believe that the authorities in Baku must resolve to listen to public opinion , because sitting on the fence is not an option , and the European Union , with all its instruments , should help it choose the right direction .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , developments in Azerbaijan regarding democracy and human rights continue to be a matter of serious concern to all of us .
Over the last few years , we have noted a worrying trend of increasing restrictions in this domain .
Parliamentary elections held on 7 November 2010 were not sufficient to constitute meaningful progress in the democratic development of that country .
There are other areas where we believe that Azerbaijan needs to improve its record of meeting fully its Council of Europe and OSCE commitments .
First of all , media freedom : overall , there is a lack of media pluralism .
There are also reports of harassment of , and violence against , journalists , as well as questionable judicial proceedings against media representatives .
Individual cases in this field remain a concern .
Freedom of assembly is another area where I am deeply worried .
The recent months have witnessed several severe actions taken by the authorities vis-à-vis organised protests , as well as attempts to organise protests inspired by the Arab Spring revolutions .
The detention of activists and other repressive measures against protesters are deeply deplorable .
The European Union has a responsibility to convey clear messages on the importance of democracy , human rights and respect for the rule of law .
Such messages were passed on by President Barroso himself during his visit to Baku in January , and will be high on our agenda for future visits .
Human rights and democracy are cornerstones in our cooperation with Azerbaijan under the existing partnership and cooperation agreement .
Last year , we established a new Subcommittee on Justice , Freedom , Security and Human Rights and Democracy .
Democracy and human rights are also a central theme in our negotiations on a new association agreement .
I welcome the willingness of Azerbaijan to discuss these methods .
I also welcome the role the European Parliament plays in advocating democratic values to the partners in Azerbaijan , including through its work in the EU-Azerbaijan Cooperation Committee .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Anyone in Azerbaijan criticising the government is silenced .
The European Parliament resolution and reports from human rights organisations highlight serious human rights violations .
One such violation which I have drawn the Council 's attention to in a written question concerns the journalist Eynulla Fatullayev , who is still being held in detention , even though a decision was issued by the European Court of Human Rights for him to be released .
I pointed this out then and I now urge the removal from the Criminal Code of the provisions concerning defamation , slander and insult ( Art. 147-148 ) .
A recent report about Azerbaijan from Transparency International indicates that the government is not taking measures to combat corruption and that the independence of the judiciary is not guaranteed .
Furthermore , the authorities responded to the recent protests which took place on 11 March and 2 April with arrests and harassment .
Democracy is based on people 's freely expressed desire .
I call on the Council and Commission to urge the authorities in Azerbaijan to respect human rights , especially those relating to the freedom of expression and peaceful demonstration , as well as to take concrete measures to combat corruption and reform the justice system .
The European Union must support all those who risk their lives and freedom in this country for the values which we share .
Azerbaijan actively participates in the European Neighbourhood Policy , is one of the EU 's six Eastern partners , and is among the founders of the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly .
The core values of these three initiatives are respect for democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
These initiatives are intended to foster a continuous political dialogue that can deepen ties between member countries and enable Europe to accompany them along the path to reform .
We believe that the instrument of the emergency resolution may be inadequate or even counterproductive to the achievement of the desired goal , namely , Azerbaijan steadily progressing towards its objectives of full and modern democracy .
The institutions set up under the agreements reached at interparliamentary and intergovernmental level are intended to achieve these ends ; these are the right place to demand explanations for possible infringements of rights and effectively encourage good behaviour and democratic reforms .
Once again , we are calling attention to the question of free speech and freedom of the press and to the general policy of treating journalists in Azerbaijan .
Reports from a variety of sources indicate that the situation of journalists and every kind of political activist in Azerbaijan is becoming increasingly difficult .
As far back as 2005 , the President of Azerbaijan , Ilham Aliyev , pledged that all the rights of journalists would be respected and that they would be able to count on help in the event of any kind of danger .
The facts reveal , however , that those words are just an empty promise .
As someone who , for many years , worked as a journalist and has a thorough knowledge of the job , this matter is of particular importance to me .
In Azerbaijan , journalists are constantly hindered from fulfilling their basic role - the reliable and credible provision of information .
It is unacceptable that journalists are carrying out their work under the threat of arrests and body searches .
The Azerbaijani authorities have to realise that the activity of free and independent media is a clear signal to the international community that a country is a credible partner on the world stage .
The message given by the European Parliament should be clear - the benefits of economic cooperation with the European Union must not obscure expectations regarding the need to move towards European standards of respect for fundamental human rights , in particular , free speech and freedom of the press , which are a pillar of democracy and without which it is impossible for a modern democratic society to exist .
3 .
Belarus ( debate )
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Belarus .
Mr President , in evaluating , we must not forget that , just as we try to make an objective evaluation in our own countries , our partners or neighbours deserve exactly the same approach .
I would like to say as a doctor that violence is still violence , wherever it happens .
It is contrary to our shared values .
We must try to ensure that those who are currently in prison are provided with proper conditions from the perspective of health and dignified treatment , wherever they are in the world .
The newly established Euronest assembly should serve as an instrument of exchange and cooperation .
In the case of Belarus , it is not possible to fulfil this aim in its entirety due to the measures adopted .
The overall outcome of the decision means a breach of the Prague Declaration and a slowdown in potentially positive developments concerning mutual cooperation .
Our efforts are directed towards the creation of the single Europe which young people most of all deserve , including those in Belarus .
We should therefore reconsider our position , and reconsider whether restrictions are the right instrument for leading civil society in Belarus to see us as a true friend .
In connection with the 25th anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster , I would like to ask you to try and see Belarus through a different lens , as a country that has suffered greatly .
The disaster particularly affected Belarus and , in my opinion , it is an insult to this nation to prevent the people of Belarus from participating in the official act of remembrance .
I should like to address one further remark to Mr Tannock .
I know how hard it is to speak quickly in English .
I love English as the language of Shakespeare .
Next time , try to speak quickly in the language of Johann von Goethe , and perhaps we will understand you better .
I say that as a Czech .
Mr President , in the five months since 19 December , the political atmosphere in Belarus has become dramatically worse .
There is increasing repression of the democratic opposition , the free press and civil society .
Belarus is also violating international treaties .
I was always in favour of dialogue with Minsk , but under current conditions , it is becoming very difficult , if not impossible .
All the more so , because arbitrary accusations addressed to the European Union are also coming out of Minsk , even harassment .
The resolution calls for new measures to be found to help Belarusian civil society and the opposition , and this is only fair .
Perhaps it is an illusion , but I think that even Moscow and Kiev could help by talking to Minsk about the release of political prisoners .
Mr President , in the previous debate , I , too , along with a number of fellow Members , alluded to the session of the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly held last week which the Belarusian MPs were absent from , as you are aware .
Their absence is justified because MPs in Minsk are not elected freely .
In addition , the human rights situation in this country remains more than critical .
I believe that we were all appalled by the repressive measures taken against the protesters in December .
At the moment , six of the seven candidates who stood against President Lukashenko are still being tried and harassed .
Many other people , including these candidates ' staff , are in prison simply for participating .
I think that two important things need to be done :
1. an independent inquiry must be held into the acts of repression
2 . I think that the economic sanctions must be extended against Belarus , applying to the state firms in this country which play an important role in shaping the region .
author . - Mr President , we are discussing the situation in Belarus for the fourth time this year , yet the political prisoners who were apprehended in December have still not been released .
We are grateful to the Council for reintroducing visa sanctions and an asset freeze on the high Belarusian officials , which demonstrated that our deep concern for the people of Belarus is not only empty rhetoric .
Perhaps we have not been clear enough .
Therefore , we are calling on the European Union to extend restrictive measures against Lukashenko 's regime .
Well-advised , targeted , economic sanctions against state-owned enterprises will have an effect that the Belarusian authorities cannot disregard .
The criminal regime of Lukashenko relies greatly on the income from exports of chemicals , heavy industry and textiles owned by state enterprises .
By cutting off the European market , we can demonstrate our determined intention to overthrow Lukashenko 's regime .
It is within our capacity to make a difference .
Regime transition is desperately needed for the people of Belarus .
We should not deny them their long-awaited liberty .
Mr President , we are talking about politics and about human rights in the context of Belarus .
I would like , today , to adopt a somewhat unconventional approach and recall the names of two people who are connected with this subject .
One of them is my friend , Anatol Lyabedzka , a wonderful Belarusian and European , who only recently was released from prison after spending over 100 days under arrest , something which I am profoundly convinced was unlawful .
Today , I would like to send him expressions of solidarity from this House - from the majority of MEPs , I am sure - because he is someone who definitely deserves this .
The second person I would like to mention is Andrzej Poczobut , a journalist who writes for Gazeta Wyborcza , one of Poland 's largest newspapers .
I and hundreds of thousands of Poles would like to appeal for his release .
He , too , is currently under arrest , and he , too , is being persecuted simply because the Lukashenko regime is afraid of free speech - it is afraid of free speech , which is the foundation of every democracy .
I think that we Europeans , assembled in this Chamber today , have no option other than to say very loudly : ' yes ' for a free Belarus , ' yes ' for democracy in Belarus and ' yes ' for the Belarusian nation in Europe .
( Applause )
author . - Mr President , once again , I deplore the persisting climate of fear and intimidation towards political opponents in Belarus and the ongoing harassment and persecution of opposition figures since the presidential elections in December 2010 .
Secondly , I strongly condemn all convictions resulting from the criminal charges of mass rioting and find them politically motivated and of a questionable nature .
I would like to stress that the trials were held behind closed doors .
Detainees were refused the opportunity to call their witnesses and to meet in proper conditions and on a regular basis with their legal representatives .
The lawyers of the accused received several warnings from the Ministry of Justice and some of them have been disbarred .
I consider that this conduct of the trials lacked impartiality .
Finally , I condemn the lack of respect for the fundamental rights of freedom of assembly and of expression shown by the Belarusian authorities and call for the immediate and unconditional release of the remaining protestors still in custody and for all charges against them to be dropped .
Mr President , the situation in Belarus is indeed deteriorating , literally from one day to the next , in both political and economic terms .
From the political point of view and in terms of civil liberties , we are seeing trials being started against the main opponents of Alexander Lukashenko in the last presidential elections , and we can see the scandalous procedure being applied in these trials .
We are also witnessing the repression of independent media , including , in particular , the fact that Andrzej Poczobut has been detained for many weeks now .
The economic deterioration can be seen in the redenomination of the rouble , the financial crisis and the problems with current payments .
In addition , Alexander Lukashenko is losing control , not only over the situation in the country , but also over his own behaviour , which can be seen in the astonishing , shocking and offensive statements made in reference to the President of Ukraine and Mr Barroso .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commission , Council , it is time to stop the words and the appeals - it is time for action .
Paragraph 8 of our resolution says clearly : it is time to introduce economic sanctions , because this is the only language which Lukashenko understands .
If , today , we bring in economic sanctions , we can expect that the scandalous trials and the scandalous repression will finally end , because it is only this language which Lukashenko understands .
It is , therefore , time to move to another and more resolute phase of reaction to what is going on in Belarus .
Mr President , Belarus is not called Europe 's last dictatorship for nothing .
In Belarus , you can go to prison for standing for election or expressing your opinion publicly .
The last presidential elections were not democratic .
Furthermore , the laws of Belarus do not permit freedom of assembly , let alone freedom of speech .
Harassment of the opposition and of independent human rights groups have now become a chronic problem in the country .
Workable democracy depends on the active participation of the opposition and of civil society in the political debate .
Human rights are universal , inalienable and interdependent .
Belarus has a responsibility to safeguard its citizens ' human rights and respect them .
Belarus must be supported in every way possible in its development of workable democracy and human rights within the framework of the EU 's Eastern Partnership .
The EU needs to consider targeted sanctions and their use , since civil society should not be penalised given the current situation in Belarus .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , there is not a single indication that the Belarusian regime will change by itself in the coming months or years .
It is only under very strong European Union pressure that we can expect anything to happen .
Belarus keeps on violating all fundamental rights and civil liberties .
Over the past month , we have seen the Belarusian authorities repeatedly demonstrating their disdain and contempt for the fundamental rights of freedom of assembly and expression .
We could talk here about the matrix of the unchangeability of Lukashenko and his regime , but we cannot end on that pessimistic note .
We should understand that a proper response would be a signal to Belarusians - to the Belarusian nation - that they are welcome in Europe , with , at the same time , pressure on the regime and some very principled words about their violation of human rights .
We must not be misled by Lukashenko 's occasional making up to the European Union just to infuriate Russia temporarily , or vice versa .
This is unacceptable .
What is happening in Belarus has to be evaluated in a very principled way , and more pressure has to be applied .
Mr President , we have talked in this Chamber about what is happening in Belarus on average once every two months since the beginning of the year - this is now the third time .
We have talked about cases of human rights violations , we have mentioned the names of opposition activists who have been put in prison and we have discussed how the ability of many civil and non-governmental organisations to operate is restricted .
We should , indeed , condemn all these matters and we should protest very strongly against them .
However , I think it is equally important , and perhaps even more important , for there to be specific and real involvement from the European Union in building civil society , providing financial support for non-governmental organisations and free media , and also in imposing economic sanctions .
As for economic sanctions , I think the right moment has come and that we should introduce them as quickly as possible .
Today , we are going to vote on a resolution which is intended to give moral support to Belarusian society .
In my opinion , this should be followed by specific measures , including financial measures and economic sanctions , which will allow the restoration of freedom and democracy in Belarus .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two questions came to my mind during our discussion about the human rights situation in Belarus .
The first one : what would you say if , one or two years from now , you were to see one of the members of the current Lukashenko government here in the European Parliament , in a place none other than the Vice-President 's chair of the LIBE Committee in charge of civil liberties and human rights ?
And my second question : when will we get to the point where , on these Thursday afternoon discussions , I will see on the agenda amongst non-EU countries the United States or Israel , for instance , particularly since we are already continuously discussing their human rights situations ?
Let me mention a few additional details regarding these two questions in the remaining two minutes : There was the issue of the member of the Lukashenko government .
Ladies and gentlemen , Kinga Göncz , member of the government of the Hungarian Lukashenko , Ferenc Gyurcsány , presides in the Vice-President 's chair of the LIBE Committee , and is lecturing the representatives of Italy , France and other democracies about human rights .
What was it exactly that made this Hungarian Lukashenko , Ferenc Gyurcsány , famous ?
The same things , and , to a certain extent , even more pronounced , that this report here is listing in relation to Lukashenko and Belarus to which you are raising an objection , setting the bar considerably higher for Lukashenko and Belarus , a country outside of the European Union , than the one you were using for Hungary and Ferenc Gyurcsány , including the fact that the Hungarian Lukashenko forcefully broke up every significant anti-government protest .
I myself have now received compensation and an apology from the police for having shot me , a European Parliament candidate , point blank in the face with tear gas .
The most stupefying fact is that there are people still in prison today , some of them serving final prison sentences and some under preliminary detention , who were leading figures of the anti-government protests .
My other question pertains to the United States .
They have the death penalty as well , and the torture inflicted in Guantánamo is the same as in Belarus , to which you are objecting .
Could it be that someone is intent on getting their hands on the national assets of Belarus ?
Is not this the reason for this country being randomly selected , especially in view of the fact that you are threatening to use sanctions against its national assets and state-owned companies ?
( DE ) Mr President , I am not often of one mind with Mr Maštálka , but today I am .
Firstly , I would like to say that all the parties need to fight for democracy and the rule of law to finally prevail in Belarus .
Secondly , I want to make the case for multilingualism .
Like him , I come from a mini-Europe , the former Habsburg Empire , which was no bad thing in many regards , but which fell apart because the biggest linguistic group - namely mine , the German speakers - always insisted on everyone speaking German .
That meant the end of a multinational community .
Charles , I hold you in a very high regard , but we are here for multilingualism and precisely for the rights of the minor languages .
Turning to Belarus , I want to say that , 20 years ago , Croatia and Slovenia became free countries - I was there - and in the August , the Baltic States , Russia and Ukraine followed .
Nobody would have thought that , 20 years later , there would still be a dictatorship in Europe .
Unfortunately , there is not only one .
There is Belarus , there is a trend towards a dictatorship in Russia , there is a sliding backwards in Ukraine and there are problems in Moldova and Transnistria .
We need to see , therefore , quite simply , that our entire eastern neighbourhood is facing a threat to its freedom to varying degrees .
We therefore need to be very clear , think strategically and make freedom and the rule of law the yardstick for our relations throughout our eastern neighbourhood , and particularly when it comes to Belarus .
( PL ) Mr President , I will begin on a personal note .
The organisation Libereco Partnership for Human Rights has asked me to take over a prisoner 's godparenthood for an opposition activist imprisoned in Belarus .
I have been asked to adopt Dmitry Bandarenka .
I would like to suggest that all of you who are involved in these matters could ask this organisation to allow you to take on the personal patronage of repressed Belarusians and their families - this would be something of a response to the problem of what we can do for those who are , in fact , not far away , in a country which shares a border with the European Union .
However , I am sure that all of us support strong and clear steps .
It has already been said in this Chamber that there must be sanctions and there must be strong words , because we can only talk to Lukashenko using a language he understands - well , he understands the language of his own interest , and he understands the language of strength .
To rescue human rights , and to rescue democracy , we must use a language which is understood in Minsk .
I have the impression that although we have already spoken many times about this in this Chamber , not much has come from these words of ours .
This is , of course , an appeal both to this House and to all bodies and institutions of the European Union , but it is also a challenge which I propose that you take back to your countries and national governments , because they have at least the same power to persuade Mr Lukashenko to establish democracy and freedom in Belarus as we do as representatives of the European Union .
FI ) Mr President , following the elections in December , President Lukashenko of Belarus began purposely to crush the already weak political opposition and the independent media .
Around 40 people who had taken part in the demonstrations following the elections were charged with civil disorder , which can carry a maximum sentence of 15 years imprisonment .
The antidemocratic power in Belarus is concentrated very much in the President .
Lukashenko is now in his fourth term of office , and for 16 years , he has shown that his moves in the direction of democracy are just a very cynical game .
The restrictions on Belarus imposed by the EU are therefore fully justified and should even be stepped up .
I strongly support the call issued yesterday by Parliament to the International Ice Hockey Federation for Belarus to lose its right to host the 2014 World Championships unless it frees all its political prisoners .
The EU should also impose targeted economic sanctions and intensify its support for NGOs in Belarus .
( RO ) Mr President , the international community , which also includes the European Union , has been appealing to the Belarusian authorities for a long time to respect the international commitments which they have assumed , to stop the repressive measures used against opposition representatives , to free the protesters arrested during various demonstrations , to end the repressive measures against the free press , civil society and human rights activists , and to allow fair , transparent trials to be conducted .
The Belarusian authorities need to understand that if they fail to respect human rights and the rule of law , in compliance with the joint declaration made at the Eastern Partnership Summit on 7 May 2009 , of which the Belarusian Government is also a cosignatory , the European Union will not be able to offer any commitment of support .
author . - Mr President , I asked for the floor because I wanted to refer to the words Ms Morvai used earlier .
Kinga Göncz is not from my party but I am appalled by the way that Ms Morvai used a debate about the last dictatorship in Europe - Belarus under Mr Lukashenko - to discredit an honourable Member of this Parliament by calling her a Hungarian Lukashenko .
( Applause )
This is not in keeping with the values or the honour of our common European Parliament , to which we have all been elected .

Mr President , I wonder whether Ms Lunacek heard me while I was saying that Ms Göncz was a member of the Hungarian Lukashenko 's government - Mr Gyurcsány 's government .
Please answer the question , Ms Lunacek .
What do you know about the massive human rights violations that were committed in Hungary in 2006 ?
Please summarise it .
They were no less serious and no fewer in number than those of Lukashenko , and as a human rights lawyer , I strongly condemn both - your comrades shooting at people 's eyes and arbitrary detentions , as well as Lukashenko 's violations of human rights .
Both are intolerable and you , as Members of Parliament , should fight against both .
author . - Mr President , I guess the previous speaker was simply confusing facts .
In Hungary , there is no Lukashenko party .
I am not from Hungary and I am not from a Social Democratic party or group here , but I refuse to accept that a Member of this Parliament can criticise somebody else in this Parliament as being a member of a dictatorship party in another non-EU country .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Göncz is an MEP in the same group as me .
You can be against Ferenc Gyurcsány , or for him .
You can disapprove of Mrs Göncz , or you can support her .
It is absolutely up to every individual to decide for themselves , freely and independently , whether they are for or against a given person 's political conviction .
The debate that we are holding here concerns the last dictatorship left in Europe .
We are holding it about one of the most brutal and bloodiest dictators on the continent of Europe .
I find it totally unacceptable for a freely elected , democratic Member of my group to be compared with a bloodthirsty dictator .
I feel that Parliament must also rebuff this , especially when it comes from the representative of a party that is characterised by a hate and persecution that it bestows on the Roma minority in Hungary that is unparalleled across Europe .
If there is one person here who does not have the right to criticise Mrs Göncz , then that person is Mrs Morvai .
( Applause )
author . - Mr President , I will be talking about Belarus and not Hungarian domestic politics .
It is 20 years since the Soviet Union collapsed , but for President Lukashenko of Belarus , it is as if nothing has changed at all .
Political repression is as rife as it ever was in the Soviet days , and Lukashenko 's secret police - provocatively still called the KGB - are used as its enforcers .
As we remember from the post-election protests in December last year , Lukashenko is intolerant of dissent and seems to take pleasure in using violence and intimidation against pro-democracy activists .
As this resolution today illustrates in graphic detail , Lukashenko has intensified his campaign for persecution and harassment against those who dare challenge his iron-fisted rule .
We call on him to 