Resumption of the session
Mr President , I should like to make a brief statement on an incident which occurred this morning at our group meeting .
This particular group invited Mrs Andreassen to come and give evidence to us on a matter of technical information about the accounting systems .
We found much to our surprise that when we arrived , she had been gagged by the Commission and was not allowed to give any information to either the assembled parliamentarians or the press present .
What a clear majority of our political group would like to ask is whether the Commission can justify under what grounds Mrs Andreassen was gagged from giving us technical information about a substantive item which we need to know about .
Perhaps more importantly , how is it that the framework agreement between the Commission and the Parliament does not now allow us as parliamentarians to talk to people about technical matters and how far , therefore , does the Commission reach into our institution ?
That is for our Bureau to decide and we would like to have clarity on that issue .
It is a matter for the Conference of Presidents and not the Bureau .
But Mrs Schreyer is speaking later , if you wish her to deal with this matter then she may - it will be entirely up to her .
You have the honour of sitting on the Conference of Presidents and that is a matter for the Conference of Presidents .
You can write to the President .
I am sure you can pick up the telephone and speak to him .
The next item is the debate on the Annual Report of the Court of Auditors for 2001 .
Mr President , Secretary-General , ladies and gentlemen , it is my pleasure to be able to present to you today the Annual Report of the European Court of Auditors for 2001 .
I have organised my comments into four main sections : firstly , the analysis of budgetary management ; secondly , the follow-up given to the Court 's previous observations ; thirdly , the Statement of Assurance ( DAS ) ; and fourthly , the reform of the Commission .
Let us begin with the analysis of the implementation of the budget .
For the second consecutive year there has been a high budgetary surplus , greater than EUR 15 000 million ( 16 % of the final budget ) .
The surplus is due to the cancellation of appropriations caused mainly by the delay in the implementation of structural measures .
It would have been appropriate to modify the budget to maintain the balance between the forecast expenditure and revenue .
Another crucial feature of the budgetary management was the low rate of use of payment appropriations in certain areas .
In the case of the Structural Funds , percentage of use was less then 70 % , the lowest level since 1999 .
Delays were also a feature of the implementation of pre-accession aid , especially in the case of the SAPARD programme , where only 9.2 % of the appropriations were disbursed .
What is more , only EUR 1 million were received by the final beneficiaries of this programme .
If the pace of implementation does not pick up , appropriations will have to be cancelled in 2003 .
The Commission must continue its effort to clear the accounts by cancelling those commitments which can no longer be implemented .
Outstanding commitments amount to EUR 12 000 million in the case of external aid and to nearly 3 000 million in the case of the new pre-accession instruments .
The rate of implementation of the European Development Funds is just as sluggish .
After four years , only 30 % of appropriations under the 8th EDF have been disbursed .
To conclude , the estimates made for these programmes in terms of implementation and payments need to be more realistic and take account of each country 's capacity to absorb aid .
This would result in a more accurately calculated and balanced budget .
The Court has analysed the follow-up given to its previous observations .
Generally speaking , the Commission has taken appropriate steps to remedy the shortcomings highlighted .
For example , outward processing customs arrangements have been simplified , the legislation promoting joint enterprises in the fisheries sector has been improved and tendering procedures under the TACIS programme have been revised .
In other sectors developments have been less satisfactory .
This is the case of the system of aid for durum wheat , where deficiencies that the Court pointed out in 1998 are still in evidence and some EUR 450 million are spent unnecessarily every year .
This is also true of the Common Market Organisation for sugar , where , despite the 2001 reform , problems of overproduction and high prices persist .
When the Audit Progress Committee starts work , I am certain that the Commission will be able to be more diligent in following up the Court 's reports .
Let us now move on to the Statement of Assurance .
It is the opinion of the Court that the accounts for 2001 reliably reflect the revenue and expenditure and the financial situation of the Communities .
However , the Report does express some reservations and observations which for the most part concern defects in the accounting system on which the Court has previously remarked .
In its reply to our Report , the Commission acknowledges these shortcomings and undertakes to present a plan to modernise the accounting system before the end of 2002 .
The Court will examine the conception and implementation of this plan and will keep Parliament informed of its progress .
As in previous years , the Court is of the opinion that the transactions underlying the revenue , commitments and administrative expenditure are legal and regular .
Nonetheless , because of the errors that we have highlighted we are unable to provide this assurance in respect of the other payments .
Most errors were detected in payments relating to agricultural policy and structural measures - in other words , in those management areas which the Commission shares with the Member States , and which account for some 80 % of the budget .
Reducing the frequency of errors will be contingent on significant improvements in the administration and control systems of both the Commission and the Member States .
Take the common agricultural policy , where the declarations submitted by the beneficiaries of subsidies have not improved compared with previous years .
The launch of the Integrated Management and Control System has not been completed , and almost half of the Member States have not introduced the bovine identification system , which has been compulsory since 2000 .
Other errors are linked to deficiencies in the controls carried out by the Member States ( in the case , for example , of olive oil and cotton ) .
The Court 's recommendations obviously include the full implementation of the control mechanisms provided for in the Regulations .
As regards structural measures , further erroneous payments were discovered , caused by deficiencies in the control systems and in the Member States ' declarations of expenditure .
The Court is concerned about national governments ' delay in applying the management and control instruments for the new programming period ; the inspection units are not operational and there is no independent control of transactions .
It recommends that the Commission intensify its checks and systematically turn the findings obtained to account .
In the context of internal policies , which are directly managed by the Commission , examination of the fifth framework programme for research revealed incorrect payments due to the failure of beneficiaries to comply with contract provisions .
The Court recommends simplifying the systems for reimbursing expenditure and introducing more effective sanction mechanisms .
The national authorities in the beneficiary countries and non-governmental organisations play a decisive role in the management system for external aid programmes .
Examination of the supporting documentation that is available centrally ( in Brussels ) leads to the conclusion that the Commission has legally and regularly met its commitments and payments .
Nonetheless , the Court has no assurance that these operations were carried out correctly in the beneficiary countries , where the control systems are inadequate and errors have often been detected on the spot .
The Commission must work more intensively to transform external aid - where progress has already been made .
To conclude this theme , I should like to open a short parenthesis .
In recent months there has been lively debate concerning the Commission 's accounting system .
This is a good thing , and I hope that the interest thus aroused will help to push through the reforms that the Court has long been advocating .
However , in some respects the debate has suffered from a lack of precision and balance .
The time has come to introduce some order and draw up an objective map of the situation .
To this end , it should be stressed that , despite certain reservations , the Commission 's accounts are reliable .
Accordingly , save perhaps in a few specific areas , the figures provided by the budgetary accounts correspond to the actual use made of appropriations .
This view is borne out by a rigorous professional auditing effort , in which the Court has invested considerable resources .
Yet this effort has also led the Court to criticise the accounting system .
The shortcomings that have been highlighted make it difficult to obtain the better-quality information that is necessary to improve management .
I refer , for example , to the deficiencies in the system of accruals accounting when it comes to presenting the state of the Commission 's assets and liabilities .
For years the Court has been drawing attention to these defects , and at last its observations appear to have elicited some response .
Today we are determinedly pressing the Commission to take remedial action .
When we meet here again next year we will just as determinedly demand results , which I am confident will be positive .
In the meantime , I would ask that the Commission be allowed to concentrate on this task , which is not at all easy .
Let us now deal with what I believe to be a crucial issue in the Report : the reform of the Commission .
2001 was a year of transition which was marked by significant progress , especially in the fields of financial management and internal control .
Let us see what the Court 's main observations in this respect are .
Firstly , I would like to point out that certain measures are not being introduced within the time limits stipulated .
This delay is above all due to an overly ambitious initial timetable , as the Court has already complained .
Secondly , the Council has adopted a new Financial Regulation which the Court considers generally appropriate .
Despite some remaining unsatisfactory elements , this is a good instrument which will help to improve the administration of Community funds .
For the first time , the Directors-General have drafted activity reports and prepared declarations on the quality of information and internal control .
Increasing top managers ' accountability in this way is one of the keys to the reform 's success .
This is a genuine revolution in the Commission 's management culture .
We recommend improving the approach to drawing up reports and declarations : presentation dates must be brought forward and guidelines must be issued in more precise terms , avoiding ambiguity , specifying possible observations and reservations and more clearly outlining plans of action .
The Commission has summarised the reports and declarations by the Directors-General in a single document which it has submitted to Parliament and the Council .
This summary includes a plan of action which aims to remedy the problems that have been identified .
The plan should provide more detail on issues such as the monitoring of internal control standards and the reform of SINCOM .
Finally , one aspect of the reform deserves greater attention .
I refer to the Member States ' management of programmes under what is known as ' shared management ' .
The Commission is having problems with incorporating concrete measures aimed at checking and improving the effectiveness of these management systems , which account for more than 80 % of the budget , into its overall strategy .
Solutions urgently need to be found , but the Commission on its own is powerless : it needs the active collaboration of national governments .
I believe that this message provides an appropriate conclusion to my speech .
The reform is progressing positively .
The Commission has met its commitment to work hard on improving its administrative and control practices .
However , it will take more time to achieve the excellent and exemplary administration we all want to see .
It is a laborious process to which all the institutions must contribute their experience .
Each year the Court will analyse the progress made , report on the deficiencies and recommend any measures it considers necessary .
I thank you very much for your attention .
Mr President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , honourable Members of this Parliament and of the Court of Auditors , I wish to extend very warm thanks to Mr Fabra Vallés for his speech and for his firm support for Commission reform .
I wish to thank all the members and staff of the Court of Auditors for their good cooperation throughout the year and for the Court 's recommendations , which are indispensable if the European Budget is to be put to good use and properly administered .
With the Statement of Assurance specifically in mind , I am also grateful for their frankness about the methodology applied .
I will follow Mr Fabra Vallés in concentrating on three points , specifically the surplus from 2001 , accounting , and Commission reform .
The Court is critical of the EUR 15 billion surplus for that year on the grounds that it is not the result of savings - which would have been a good thing - but has come about because the Budget provision on which Parliament had decided had not been fully used , and because programmes , especially in structural policy , had simply got going more slowly than had been planned .
The surplus represents the difference between the estimates and cash data as set out in the revenue and expenditure accounts , in line with the accountability required by Parliament .
Why was there such a great discrepancy in structural expenditure ?
In this area , the Commission always relies on proposals and predictions by the Member States , and in this instance we were working on the basis of assumptions that were simply unrealistic .
I told the ECOFIN meeting yesterday , and not for the first time , that there is still , in the Member States , no systematic procedure for estimating , on a sound basis , how much in the way of resources can actually be drawn on in a financial year .
This is where the Member States need to work together with the Commission on improving forecasting , which may be helped by our now presenting the Member States ' forecasts to the Parliamentary Committee .
The Financial Regulation requires that any surplus from a financial year be credited to the Member States as income for the following year .
We have done this principally by way of two supplementary Budgets , an instrument that also featured in discussions on the Financial Regulation .
Turning to the accounting standards , the Court has , as in previous years , again observed that the annual accounts for the financial year 2001 gives a true and faithful picture of revenue and expenditure , and of the Community 's financial position at the end of the year .
The Court subjects the financial management including of course the cash position , to detailed scrutiny .
It is , then , quite simply wrong to assert that the Commission 's books and cash position have not been audited for ten years !
The Court examines in detail the accounts and the standards by which they are kept .
The Court has again expressed reservations about the balance sheet , and is calling for further changes to be made to the system .
As you are aware , the new Financial Regulation requires all the institutions , with effect from 2005 , to have one single balance sheet relating to specific periods , a requirement that also applies to Parliament .
Having gained the impression that there is confusion about this , let me follow the President of the Court of Auditors in making a basic observation to clarify matters .
Public sector accounting is , by tradition , cash-based , in the sense that it involves the recording of revenue and expenditure over against the Budget estimates arrived at by the body legislating for the Budget .
This system is therefore in line with accountability to the budgetary authority .
In some Member States , financial management continues to be founded on this principle , and there is no truth in the claim that this type of cash accounting is inherently susceptible to fraud .
This sort of information is not , however , sufficient for administrative measures aimed at efficiency , and that is , as it has been emphasising for years , what the Court of Auditors is concerned about , and it is also a matter for concern for the Commission .
There is a close connection between the adoption of commercial standards in the public sector and the overall reform of administration within the Commission , and also in some Member States in particular .
It is these aspects that have such a great part to play in the Budget , and especially in the balance sheet , but the budget-spending centres must be able to get more information from the accounts .
We have committed ourselves to continued development , which the Court has also expressly enjoined on us , including improvements to the underlying computer system .
Our accounting system is computer-based and capable of performing to the highest standards ; I might add , by the way , that the budget-spending centres in all the Directorates-General and in the representations are linked together in a system of which some Member States can only dream .
This too has been the subject of false allegations to the effect that 4 000 officials were able to carry out transactions directly and , as it were , on their own authority .
That too is untrue .
They are obliged to feed everything into one single system , and the Budget Directorate-General then carries out the actual transactions .
A number of steps have been taken to improve this .
This year , we have also been concerned to introduce improvements in the area of security , specifically concerning access by system managers , which the Court of Auditors had drawn our attention to on numerous occasions .
Every year , Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control has the important task of checking the financial statement , and , should you need help in this , it goes without saying that my staff are always at your service .
Mr Elles , if your group has come to the decision that it should seek help from elsewhere , that is manifestly its own business .
As far as the hearings of a suspended official are concerned , the Conference of Presidents had given this matter their attention , and , when the official raised a query , it was to that and also to the proceedings currently underway that her attention was drawn - nothing more than that .
To summarise , I would like to thank Mr Fabra Vallés again for observing that the Court of Auditors , on the basis of rigorous and professional audit work , has confirmed the reliability of the Commission 's accounts .
The Commission is currently finalising a detailed framework for further modernisation of the accounting system that will take on board the very suggestions and criticisms that the Court of Auditors has made , and I will be able to present this to Parliament in January .
Turning to the third area - that of the reforms - the measures taken by the Commission are many in number and far-reaching in their effects .
You will be aware that , in the area of the Budget , activity-based budgeting is changing the way in which the Budget is drawn up .
Another major change is the strategic planning using the Annual Policy Strategy within the Commission .
The offices of the Internal Audit Service and the Central Financial Service have been set up in the same way .
The most crucial aspect , though , is the decentralisation of responsibility and accountability , as described by the Directors-General in their report .
This must show whether the objectives set out in the Budget have been achieved , and whether a declaration on the financial management can be given , stating that all the control measures had been set up and were up and running .
This too involves new structures , such as annual reporting for example .
We did this for the first time in 2001 , and the Court of Auditors is right to point out that the statements by the Directors-General still differ in too many respects for them to be able to serve as a basis for some sort of Single Audit Concept .
This is an observation with which the Commission concurs , and that is why we will shortly be deciding on appropriate improvements , which we will authorise the Directors-General to carry out .
There is one suggestion in the Court of Auditors ' report that I particularly want to pick up on , one that will also be important in terms of the work done by the Committee on Budgetary Control , and that is the suggestion that the annual reports by the Directors-General should include a specific position statement on which of the Court of Auditors ' recommendations have already been put into effect and which of them still require action to be taken .
This would reduce the number of possible criticisms ; this is a very good , indeed essential proposal , and one that we shall adopt .
It will make the Budget Commissioner 's work easier , as also that of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Let me take this opportunity of congratulating the Court of Auditors on its twenty-five years of existence , and also , on behalf of the Commission , to again thank it very warmly for all the work it has done .
I would also like to address a few words to the principal rapporteur , Mr Casaca .
Work on the discharge procedure has already begun , and the questionnaire you have submitted is a comprehensive one .
For its part , the Commission will do all it takes to give you satisfactory answers in due time , that is to say by 18 December .
The questionnaire also makes clear , Mr Casaca - and you can tell the committee this from me - that the cooperation involved will , in my view , be not only thoroughly in-depth , but also very good .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Fabra Vallés , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by extending my warm congratulations to the Court of Auditors on twenty-five years of its existence and on last week 's celebrations , which were entirely worthy of the occasion .
Today 's discussion on the Court 's annual report for 2001 , which you , Mr Fabra Vallés , thankfully presented to the Committee on Budgetary Control as long ago as the beginning of November , makes it possible for us to examine the same key areas that have already been mentioned - notably the enormous Budget surplus of over EUR 15 billion , the significance of which is that 16 % of the resources allocated were not able to be spent even after the 2000 financial year had come to an end with all of 14 % of funds unused and left over .
We are very much in favour of frugality , but not at the expense of objectives that have been decided on , unless the capacity for implementing them had been overestimated from the outset !
In Chapter I , the Court reiterates the call it made in the previous year for a supplementary and amending Budget to be presented in good time .
The Commission 's response to this may well be technically correct , but it is not the right one politically .
There is still a great deal of work to be done here .
What the Court has to say in Chapter 9 of the Statement of Assurance is most interesting , but , at the same time , gives rise to grave concern .
Again , with the exception of a few areas , certification of the accounts is withheld .
The question arises of whether the top notch on this yardstick will ever be reached .
In terms of discharge , the really important things will be a series of items such as Commission reform , financial management and the new Financial Regulation .
The reliability of the Commission 's accounting system has been the subject of vigorous debate , which the media have broadcast far and wide .
The Committee on Budgetary Control was prevented from hearing the arguments of the Commission 's accounting officer , who has since been suspended .
What we now read in the Court 's report- on pages 308 ff. for example - paints a pretty grim picture of deficits that have been present in the Commission 's book-keeping and accounting procedures for years .
Putting together the Court 's criticisms in its reports from 1994 onwards , the result is proof of the culpably negligent way in which the Commission goes about remedying these serious defects .
According to its current plans , the Commission intends to progressively remove them , but it will be 2005 by the time it will have done it , so the Court of Auditors and Parliament will have many years more checking up to do .
I will end with two questions .
The first is whether 2001 saw an improvement in Budget implementation .
It is the discharge resolution that will provide the answer to that .
The second is this : under the Treaty , it is the Commission that is responsible for the management of the Budget as a whole .
The new Financial Regulation gives its Directorates-General decentralised responsibility .
Who , though , in the Commission , is responsible for the monitoring of the whole within the Commission itself ?
The individual Directors-General , the Budget Directorate-General , or the accounting officer ?
In any case , it is , above all , you , Commissioner Schreyer , in your role as Budget Commissioner , to whom we shall continue to address our questions .
Mr President , thank you in any case for giving me the floor .
I should like to start on a positive note .
The Court of Auditors is celebrating its twenty-fifth anniversary , for which congratulations are in order , and I can only say that in those twenty-five years , the Court of Auditors has become a father figure without which this Parliament would be unable to do its job .
I am also pleased that the Court of Auditors notes that the Commission is functioning ever more effectively .
The Court of Auditors takes a positive view of Commission reform , and the same more or less goes for the new Financial Regulation .
This is the good news .
The bad news is that a positive Statement of Assurance has not yet been issued this year either .
I should like to repeat what I said last year and the year before .
Why can the Commission not be more specific and set a date by which we must have a positive Statement of Assurance ?
It would be something we could all work towards and we would know what to expect .
It is also disappointing to perceive no real improvement in European unification 's oldest policy area , namely that of agricultural policy .
Once again , the Court of Auditors is assessing agricultural spending very critically , and there appears to me to be hardly any tangible improvement .
This is why I took the initiative earlier this year to better control agricultural spending .
This topic will be discussed shortly in this House , and I hope that the Commission , the Council , as well as the MEPs will assess it in a positive light .
It is also this year for the first time that the Directors-General of the Commission will be required to account for healthy financial management .
I think that this will be essential in the future .
As far as the procedure is concerned , surely there is room for at least some improvement , and the reports will also need to be more specific and clearer , but I think that this will be also an essential point for us as Parliament in future .
As everything that needed to be said about the surplus on the budget has already been said , I will not enter into any great detail on this subject .
Suffice to say that we naturally need to budget more effectively .
I would also like to say a few words about the Statement of Assurance itself .
This is the same message I am having to repeat .
I gather from the Court of Auditors and the Commission that it is very difficult to indicate margins of error in some sections of the Budget , but I would still appreciate it if the Court of Auditors were to develop certain indicators where possible .
We should be able to judge , from one year to the next , whether things have generally improved by a certain percentage .
Everyone likes to know the final score , and this should also be possible for the European Budget .
One major point that is left is enlargement .
The Court of Auditors itself admits that even the current Member States leave a great deal to be desired on this score .
As far as I am aware , the IACS ( integrated administration and control system ) has not yet become operational in any of the new Member States .
This is a point of grave concern and something which will require attention particularly in future .
Mr President , I should first of all like to concur with Mr Kuhne on the subject of the transparent and open way in which we cooperate .
I could be asking my fellow MEPs a whole string of questions today .
I could question the considerable budget surplus of EUR 15 million ; I could ask why , for the umpteenth year in a row , no positive Statement of Assurance has been issued ; I could ask about the Commission 's accounting system , about the shortcomings of the Member States which , all in all , already manage 80 % of European subsidy policy ; about pre-accession policy , or about Sapard , where only 9.2 % of the resources have been used .


These are all important questions , which we will be addressing together with the rapporteur , Mr Casaca , over the next few weeks and months .
In my view , there is only one important question left today .
Members of the Court of Auditors , you know that I am on good terms with the Court .
I like working with you and we work well together .
However , according to OLAF 's annual report , allegations have been made by an MEP to OLAF with regard to possible misappropriations by a former member of the Court of Auditors .
You will be aware that I am that MEP .
When I heard about those allegations , I passed them on to OLAF .
I specifically did not want any publicity at the time .
I wanted to see whether OLAF would do its job , and I have to compliment the OLAF investigators on doing a sterling job .
A few weeks ago , they submitted a dossier to the Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
They also submitted a dossier to the Court of Auditors itself with a number of recommendations .
One of those recommendations was to mount a disciplinary inquiry against a former member of the Court of Auditors and against someone who used to be one of its temporary officials .
I understand that a request has also been made for a financial reimbursement to the tune of EUR 28 000 .
Members of the Court of Auditors , I should like to ask you for your official reaction to the OLAF inquiry .
Will you be taking on board the recommendations that the Court of Auditors has made ?
Can you also give me permission to examine this OLAF dossier myself ?
Thirdly , can you assure me that the case involving Mrs N is an isolated one and that it is not common practice within the Court of Auditors ?
Members of the Court of Auditors , it is a crucial question because we will shortly be debating not only Parliament 's discharge , the Commission 's discharge , but also , among other things , the discharge of the Court of Auditors itself .
I think that an honest and open answer from you is very important in terms of the Committee on Budgetary Control 's , or Parliament 's , ability to decide whether or not to grant you discharge with respect to the year 2001 .
Mr President , what would happen if a small Danish limited company with 100 employees were to draw up annual accounts about which a chartered accountant made a declaration emphasising that most of the reservations were due to the fact that they recurred from year to year ; and if it were confirmed that the weaknesses were to a large extent due to the failure of the company 's accounting system to provide adequate assurance that its balance sheet was complete and included all the elements of the company 's activities ; and if , in addition , the declaration stated that there were problems with the monitoring and security systems , and that the data in the system were not complete ; and it continued by saying that it was a matter of concern that the company did not give a high enough priority to remedying these defects , and that it had not given sufficient consideration to the area or allocated enough resources to finding a solution to the problems within a reasonable time frame ?
What would happen if it was ultimately concluded that no declaration could be made as to whether the construction work , purchases or services forming the basis of the payments to the local recipients , actually took place ?
If all this happened , the board of directors would , firstly , refuse to give discharge to the management .
It would then get rid of the management .
After that , the taxation authorities would turn up and seize all the business 's accounts documentation for critical analysis .
Afterwards , the business would have its taxes raised to the tune of the undocumented expenditure , and finally there would be talk of criminal liability .
But not so in the EU .
This is just the approach we take for private business .
Here , the Commission seeks to silence criticism by all possible means , which is exactly what happened with the sacked accounts director Mrs Marta Andreasen , and when Parliament wished to make thorough enquiries into her criticism , a majority in the Conference of Presidents prevented us from holding a hearing .
If the criticism was unjustified , as the Commission claims , we would of course clear this up , and all would be well .
However , the Commission knows , and the European Court of Auditors has confirmed , that the criticism is justified , and therefore it must not come to light .
Instead , this Parliament chooses to turn a blind eye ; which means giving discharge , as otherwise the citizens could find out that the EU finances are not under control .
I think that it is incredibly unwise to continue with this hush-hush policy , and I do not believe that it is possible in the long run to avoid the scandal that is the EU 's failure to manage the money the taxpayers are handing over to us .
I find the report very enlightening .
The problem is that we do not dare to back our criticism up with action .
Mr President , every autumn , as the trees drop their leaves , we in this House discuss the European Court of Auditors ' annual report , the content of which changes very little from one year to the next .
It appears that the Commission hardly takes any notice of the criticisms and recommendations contained in this annual report .
Is this really going to change this year ?
We fear the worst .
This Commission has been promising a change for the better since 1999 , but the fact that by May 2002 , no real action had been taken to reform the accounting system is , according to the EDD Group , an absolute mockery .
The Commission is asking for a repeat of the fall in 1999 , particularly in the light of the fact that Mrs Andreasen was not allowed to give us any information about the shortcomings in the accounting and the administrative organisation this morning .
This being the case , we would ask the President of the Court of Auditors whether he would be able to submit a special report containing all the relevant information on this topic by mid-March 2003 .
We are tired of the Commission 's delaying tactics and of its beating about the bush .
Is the President of the Court of Auditors of the opinion that a more independent position in respect of the Commission could considerably enhance the effectiveness of his institution ?
Given the virtually built-in surplus in the Structural Fund policy , this is due for a thorough overhaul , also in view of the EU 's impending enlargement .
In addition to better control , an integral policy evaluation is needed as a matter of urgency .
Can the Court of Auditors indicate whether the unaltered course of the present Structural Fund policy after 2004 will lead to even greater administrative problems ?
In our view , we should , as soon as possible , put a stop to the pumping around of government funding , which entails the considerable risk of it being taken advantage of .
Mr President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the report which our former colleague , Mr Fabra Vallés , is presenting to us today is important in terms of what it says and what it suggests .
It makes it very clear to us that the Commission 's accounts are reliable , and also that , despite the criticism that can be made of the accounting system , this system is not necessarily the root cause of fraud .
These are two things that I feel are important in the context of the debate that we are holding .
Having said that , it goes without saying , Mr President , but above all , Commissioner , that this House is concerned by the Commission 's accounting situation , and I must honestly say - even I who , as you know , always adopt a cautious attitude in the light of ' scandals ' - that some decisions , such as the one taken this morning , do not , in my view , help the Commission to show that it can propose a legitimate reform of the accounting system and do this in good faith .
I sometimes tell myself that ' we are learning nothing ' or as the Latin saying goes ' oportet ut scandala eveniat ! ' .
Why have we resorted to using a scandal , a mini-scandal , a mini-debate in order to delay a reform - reform which you yourselves have admitted is urgent - for such a long time ?
That is the question that is essentially being raised .
We look forward to your forthcoming decision .
I believe , however , and the Court of Auditors says this , that this has nothing to do with the discovery of cases of fraud or poor management by the Commission , but I feel , in fact , that it is high time that this reform got off the ground , is discussed , and that it is carried out in all the institutions .
It is a shame that it is caused by a situation that we have recently experienced .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the President of the Court of Auditors , Mr Fabra Vallés , on the report he has presented to us .
It is a rigorous , clear and very focused report , which provides us with precise information on how the budget has been implemented .
The most striking aspect of this report is , once again , the significant budgetary surplus for 2001 : 16 % .
It is a very high percentage , as the previous speakers have been repeating , especially if we analyse it in detail and realise that , of the Structural Funds , just 70 % has been implemented and that the SAPARD budget has barely been implemented at all , despite the fact that it is an enormously important instrument for the new countries of the European Union .
A similar thing is also happening in the case of agricultural policy .
With regard to the reliability of the accounts that the Commission has presented , the Court 's report considers them to be adequate and , amongst the recommendations it makes , I would like to stress the one relating to the accounting system .
As in previous years , the Court believes that actions should be taken to modify the current system in order to improve it .
And given that this issue has led to some controversy - excessive controversy in my opinion - it would be desirable for the Commission to take very good account of the recommendations for modernisation of the accounting system and to make it as transparent as possible as soon as possible .
I believe it is also necessary to point out the reference to the internal reform of the Commission and the slowness with which it is taking place .
This is no doubt due to the fact that it is a complicated and ambitious process , but we should also remember that it is a necessary reform , and we therefore hope that the Commission will take very good account of the recommendations made to it .
I do not wish to elaborate on the previous speeches .
Practically all the Members who are speaking agree on the concerns in this report and the clarity with which they have been presented and I therefore believe that the ball is in the Commission 's court .
I would like to congratulate Mr Fabra Vallés once again .
There is absolutely no doubt that his experience as a former member of the Committee on Budgetary Control has been a great help to him in carrying out his work .
Mr President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome this report by the Court of Auditors , in particular for the innovations it makes and for the wealth of its content , and to pay special tribute to the President , Mr Fabra Vallés .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for her kind words to me and I wish to offer her my particular thanks for the cooperation I have received from the Commission services in this discharge process .
The framework of budgetary implementation in 2001 outlined by this report is characterised by a very strong implementation of the budget , which in particular affects appropriations for the pre-accession and Structural Fund programmes , due to ongoing shortcomings in Community accounting procedures , which need to be reformed as a matter of urgency , and also due to the persistence of long-standing problems , such as the lack of transparency in the Commission 's handling of the system of protection for the European sugar industry .
Amongst the shortcomings of the budgetary implementation it is particularly shocking to see that the stated concern at the lack of preparation of the candidate countries appears to have varied in a way that is inversely proportional to the Funds that have actually been made available to the final beneficiaries , especially to the farmers of these countries .
It sometimes appears that the myriad consulting companies that hover around the European institutions , often composed of former officials or of officials on temporary leave , are more important than the citizens .
The rules are also taking on an absurd and increasing complexity , which is out of step with reality .
In the much needed revision of the accounting system everything - and I mean ' everything ' - that is considered necessary to ensure that the EU 's accounting systems adhere to international best practices and public accounting standards must be done .
The modernisation of accounting and payment procedures , with clear , accessible and exhaustive codification of all expenditure , with the systematic notification of final beneficiaries and with clear and consistent terminology , are projects that we would like to see implemented .
The transparency of relations between the European institutions and the outside world is a recurring concern .
The Court 's account of the case that led to the sugar system not being reformed demonstrates how one of the most anachronistic farming systems in the Community has been able to hold out for almost four decades without making any significant changes .
In a complex high level intermediation system it is sometimes easy to forget the citizens in favour of the pressure groups , overlooking those in greatest need in favour of those who are able to exert the most and the most effective pressure .
It is therefore crucial to make the fight for transparency and fairness part of our daily work .
Mr President , many things have been said about the Commission 's accounting system in the last six months .
The European Court of Auditors confirms in no uncertain terms that many of the recurrent problems surrounding the underlying transactions , which are making it impossible to issue a statement of assurance without reservation , are due to the flawed accounting system .
The Commission acknowledges most of the defects that the Court of Auditors points out .
It never ceases to amaze me , however , that the Commission did not take action back in 2001 , on the basis of the draft action plan which was submitted in that very year with a view to responding to some of the most pressing problems .
I am now looking forward to a frank and serious discussion between the Commission and Parliament , so that we can finally get this cleared up .
It is politically untenable that auditors ' criticisms keep on coming .
If something is wrong , it must be put right .
The Commission has promised that its strategy for giving the EU an integrated accounting system based on the highest standards within the public sector will be presented at the end of this month .
I wish to hold the Commission to this promise , and I welcome the action plan .
I also hope , however , that the plan will get straight down to addressing the areas requiring immediate action , especially given that the Committee on Budgetary Control is to focus on just this accounting system in connection with the discharge for 2001 .
Mr President , I too welcome the Court of Auditors ' report but I wonder about the statement just made by Mr Fabra Vallés .
It has a very interesting spin on the words you have actually written within your report .
You mention in your statement a lack of balance in what is being said in the public arena at the moment and I agree with this .
I would have liked to equal that balance out from the 300 Commission spin-doctors that have been saying things about Marta Andreassen recently and point Members of Parliament 's attention to the fact that she was gagged by that very same Commission this morning .
But what did you write ?
You wrote : ' Since the first statement of assurance in respect to the financial year 1994 , the Court has repeated its reservations in respect to the reliability of the accounts . These reservations most often have their roots in the weakness of the accounting system and in the low awareness of the Commission 's operational DGs etc . ' .
You also said : ' In the absence of a comprehensive accounting system , the year-end financial statements are drawn up largely on the basis of records which are not part of the accounts .
I would say these are actually two quite shocking statements and , oddly enough , I would also say they back up exactly some of the things that Marta Andreassen , the Commission 's former chief accountant , had been saying .
If , as you just said in your statement , the accounts are so reliable , then why write those things in your report ?
If the accounts are so good , why did so many heads of departments refuse to sign their own accounts off without reservations ?
If your checks are so thorough , why do you not give us , the Parliament , a figure that we have requested for many years now , which is the percentage of money lost through fraud , mismanagement and waste - a figure you used to give us to allow us to have a benchmark to see if things are materially getting better .
Finally , I have one or two questions for the Commissioner because I am quite sure that you are a wise political manoeuvrer , Commissioner Schreyer .
I think you have probably heard a host of political speeches in this Parliament today about the Court of Auditors ' reports and how people are framing themselves , looking forward to discharge .
I believe you have a whole host of problems coming forward and , should you read the political tea-leaves correctly , you will be keen to get your reforms under way even quicker than you have done .
So please , with that sort of political nous that you have , could you just answer a handful of very short questions for me ?
Who did sign off within the Commission the accounts in 2001 ?
I think I have tabled this question to you and also a whole host of journalists have asked you this .
We would really like that answer .
Was it the Chief Accountant at the time ?
Was it the Director-General of Budgets ?
Was it you ?
Was it some secretary ?
Was it the commercial engineer you have employed as the Chief Accountant of the Commission presently ?
What is going on within your systems ?
We want reform .
This Parliament urges you to reform , and if you do not quickly reform the system , then please leave and let someone who will do the job do it properly .
Mr President , I would also like to thank the Court of Auditors for its report again this year .
I am extremely disappointed that this is the first occasion on which the Court has been able to present its audit this year .
I think it is one of the primary responsibilities of this Parliament and I am very saddened that it has taken it until December to put on the agenda something that came out in November .
The way the report has been set out has improved a little bit ; however , I think the document itself is still largely impenetrable .
It is over-complicated and is badly presented .
We hope , President , that you will continue in your efforts to make this clearer in future .
The main issue on which the Budget Control Committee is likely to concentrate this year is of course the accounting system of the Commission .
This is not because Marta Andreassen has told us that we should do that , but because the Court has been pointing out these failures since 1994 .
The fact is that the Commission has been extremely slow in instigating those reforms and we still are unlikely to see a complete radical reform until 2005 .
I think this is an unacceptable degree of complacency .
We must go much further and set a more ambitious timetable .
Although we do recognise , and in fact what we are asking the Commission to do here is already ahead of 11 EU Member States in their presentation of their accounts .
But we are being tough on you and we want to push you to meet the standards of the best .
The Court has also been remiss in the fact that they have failed again to name and shame Member States who have failed to control EU spending and I do not think we are ever going to identify the real culprits until the Court of Auditors stops being quite so cowardly and starts naming people .
It is also worth noting , as people have said before , that this is the first year when Directors General have taken control of their own departments but 22 of those DGs have expressed reservations and we will be investigating those during our research .
An issue that many are keen to follow is also the failure of the Commission to fine Member States who infringe EU directives and I would just like to warn the Commission that we are going to take this issue a lot more seriously .
We want to see more money coming into EU coffers from the fines that should be imposed on Members States who fail to respect directives .
Mr President , aware as I am of your usual agenda , I would like to thank you most sincerely for being here .
Thank you very much .
There have been a series of specific questions and general comments , but to stay somewhat in line with the agenda , I believe it was Mr Kuhne who said that he had confidence in Mr Casaca .
As far as I am concerned , naturally , as far as I know , that confidence is complete and absolute .
But not only confidence in him , but in the whole House , in all the Members , but I am aware of the usual good work of Mr Casaca .
Furthermore , issues relating to the DAS have been mentioned .
We are often asked when we will be able to provide a positive DAS .
Well , I am convinced that the day that the internal control of the Commission - which has just begun - is working properly , will be the day when the DAS is positive .
Because I am sure that it will be the Commission that rectifies and controls itself .
Why do we not give the error rate ?
I have said several times , whenever I am asked , that the error rate provides limited information and may lead to distorted interpretations .
I therefore believe it is better not to provide this information .
We are then told that we could provide the DAS by sector .
If only !
And I say ' if only ' because if we had the resources to carry out a DAS by sector , you may rest assured that we would do so .
And you may be sure that we would derive much more information .
The truth is that today , with the information provided by the DAS , something very clear has to be taken into account : to speak of mistakes does not always mean speaking of irregularities , and speaking of irregularities does not always mean speaking of fraud .
Therefore , what the error rate indicates are errors and what we have to look at is the background to these errors .
This error rate , because of the sampling system employed , is so small , that what we cannot do is give it to Parliament so that it can interpret it as if it were a clear result , which indicates exactly what people want to hear .
That is the reason .
We are working on a new methodology for the DAS and we hope that with that new methodology we will be able to reach a point where we can provide the information required by Parliament and that that will be sufficient for the needs of our budgetary authority , both the Council and Parliament .
Mr Staes asked me a question about the case of Mrs N. All I can say about this is that , from the moment OLAF arrived at the Court of Auditors , all doors were left open to them , the cupboards unlocked and the computers switched on so that they could look at whatever they want .
When you ask whether we have already taken measures , I believe that the Court of Auditors has adopted a prudent attitude , waiting for the Solicitor-General to assess the documentation provided by OLAF , because member N has yet to be heard .
I believe that we , as the Court of Auditors , cannot pass judgment , because although we are called a court , we do not pass judgment , we only make recommendations .
I therefore believe it is prudent to wait for the Solicitor-General in Luxembourg to assess the documentation provided to him by OLAF .
But it should be noted that at this very moment there is a group of members of the Court working on this issue .
What for ?
To get as much as possible done before the Solicitor-General gives his opinion , whatever that opinion may be and whatever assessment he sees fit to make .
Mr Dell 'Alba said that he is worried .
I believe we should all be worried .
And we should all be because whether the Commission improves or not depends on all of us .
I know that the honourable Members fulfil their duties , and I know because I used to be a Member of this House , and I remember how I used to enjoy getting stuck in .
But I must say that I have found a completely different situation .
It is not that I have passed over to the enemy or changed sides , nor have I moved over from Barcelona to Real Madrid , no ; I have genuinely found a Commission which is different to the one I was accustomed to dealing with .
A Commission in which I see daily changes .
You say these changes cannot yet be seen in the final result ?
It is true , they cannot .
And do you know why ?
Because this is not simply a face-lift .
If it were simply a face-lift , a nip and a tuck , and the results would be visible very soon .
The Commission is undergoing a profound change .
And therefore until next year I am sure we will not see any changes .
I believe that that confidence , and as well as confidence , help , should be offered by all of us , and we must not forget - you are in contact with the governments , with the States , and you must pass this on also to the governments - that one of the current problems the Commission has in terms of improving its results , the Community budget for improving its results , is also in the hands of the governments .
Therefore , I believe that if all the institutions as well as the governments make an effort , we will help the Commission to achieve tangible results as soon as possible .
I would say to Mr Heaton-Harris that I am sorry but I am not going to reply in relation to the former chief accountant because a disciplinary procedure is under way and I am not therefore going to answer .
What I can say , and we should all agree on this , is that I believe there has been a mistake in the procedure ; there has been a procedural error .
And I would say to Mrs Morgan that of course we are making an effort .
You ask us to make an effort ; we really do make an effort every day , everyday we increase contacts and dialogue with the various institutions in order to improve our work .
We hope that this work will be increasingly useful to you .
I am prepared to commit myself to this , of course .
I believed that the approach of the report had managed to improve something , because all I have done is seek something I would have asked for and present it as a consequence .
It seems that it is not yet sufficient , but I promise , Mrs Morgan , that next year we will make a further effort .
Mr President , I should briefly like to refer back to my speech .
I asked the President of the Court of Auditors three questions , two of which were left unanswered .
I specifically asked him whether I would be able to gain access to the dossier drafted by OLAF following the submission of my fraud dossier to the Court of Auditors .
He failed to give me an answer to this .
Neither have I received a reply to the question whether the case involving Mrs N , the former member of the Court of Auditors , is an isolated one and whether we can rely on this not being common practice within the Court of Auditors .
Thirdly , I should say that I am extremely dissatisfied with his response .
In its press release , OLAF first says the following about this case : ' we have submitted a dossier to the judicial authorities in Luxembourg ' . OLAF subsequently adds : ' in this context OLAF has recommended to the European Court of Auditors to open a disciplinary inquiry into these persons and to initiate recovery procedures in respect of the sums in question ' .
I now hear that the Court of Auditors is waiting for the judicial inquiry in Luxembourg .
I fear that this will take years and years , as is customary in Belgian courts .
I should still urge the Court of Auditors to do as OLAF has recommended .
Mr Staes , I am sorry for having left some of your questions out .
With regard to the contents of OLAF 's report , until there is a response from the Solicitor-General , the affair is sub judice , and there is therefore nothing more to say .
Furthermore , in its report , OLAF makes it clear - and I will give you a small piece of information from the report - that the case of member ' N ' is - and I quote - ' a specific case and the procedures used by the Court of Auditors for internal control are correct ' .
That is all .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparation of the Copenhagen European Council on 12 and 13 December 2002 , including the institutional aspects of enlargement .
- ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , former colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming European Council meeting in Copenhagen will play a decisive role in the conclusion of the Danish Presidency .
The agenda will focus on two subjects : enlargement and the functioning of the Council in the light of enlargement .
At the meeting , the Chairman of the Convention will brief the European Council on the status of the Convention 's work , and , in addition , the European Council will meet with the President of the European Parliament , Mr Cox .
Let me start with the latter .
The meeting with the President of Parliament is of course an established tradition at meetings of the European Council ; a tradition that the Heads of State and Government view as important and valuable .
It is important that the institutions have a regular opportunity to exchange views and discuss key European questions , as we are also doing here today ; and as the Danish Prime Minister and I did last week , when we were visited by Mr Prodi , President of the Commission , and Mr Cox , President of Parliament .
I am quite sure that the meeting is fresh in their minds .
If enlargement succeeds in Copenhagen , and it will , this will be another product of the hard work put in by the institutions and their effective cooperation over the last few years .
Enlargement will be the most important item on the agenda of the European Council meeting in Copenhagen .
For some months the pace of the accession negotiations has been very fast .
We are now close to taking the decision that will seal the reunification of the continent of Europe : the conclusion of accession negotiations with the first group of candidate countries with a view to their accession on 1 May 2004 .
This has been incredibly difficult and complicated , and it has not yet been resolved .
The fact that the possibility of concluding the negotiations now seems to be a reality is due in no small part to the positive result that was attained at the European Council meeting in Brussels .
As you know , the Brussels European Council concluded that ten countries will be ready for membership from the beginning of 2004 .
The final and decisive negotiations are now taking place .
Last week , the Presidency presented a negotiating package for each of the candidate countries .
These packages represent the Presidency 's proposal for a definitive resolution of the negotiations .
They take into account - as far as possible - the views of the candidate countries , as presented at separate meetings with each individual country , and they are in line with the financial framework for enlargement , that is to say , with the Berlin Agreement and with the decisions from the European Council meeting in Brussels in October .
The Presidency hopes that we can cover a lot of ground - as much as possible - in the negotiations before the European Council meeting in Copenhagen .
It is no secret that the final negotiations will not be easy .
Given the right willingness to compromise on the part of both present and future Member States , however , I am convinced that we shall achieve a successful result .
Enlargement does not end in Copenhagen , however .
The European Council also wants to give new impetus to the accession process for Bulgaria and Romania .
A decision will be taken on detailed roadmaps and timetables , and pre-accession aid , in order to move forward the accession process with Bulgaria and Romania .
The Commission 's communication of 13 November on a roadmap for the two countries is a good step in the right direction .
At the last European Council meeting , in October , the EU welcomed the new reform work in Turkey .
The countries of the EU were unanimous in emphasising that the many important reforms in Turkey have expedited the start of accession negotiations with that country .
Turkey 's accession will follow the same principles and criteria as those applied to the other candidate countries .
The EU is in the process of preparing the decision on the next step in Turkey 's candidature .
This decision will be taken at the Copenhagen European Council .
The Presidency hopes that a solution to the Cyprus issue can be found ahead of Copenhagen .
The EU supports wholeheartedly the UN Secretary-General 's endeavours to find a solution .
If a solution is not found to the political conflict in Cyprus at the Copenhagen Summit , the EU will take its decision on the accession of Cyprus on the basis of the conclusions from the Helsinki European Council in 1999 .
Setting the accession date for the new Member States entails a number of institutional consequences , and it is obviously important that Parliament is fully involved in the discussions on these consequences .
I myself have had the pleasure of informing Parliament at all stages of these deliberations .
I have already had the occasion to discuss matters : during the last session in Strasbourg , where this and other questions were raised by Mr Barón Crespo ; and also last week in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , where we discussed the subject at length .
The Presidency fully understands Parliament 's keen interest in the institutional consequences of enlargement , and is willing to enter into an open discussion on these matters .
At the same time , I must also draw attention to the complicated negotiating process under way at this time with regard to enlargement .
Agreement must be reached not only within the Council ( and within the other institutions ) , but also - and this is particularly important - with the future Member States .
It can be said , therefore , that it is an ongoing , intensive process in which we do not have all the answers yet .
The institutional questions are pressing .
They are a necessary part of enlargement as a whole .
Questions such as the weighting of individual countries ' votes in the Council and the countries ' representation in the European Parliament constitute an essential part of the accession treaty .
We need to make a start now on laying down clear provisions for the transitional period .
What we are talking about is primary legislation in line with the treaty .
In this connection , I should like to make the point that the European Parliament will have to give its assent , and that the accession treaty needs to be ratified in both existing and new Member States .
Agreement on the accession date of 1 May 2004 is based on detailed discussions on what is desirable and what is possible in the light of the ratification process in both the present and the future Member States .
We owe it to the future members not to delay accession for any longer than is absolutely necessary .
I believe this goes for us all : Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
This means that there is a need for certain transitional arrangements .
This was also the case with previous enlargements .
It has been suggested in Parliament that the 2004 elections to the European Parliament be held on an earlier date , for example 9 May .
I personally sympathise with this view .
The matter was discussed in detail over many years in connection with the revision of the Common Act on direct elections , which has recently been amended ( published in the Official Journal of 21 October 2002 ) .
All sorts of dates have been considered , but in vain .
Unfortunately , I do not believe that further attempts to change the date will bear fruit .
It is not the Presidency , however , that is standing in the way of a different , earlier , date .
I hope that Parliament appreciates the situation that the Commission will find itself in during the period between the accession of the new Member States and the investiture of the new Commission .
Obviously redistributing the portfolios within the Commission for a period of just half a year is not a satisfactory solution .
The Presidency hopes Parliament accepts that the interim Commissioners from the new countries will not be subject to hearings or approval by Parliament .
This avoids any possibility of prejudicing the new Parliament 's opinion of the new Commission .
It is of course unacceptable to the new Member States that ' their ' Commissioners should be approved by a Parliament in which the new countries are not yet represented by MEPs with voting rights .
The proposed solution avoids any possibility of prejudicing the choice of candidates by the President-designate of the European Commission in the composition of the new Commission .
It goes without saying that , if the Commissioners from the new countries do not have a portfolio during the period up to the investiture of the new Commission , there is very little point in Parliament 's specialist committees holding hearings of the new Commissioners and examining them in specialist areas they do not have .
This is why I hope that Parliament can see its way clear to agreeing to the new Commissioners being appointed on the basis of a simplified procedure in the transitional period , until a new Commission can be appointed with the full involvement of Parliament .
Lastly , there is the question of the full participation of the new Member States in the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
The Council has a clearly defined position on this matter .
The new Member States must be placed on an equal footing with the old Member States in the negotiations that will shape their and our common future .
And , like the old Member States , they must of course have the right of veto .
We cannot in decency do otherwise .
I have endeavoured to explain the complicated institutional consequences of enlargement .
I am looking forward to our debate .
I will listen very carefully and am open to all good suggestions for realistic alternative solutions .
The Council will discuss the institutional consequences of enlargement once more at the General Affairs Council meeting on Monday and Tuesday .
It has already been agreed that I shall be present myself at the meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on 10 December .
This will be an opportunity for me to brief the competent parliamentary committee on the latest developments , and for a discussion on their significance .
In my opinion it is natural that the discussion should take place within this committee , but if Parliament should wish for a different forum for the debate , on the date in question , 10 December , I am , of course , at your disposal .
The Seville European Council instructed the Danish Presidency to continue working on the question as to how the presidency will function in the future in an enlarged EU .
The Presidency was to present an initial report at the meeting in Copenhagen .
This will mean that we can have an initial orientation debate on the subject there .
The Presidency 's report has three models for the form the presidency could take in future , and the report deals in this respect with the question of strengthening the role of the High Representative and the possibility of having an elected President of the European Council .
It is not the intention that the European Council will take a decision on the models .
The Presidency will suggest that the further work on shaping the presidencies of the future be continued in both the Council and the Convention , and , as far as the latter is concerned , this forms part of its general discussions on the institutions .
At the meeting in Copenhagen , the Chairman of the Convention will give a report on the progress that has been made in the Convention .
This dialogue is very important .
With the presentation , last month , of a draft Constitutional Treaty , the work of the Convention entered a decisive phase .
The discussions on the details within the framework the chairman presented are making rapid progress .
The basis for the Convention 's end product is now being created .
In this connection , it is good to see that the draft Constitutional Treaty has given rise to a Europe-wide debate on the form the Europe of the future will take .
It bodes well for our common ambition to create European cooperation which is more democratic and has grass-roots support .
Over the whole of its term , the Presidency has worked towards seeing to it that the work in the Convention unfolds in accordance with the aim of producing a good and well prepared input to the Intergovernmental Conference .
As will have been clear from my statement , the European Council has an extensive and ambitious agenda for its meeting .
It is my hope and belief that all the countries at the meeting will show the necessary willingness to compromise and help to take the important decisions I have spoken of here .
In Copenhagen we hope to be able to take a historic decision on the greatest enlargement in the history of the Community to date , and I also dare say the enlargement with the most far-reaching consequences and the broadest historical perspective .
The great debate on enlargement that took place in Parliament last month is just one example of the strong will Parliament has shown , and the efforts it has made , to make this project succeed .
And , as I said at the start , this great project can only succeed if the three institutions work closely together .
I believe that they have done so , and I should like to thank Parliament once more for the clear messages it has given out all along when it comes to the enlargement ahead of us .
I particularly note your intention to attend a meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on 10 December 2002 to take up some of these institutional questions .
I recall that later in that week in Copenhagen , we will have a meeting of the Conference of Presidents with the Danish Prime Minister .
Perhaps in our own internal debate within the groups , we can see how to try to coordinate some positions and to what extent , if it is possible , we could advance or progress the sensitive questions on institutions .
Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , in 1993 , the Copenhagen European Council set in motion the current enlargement process , the largest-scale enlargement in the Union 's history .
Almost ten years on , we are nearing the end of that process .
At the end of next week , the Heads of State and Government will be back in the Danish capital to take the final decisions .
What is on the agenda at Copenhagen ?
Basically three points .
The negotiations need to be wound up with the ten candidate countries named in the Commission 's report of last October , the pre-accession strategy to help Bulgaria and Romania speed up their preparations for membership needs to be strengthened and a decision is needed on the next steps in Turkey 's candidacy .
I will expand on these three points today .
First , however , let me say something about the decisions we must take to organise the three great changes which will take place in 2004 : the accession of the new Member States , the appointment of the new Commission and the European Parliament elections .
We can now establish the heavy schedule of political and institutional events in 2004 in the light of the reflections taking place in Parliament on how to organise the various deadlines related to the arrival of the new Member countries and the European elections .
I think the recommendations we are getting from the Council can , if necessary , be revised and supplemented to accommodate Parliament 's specific needs in the best way possible .
I suggest we organise things in the most practical order and , where the Treaty is silent , that we use common sense .
Politically , it is highly significant that the European elections should be at the centre of the institutional activities related to enlargement .
The new Parliament will open its doors immediately to the new Member States ' elected representatives , who will come in as full members of this House , and it will thus be able to approve the appointment of the new body of Commissioners legitimately , and they will take office as soon as possible .
How is the Copenhagen Summit shaping up in terms of the main point on the agenda - enlargement ?
The Brussels European Council brought agreement within the Union on the broad outlines of the offer to the ten candidate countries , in particular as regards the agricultural and budgetary issues .
The European Council 's conclusions were presented immediately to the Heads of State and Government of the candidate countries , who reacted favourably to them on the whole .
Nonetheless , many issues still have to be resolved before an agreement acceptable to all concerned can be reached .
The Presidency of the Council and the Commission have worked - and will continue to work - ceaselessly to reach an agreement .
Without going into detail on the discussions under way , I will outline some of the main points .
Firstly , we need to find a suitable way of respecting a principle we all agree on . In 2004 , 2005 and 2006 the net amounts received by the candidate countries from the European Union should not be lower than those they receive in 2003 .
Secondly , the candidate countries need assistance to prepare better for the task of controlling the Union 's external borders . This means enabling them to carry out their tasks under Schengen properly .
Lastly , we need to solve certain specific points relating to the agricultural policy .
First and foremost , the Commission fully supports the Danish Presidency in its efforts to reach the necessary compromise on all these matters .
Some Member States have expressed reservations regarding the substance of the offer to the candidate countries .
We , however , do not share their view .
Like the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Rasmussen , I consider that a reasonable offer should be made - an offer that allows the candidate countries to defend the Copenhagen outcome before public opinion in their own countries .
We must keep within the overall framework laid down at the Brussels European Council , but openness , flexibility and generosity are also needed .
Secondly , last week , I appealed publicly to the leaders of the candidate countries to show realism in this last lap of the negotiations .
Indeed , I note that many points are still unresolved and we have only a few days left .
We are skating on thin ice and progress must be made .
There are times in history when narrow sectoral interests , however legitimate , must give way before the general interest .
That is the law of democracy and we must apply it .
I want to reiterate earnestly that most of the points of the final compromise must be decided at the forthcoming General Affairs Council meeting on 9 and 10 December .
We cannot leave the Copenhagen European Council to decide on dozens and dozens of details .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , before this House , I appeal to the good sense of the leaders of the candidate countries and the leaders of the Fifteen .
The remaining difficulties must be settled quickly in the same spirit of partnership and friendship that has presided over all the accession negotiations .
I would also like to comment on the latest developments regarding the conclusion of the negotiations with Cyprus .
As you know , the European Union has always backed the endeavours of the United Nations Secretary-General and , in the last few weeks Kofi Annan has taken the courageous initiative of putting forward a plan for a global settlement . That plan has our full backing .
The reactions of the parties concerned have , on the whole , been positive .
They have accepted these proposals as an appropriate basis for a settlement and , in the next few days , they will respond with their proposals .
We hope these contributions will allow Mr Kofi Annan to make more progress towards a solution .
We have already formally stated that we are ready to take account of the terms of such a settlement in the accession arrangements for Cyprus , and we will endeavour to do so if such an agreement is reached .
In any case , the commitments entered into at Helsinki remain valid for the candidacy of Cyprus .
As regards Bulgaria and Romania , the Copenhagen European Council will have to adopt the Commission 's proposals for detailed roadmaps , including precise timetables and increased pre-accession assistance , in order to take the accession process forward .
As you know , these two countries have proposed 2007 as their target date for accession and the Commission believes no effort must be spared to achieve that target .
Lastly , a word about Turkey .
This House has already had occasion to debate the issue at length . For my part , I want to state our position once more , in particular in the light of contacts Commissioner Verheugen and I have had recently with the leader of the AKP , Mr Erdogan .
On the basis of the Helsinki Conclusions , the Commission regards Turkey as a candidate on an equal footing with other candidate countries , and therefore as subject to exactly the same assessment criteria .
The report the Commission presented on Turkey in October was based on objective information that no one disputed .
It noted Turkey 's progress towards meeting the Copenhagen political criteria . It also noted the remaining difficulties .
In short , Turkey has come a long way but much remains to be done .
The new Turkish Government 's legislative programme confirms this .
Indeed , the government plans to present several series of legislative measures , and even constitutional amendments , to the Turkish parliament in order to bolster democracy and human rights in Turkey .
The European Union must encourage this process . It is in our interest that a major partner such as Turkey , whose role is enormously important strategically , politically and economically , should reinforce its institutions , improve the quality of its democracy and commit itself unequivocally to the values and principles we all share .
On the other hand , before we take an irreversible step , we must be sure that Turkey meets all the conditions fully , just as we have in the case of the other candidate countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the prospect of approaching membership of the Union has given millions of Europeans a new political and economic perspective . Above all it has given them hope .
Hope is the rarest and most valuable commodity in politics .
History has not been kind to these peoples recently , but now they have the hope of a better future - a future of dignity , freedom and prosperity .
I am certain that this hope will carry the Union forward for many years to come and that , together with the governments and peoples of the incoming Member States , we will achieve great things .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , changes and developments are now occurring on at least a daily , even an hourly , basis , and so the picture I can give you at the moment is only a snapshot of that moment .
It prompts a number of observations on the subject of Copenhagen .
For a start , we have not yet reached the objective .
There are still very considerable differences in outlook between the Member States and the candidate countries , and any real result in Copenhagen will demand abundant political courage , far-sightedness , and a great deal of leadership .
I am of course glad to hear it said that we are dealing here with an historic dimension , which must not be allowed to be brought down by this or that detail .
Do you think I do not know that ?
But even great and historic projects have to be paid for , everything has to be done decently and in order , and we have to get through the difficulties in which we find ourselves at the moment .
I am confident , though , that the Heads of State and Government will indeed weigh up the risks we would run if we did not achieve a result , and the concessions that might still be required in Copenhagen .
Secondly , it is important that Copenhagen should not be overloaded , and I am saying this to the future Member States , whom I earnestly urge to do their utmost to sort out the many bilateral issues and leftovers from the negotiations by the beginning of next week , which I think they have a very good chance of being able to do .
But I am also addressing the Member States , who must resist the temptation to tie the great decision on enlargement to the advancement of certain national interests .
It is with a certain amount of concern that I see the first attempts being made at wrapping up packages that are not appropriate .
Thirdly , we have to achieve an outcome in which there are no winners or losers .
Those who think in terms of winners and losers will fail .
We have to achieve an outcome in which there are only winners , one in which the principal victor is Europe as a whole .
So everyone should be aware that the proposal from the Presidency that is now on the table , which was worked out together with the Commission and is fully endorsed by it as it stands , is a fair and even-handed offer to the Member States .
Although it is now the accession of ten states that we are now organising rather than the six planned in Berlin in 1999 , the Danish proposal is over EUR 2 billion below the upper limit laid down in Berlin .
This gives the candidate countries an argument when they ask how it is that it is suddenly no longer possible to make the funds available that , in 1999 , were considered appropriate for six countries , even though we now have ten countries to deal with .
That is an argument that is not easy to counter , and so I hope that there will be some movement here .
I really have to tell you that one problem is the result , quite simply , of the rules we have made for the European Union .
The new Member States will have to pay full contributions from the very outset , but , as you know , the flow of funds is very slow , and it is subject to certain rules .
Not only do we have the problem of having to prevent new members from becoming net contributors ; we also have the additional problem that we may not allow the new Member States ' state budgets to become unbalanced .
It is that problem that we have at the moment .
Let me just add , in conclusion , that the proposal currently under discussion has already taken on board many of the candidate countries ' arguments and aspirations and contains many new ideas , the most important of which , in my view , is the creation of what is termed a Schengen facility , by which we will be supporting the new members in securing our external borders .
I believe that what makes this idea so good is the fact that it will persuade the citizens that money is being spent here for a purpose that is of benefit to us all .
As President Prodi has made reference to Romania , Bulgaria , Cyprus and Turkey , I do not need to repeat what he said , but I do want to put forward a few ideas for your consideration .
In the situation as it is at the moment , in which we are closer than we have been in decades to resolving the Cyprus problem , and there is a real opportunity to sort the problem out - an opportunity that will pass us by if it is not done before Copenhagen - at a moment such as this , positive , encouraging signs are of extraordinary importance .
It would therefore be right and proper for the European institutions , even before Copenhagen , to speak out clearly in favour of the international community taking its share of responsibility in managing the great tasks that will remain to be dealt with after the Cyprus issue is resolved .
This country will have great burdens laid upon it , burdens that it cannot bear alone , and it will be dependent on help from the international community .
The sooner the international community declares its readiness to provide this aid , the greater , perhaps , will be the willingness to do as the United Nations proposes .
All things considered , I believe that we can be satisfied with the position that we have reached .
What we now need is a final great effort , an effort made in full awareness of the fact that time is running out .
We have often spoken of a window of opportunity .
I had no inkling of just how true that is .
We must all be aware that if we do not act now , every month in which we hesitate will make things more and more difficult .
I am firmly convinced that it would take only six months for the Budget situation in the Member States to make a solution almost impossible .
So I can only say that it must be done now , and all parties must , in heart and mind , surmount the obstacles !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I will start by asking for your indulgence , as I am going to do something I have never done before and leave the Chamber immediately after my speech .
The reason for this is that , contrary to what it had agreed with me , Turkish television has announced that Mr Watson and I will be available for a discussion starting at 5 p.m ..
Not wishing to give the wrong political impression , I will go and do it , although I do not otherwise comply with requests of this sort if they have not been agreed in advance .
Let us turn , though , to Copenhagen : from Copenhagen to Copenhagen !
I wish the summit of Heads of State and Government under Danish presidency great success , in order that we may tackle the issues that remain to be resolved .
This summit in Copenhagen must become a summit for enlargement .
We must not end up in a situation in which Turkey is the sole topic for discussion .
Turkey may well be important , but Copenhagen must send out a signal that the peoples of Central Europe , plus Malta and Cyprus , are joining the community of values that is the European Union .
That must stand centre-stage .
Copenhagen must consummate the historic process of the 1980s and 1990s , and , to that end , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we wish you much success !
I can endorse wholeheartedly what has been said on behalf of the Commission , both by President Prodi and by Commissioner Verheugen , both of whom , as well as the President-in-Office of the Council , I wish to thank for the work they have done .
Speaking on behalf of our group , I would also like to remind you that , even if the Danish proposal is accepted , we still have EUR 2.391 billion in hand , on the assumption that the figure , to which Commissioner Verheugen referred , is correct .
We should be counting every euro , and , as President Prodi will be aware , I am very much in favour of stability , but the outcome of Copenhagen must not be that the whole enlargement project is deferred for lack of agreement on the financial issues .
We therefore call on the governments to achieve a result in Copenhagen .
I would think it a tragedy , ladies and gentlemen , if we ended up without an agreement with Poland , a country that was at the heart of change in Europe - I do not want to recapitulate the historical circumstances all over again ; I have done it often enough - and if we ended up without an agreement with Poland , the country to which , along with others of course , we owe the great change in Europe .
Hence the demand that the Heads of State and Government should do something now and make a result possible .
And now for Turkey .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Court of Justice is fifty years old today ; at any rate , it was fifty years ago that it was convened for the first time , on 4 December 1952 .
The law matters to us .
There are criteria for accession , and they include such things as the law .
We cannot , then , take certain things - all of which are important but have nothing to do with the criteria as such - as reasons for now naming a date for negotiations with Turkey , even though the criteria have in no way been met !
We firmly reject the idea that Copenhagen should name a date for negotiations !
Ladies and gentlemen , I say this in full awareness of the fact - which I do not conceal and have never sought to conceal - that there are within our group widely divergent views on whether or not Turkey should be a member .
Some are very strongly in favour of Turkish membership , while others advocate a strategic or privileged partnership .
This is indeed normal in a large group , and I am sure that other groups differ but little .
We are not talking only about Turkey , however , when we agree , absolutely and 100 % , that it would breach our own requirements and be in contravention of them , if we were now to throw overboard what we have defined as conditions for the commencement of negotiations .
What will be the image of the European Union if pressure is exerted over the Cyprus issue , if we are told that , if there is no date right now , the Cyprus issue will not be resolved ?
We are becoming susceptible to extortion !
I therefore recommend that we rely on the firm foundations of European law and criteria .
The Commission has pointed us in the right direction ; we are not opening any negotiations right now , because the criteria have not been fulfilled , and , on this , our group has no reservations whatever in following the Commission 's lead .
What I expect of the Council Presidency , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is that you too take your stand on the basis of the criteria and of what has hitherto been agreed in the Community of Fifteen .
If you take a different line , our assessment of the Danish Presidency 's achievements will be less favourable than it has been so far .
Nor do we accept the way in which the United States of America is trying to exert influence ; whilst they have the right to bring influence to bear , it is influence and pressure to which we shall not yield !
Now , I am also aware that there are countries in the European Union that lag behind others ; in particular , that there is a major EU country that needs to make up for lost time in its solidarity with America , and this country is therefore susceptible to pressure .
For us , as a friend and partner of America , the pressure of no consequence whatever , as we are following our own principles , and so what we say to our American partners and friends is this : You can make recommendations to us , but we will act in accordance with our own convictions !
We now hear from Turkey that the Cyprus issue will not be resolved if they are not given a date .
We had a clear basis , to which the President-in-Office of the Council referred : if the Cyprus issue is not resolved within the framework of a federation of both parts of the island , then what had previously been resolved by the European Union will apply , and the whole island - but in reality only its Greek part - will become a member .
I have one further comment to make to the Commission on the post-1 May 2004 order .
Our recommendation to the Council and to the Commission is that no decision , whether anticipatory or otherwise , should be taken without reference to Parliament .
We are prepared to be flexible in any way that will be appropriate , but what you can depend on is that we will always defend Parliament 's rights .
It is on this basis that we seek good cooperation with all the institutions of the European Union .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Poettering , ' inshallah ' .
We are on the eve of an important historical event : the reunification of Europe , rather than the conclusion of a new stage in enlargement , of which this is the fifth .
I believe we must wish the Danish Presidency luck in its task since this is a very important moment .
Vice-President Titley and other colleagues from my group will deal with all aspects of this issue .
I will restrict myself to thanking the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Haarder , for his reference to my question from the previous plenary session , specifically in relation to the institutional aspects and their relevance to the European Parliament .
I must say that I consider the behaviour over recent weeks of the Commission and the Council in relation to issues which are not only subject to negotiation with the enlargement countries , but which affect our daily life and the essence of Parliament , to be entirely unacceptable .
I still maintain that criticism .
I have listened carefully to President-in-Office Haarder and President Prodi .
I am grateful and pleased that you are coming on the 10 December to Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs , but I maintain my criticism for the following reasons : firstly , it has been proposed to modify the mandate of the Commission ; I have always thought , and we have therefore always advocated , that the Commission should be chosen , that from the day of the European elections the Commission should be operational .
It was said that its mandate would last until January and now it turns out that the date for the end of the Commission 's operations is being brought forward .
It is never made to coincide with the elections , which worries me very much .
Secondly , the General Affairs Council of 18 November took a series of decisions which affect many areas , specifically , the parliamentary timetable for 2004 , and which make this Parliament during the next legislature a concertina Parliament .
We will have Members who are here for just a month , and then we will have the incorporation of other Members from the candidate countries who will have joined the Union .
Then , if the negotiations with Rumania and Bulgaria are concluded at the same time , there will be another modification ; if it is not at the same time , there will be two modifications .
In other words , we will not know what the absolute majority in this Parliament is nor what its membership will be over the next legislature .
This has not therefore been done well and it causes many problems .
Furthermore , I do not believe it makes any sense to have Commissioners spending several months with nothing to do in the Commission .
I believe that Parliament must defend its right to hold hearings and to appoint a Commission on the basis of a joint programme and that is our duty to the electors .
I hoped that in the ' trialogue ' , as President Prodi said , there would be progress on this issue .
But , Mr President , since there has been no information from you , I very much fear that there has been no progress in last week 's ' trialogue ' ; if I am mistaken , please tell me now .
And I would ask you please , and we are awaiting the meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs of 10 December , to raise these issues seriously at the European Council in Copenhagen , because this is not the way to act .
And finally , and I will end here , I still have hope because , as Alfonso X the Wise , a philosopher king , said , ' if God had consulted me on the day of the Creation , I would have given him some useful advice ' .
Neither the Council nor the Commission are God , and neither are we the Devil .
I will briefly respond to Mr Barón Crespo .
The dialogue of last week had only one definitive context as far as Parliament is concerned : an opportunity for me to confirm in person what I had already done in writing , that Parliament would insist that no definitive decision on the question of dates should be arrived at without having an adequate dialogue and understanding between the institutions including Parliament .
Thereafter , because there is , from my own appreciation of the points made by different colleagues here , a diversity of parliamentary views , I was not in a position to express a definitive view except the view that there should be no final decision without our consent .
I should not now enter the debate .
Mr President , Copenhagen has been the place of many controversial summits but none will be more so than next week when the camel of enlargement approaches the eye of the needle of European domestic politics .
We know that enlargement will make us more multi-cultural and more competitive .
The central question is : will it also make us more democratic ?
Many of the answers to that question are being teased out inside the Convention , but it is certainly up to the European Council and not the president , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , to decide just how far and how fast Member States are prepared to project the Union 's experience in parliamentary democracy to the east and the south .
I trust that the European Council and the Commission will be generous to Turkey in this respect .
We should throw ourselves behind the process of regime change which is taking place in Turkey .
There would be no stronger way of expressing support for Turkey 's reformers than offering a schedule for the opening of the accession negotiations but only on the condition that the Turkish Cypriots were brought to accept the Annan proposals for a federated settlement of the problem of Cyprus .
It will certainly be far more possible for them to accept a UN settlement should there be a firm prospect of membership for motherland Turkey itself .
They frankly require the assurance of our settled intentions concerning our future partnership with Turkey and I know that the presidency will do all that it can to achieve this great breakthrough that is in its grasp .
Mr President , my thanks also to the Danish Presidency , the Commission and others .
We are facing a kind of evaluation , and the time has come to hand out a little praise , and of course a small amount of criticism , too .
First , the praise .
I wish to commend the Danish Presidency for managing to secure the release of Akhmed Zakayev before the great Copenhagen Summit gets under way .
It was a splendid decision and means that many of my worst fears have fortunately not come true .
I also wish to praise the Presidency for its hard work on enlargement .
I think , however , that it is worth remembering that praise is also due to the applicant countries for the herculean task of adapting themselves , and for the formidable tasks the populations of these countries have had to undertake in connection with this whole process .
I also wish to point out , as Mr Verheugen did , that it is not over yet .
Besides the fact that we have not quite completed the whole project , the people of these countries will of course also be voting on whether or not they want to join us .
In this connection , it is to be hoped that these voters do not compare the debate on money with the debate we had earlier today , the one about all the money - the large amounts of euros - that , for various reasons , the Commission has not been able to use .
I hope that the citizens of the applicant countries do not look at the two things side by side and become frustrated .
I hope for a ' yes ' vote .
As regards Turkey , I also agree that the time has not yet come to give that country a date , but I think that the right thing to do would be to give it a date for a date ; in other words , set a combination of a timetable and a roadmap .
What are the practical demands we are making of them ?
What are the deadlines ?
How are they to be met ?
When must the individual parts of the human rights and democracy projects be implemented in Turkey in order that we can set the final date ?
It is obvious that it is not possible to give a fixed date right now , with fundamental aspects still not in place and many decisions yet to be implemented .
A date for a date , however , would be the right thing to do .
There are a couple of things , however , that have disappointed me about the Danish Presidency .
I am disappointed that it did not manage to do something about the Statute of the Ombudsman .
I am disappointed that it is still not possible for the Ombudsman to obtain the documents he asks for .
Not only to be permitted to sit down somewhere and read them , but also to have those documents handed over which he has asked for , and which he needs in order to carry out his work .
I am also disappointed that no progress was made towards ensuring that the employees who are in contact with the Ombudsman are only bound by one thing , that is , by the truth , rather than by any form of loyalty to one of the institutions of the EU .
These employees must be bound by the truth in order to ensure the proper treatment of citizens within this system , and tackling this was one of Denmark 's clear priorities .
I am also disappointed with Denmark 's readiness to cooperate with the USA in connection with the war with Iraq , and also in relation to the EU 's list of terrorist organisations .
I should like to hear where the Presidency stands on the plans to put the Iranian resistance movement on the list of terrorist organisations .
Does this not conflict with what Denmark , amongst others , supported when the list of terrorist organisations was first discussed , which was that resistance movements comparable with the ANC or the Danish resistance movement must under no circumstances end up on the list of terrorist organisations ?
We have a problem , and I should like to hear the views of the Danish Presidency on this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we always have the option of saying the same thing at every meeting .
Let us repeat ourselves , therefore , although it may be that , for once , it will not be necessary .
First of all , with regard to the timetable , I would like to say one very simple thing : the Commission , the Council and Parliament must come to an agreement together .
It is unacceptable for the Council to set one timetable and for the Commission to set another .
We must reach an interinstitutional agreement .
Once this agreement has been reached , it is up to Members of Parliament to come to an agreement , because different points of view coexist within this House .
I am against the idea of bringing forward the elections , against decisions which would not change anything in terms of historic opportunities and could lead us , in my view , to speed things up , leading us inevitably to failure .
We must find an interim solution for the new commissioners during the six-month period .
I think that the most important thing , and no one has mentioned this , is that , if the Convention succeeds - and I hope it will - in convincing everyone that the President of the Commission must be elected by Parliament , and if the IGC accepts this , I shall , in that case , call on the Council to bring forward the ratification , because this procedure could take 18 months otherwise .
As things stand , the next Commission will not be able to be elected under this procedure , simply because we will not have enough time for the IGC to endorse the appointments .
It is therefore absolutely essential that the Council anticipates and accepts what has been decided by the Convention and by the IGC , and therefore that , when the next Commission is constituted , and this is the most important thing in my eyes , the next President is elected by Parliament , thus anticipating what is decided by the Convention and the IGC .
That is the most important thing .
As far as Turkey is concerned , we must be responsible .
We cannot decide on Turkey 's accession plan now .
There are some possibilities of Turkey joining the EU , but there are also some arguments against its accession .
What we must say today , therefore , is ' no ' to those who say that Turkey is not part of Europe , and ' no ' as well to those in the US and the UK who tell us that Turkey must at all costs be part of Europe .
President Clinton had even said that Russia should definitely be part of Europe .
So we say to the US that Mexico and Canada must be part of the United States .
How about that ?
I do not understand why it is up to the US to decide who must be part of Europe .
I believe , therefore , that this question remains open .
There are important debates to be held , but I call on the President of Parliament and the President-in-Office of the Council to write a letter to the Turkish Government and tell it , in order to give it the opportunity to prove his good intentions , that we are organising a meeting in Strasbourg for all the Sakharov Prize winners , and that , in the light of this meeting , Leila Zana must be freed in order to be able to take part .
It would be an extraordinary manifestation of Turkey 's goodwill .
This is what can be done in the near future , Mr President .
Therefore , Mr President , write to the Turkish Government .
It would certainly be an extraordinary gesture before Copenhagen if the Turkish Government allowed Mrs Zana to come to the meeting of all the Sakharov Prize winners .
This is how we could move things forward .
I would like to end by simply repeating exactly what I always say : financially , our proposals for enlargement will not be enough , not by a long shot .
The Council is wrong , the Commission is wrong .
We cannot operate on the same budget with 25 Member States as we did with 15 .
Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam .
We always have to repeat the same thing .
One day , you will understand history and the meaning of history .
Mr President , we are standing on the threshold of a truly historic European Council where we expect the final political decision will be taken to give the green light to ten applicant countries to become full Member States in 2004 .
The groundwork has been done and I commend you , Mr President , for your leadership and enthusiasm for the European project and also the Commission and the Danish presidency for their efficiency in dealing with this unprecedented project .
Enlargement to welcome ten new States and tens of millions of new European citizens into the EU is both a bold gesture and the accomplishment of our true European destiny .
I urge the heads of State and Governments to be similarly bold in proposing a package of measures for Bulgaria and Romania that will ensure that those States too may fully rejoin the European family of nations as early as possible .
I also hope that a genuine and significant decision will be made in relation to the Turkish application for membership .
It is clear that Turkey has a key role to play in shaping the European Union of the future and we must do all in our power to guarantee that the new Turkish Government is given full support and encouragement in its desire to make their country meet the Copenhagen criteria so as to begin accession negotiations .
Mr President , the Copenhagen Summit will be a historic event .
Ten countries will be able to join the EU from 2004 , two countries from 2007 , and Turkey will probably be given a date for its next meeting .
Europe is growing together , which is a good thing .
However , the EU membership that is now being negotiated is not the kind the applicant countries will actually receive .
They can say ' yes ' to the EU , but as early as next Christmas , when the Rome Summit has buried the Treaty of Rome and the constitution of Rome is born , they will be given the status of constituent state of a new federal state .
The completion of the new constitution is planned for before the new countries join , with their right of veto in matters of treaty amendments .
This is unfair , as Mr Haarder also said .
When the applicant countries have signed their membership agreements , and when they have been approved here in Parliament - by March or April - they should be offered equal status with the present Member States and enjoy the same legal representation in all bodies .
If a referendum says ' no ' to membership , the country 's representation can cease in the same way as when Norway voted ' no ' to EC membership and had to find an ambassador job for its Commissioner .
If the referendums confirm membership , this membership becomes a reality , and the countries should have the same right of veto in matters of treaty amendments as the present Member States .
They must not join as second-class members , but instead have equal rights from day one .
I also think that we could be much more accommodating with regard to the funding of their membership of the EU .
When Denmark , a rich country , joined in 1973 , we actually only paid 20 % of our contribution in the first year , 40 % the next , 60 % the third and 80 % the fourth , until , after five years , we reached our full contribution .
Why can we not adopt a similar introductory arrangement with reduced contributions , or grant exemption from contributions , while these countries are so far behind us in terms of wealth ?
We should bear in mind that EC and EU membership is , of course , not just something one receives .
For some it is actually very expensive insurance , as ordinary people have to pay contributions via their daily purchases of everyday goods and via national taxation .
Everyone has to pay , but only very few receive subsidies from the EU budget .
We should perhaps now look into redistribution , or Mr Rasmussen runs the risk of getting an unpleasant surprise when people realise how much they will have to pay in contributions to the EU .
Just a few words about the next point on the agenda .
There should be a move towards wages being paid through the front door , and being taxed in the Member States ; and the system of travel expenses should be changed to a card system for Members , according to which Parliament pays all the expenses incurred , whatever their magnitude .
Mr President , Mr Bonde first became a Member of Parliament - as I did - in July 1979 .
As a communist activist , he was elected to uphold the need to stop Denmark acceding to Europe .
Over 20 years on , you have heard what our dear Mr Bonde has to say about the management of the situation before us .
In 1979 , Mr Cohn-Bendit was probably still much more revolutionary than we are as European federalists , persistently liberal , persistently anti-fascist , anti-communist , anti-fundamentalist and federalist .
Today , things have changed .
Today , Mr Cohn-Bendit said something very interesting , but he presented it as a paradox .
The United States is proposing that we speed up the time frames for Turkey 's entry into Europe .
Mr Cohn-Bendit says that it is as if we were to call upon the United States to speed up their federalising process and get on with annexing Canada and Mexico .
Is the concern today not the need to move towards a world organisation of democracy and democracies , using the ultimate global free liberal weapon of mass attraction in preference to the ultimate weapons of mass destruction ?
The ultimate free , liberal weapon of mass attraction is the recognition of the natural , historically-won right of every woman and every man to political democracy , to the rule of law and , therefore , to the liberal foundations of federal , federalist States which respect the freedom of the individual citizen .
What has all this got to do with Copenhagen ?
A great deal !
After the war , Benedetto Croce observed that , indeed , monarchic Europe - the Scandinavian monarchies , the British monarchy , the Dutch and Belgian monarchies , as it were - was the only part of Europe which resisted the different forms of nationalism , including national socialism , and the different forms of socialism , including communism , preserving a faint hope of freedom .
This story is paradoxical .
The paradox which we want to focus on , Presidents , is that you are not free to build Europe in Copenhagen now : you are representing bureaucratised States and a bureaucratised Parliament .
This means that the creative spirit is not free to flow where it will .
We must fight for freedom and for Europe .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , expressing the opinion that emerged on the institutional implications of enlargement .
These implications , starting with the initial time frames , warrant a great deal of attention in our view , and they must be addressed with all due rigour .
We cannot afford not to carry out a meticulous analysis with the excuse that these are political issues and that we therefore ought not to go into too much detail or that these are technical issues and it is not worth wasting time on them .
The solutions must be sustainable , respect the Treaties , meet a number of institutional criteria and be decided upon by agreement between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , whereas the Council communication of 21 November sought to present us with faits accomplis .


The Presidency representative , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Haarder , said that it is important for Parliament to be involved , but a debate - although the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has called for a debate - is not enough : a genuine , formal agreement needs to be reached between the three institutions .
I will , however , specify the points which we consider to be essential .
Firstly , we believe that transitional arrangements relating to the composition of both the Commission and the European Parliament must be kept to a minimum or avoided .
The Council has specified the date of 1 May 2004 for the formal entry into the Union of the new Member States .
That would mean the appointment of ten new Commissioners , taking the total number of Commissioners up to 30 , and would clearly create problems , in that the Commission 's term of office should end on 20 January 2005 at the latest .
What responsibilities , what special status could be conferred upon ten Commissioners for a few short months , ten Commissioners which the European Parliament would not have time to examine at the necessary hearings in May before its dissolution ?
We would have Commissioners whose appointment had not been approved , whose role in the Commission was uncertain and who would be in danger of not having their appointments renewed a few months thence .
I do not believe that this can be in the interests of the candidate countries of the future Member States .
Similarly , joining the European Parliament after 1 May , the representatives of the new Member States would only be in office for a few weeks , for a single part-session , before the election of the new Parliament .
In conclusion , if we stick to the date of 1 May 2004 , the most sensible solution would appear to be to bring the European Parliament elections forward and schedule them for that same month of May .
The President-in-Office has told us that such attempts have failed in the past .
We do not see why they should fail again and we feel that an effort must be made to adopt that solution .
In particular , the European Parliament elections - why should they not be held on 9 May 2004 , immediately after the accession of the new Member States - would assume particular importance and this might stimulate greater , more enthusiastic participation of the electorate .
Moreover , it would allow us to carry out the election - if the Commission President is to be appointed by election , as we too hope - or , in any case , the vote on the appointment of the President of the Commission , during the June part-session of the European Parliament and to complete the process of examining the Members of the Commission and endorsing their appointment by the end of July , with the new Commission taking office on 1 August , without the need for dubious transitional measures and with all the Commissioners having full legitimacy and equal status .
At the same time , a decision needs to be taken to bring forward the end of the Commission 's mandate .
The result would be first and foremost - and we believe this too to be vital - to synchronise essentially the terms of office of the Commission and the European Parliament .
To this end , we need an interinstitutional agreement which brings forward the end of the Commission 's term of office and the date of the European Parliament elections , and we call strongly for such an interinstitutional agreement .
One last comment on the subject of the IGC .
Mr Haarder , you said that the future new Member States must also be able to exercise the right of veto at the Intergovernmental Conference , in other words they must have exactly the same rights as the Member States without actually being Member States , only acquiring this status as of 1 May 2004 .
We would like to know how this tallies with Article 48 of the Treaty .
We believe that an acceptable solution would be for them to have the same status for the purposes of the IGC that they have for the purposes of the Convention .
Mr President , for the record , my name is pronounced van Velzen .
I should like to say that we are currently facing an historic moment .
Indeed , we are at the final stage of negotiations and I think that the package that is being prepared by the Danish Presidency , consisting of a number of key components on the subjects of agriculture , nuclear safety and border control , is , of course , one that is certain to appeal to our citizens in the European Union as well .
I have no option but to conclude from the Commission report that the Member States wishing to accede still have to sort out an awful lot of things .
I also think that we should expressly mention this in Copenhagen , so that our citizens know what the newly-acceding Member States are up against in the coming year and a half .
Another area of concern to which more attention should be given is media pluralism in Central and Eastern Europe .
The past has shown us all that , let us say , the old establishment set aside resources and created opportunities in order to keep their own media intact .
In this area too , I think we could ask the Commission to devote more attention to the actual - that is the factual rather than theoretical - diversity of the media in Central and Eastern European countries .
I also think that we should not combine enlargement with the debate on Turkey .
If we do engage in such a discussion at present , we would of course be flouting our own laws and rules , as Mr Poettering has already pointed out .
Looking at the facts and the Commission 's report - and I was in this respect pleased with Commissioner Verheugen 's speech - we simply have to conclude that although Turkey has made a great deal of progress , it still fails to meet the Copenhagen criteria on all counts .
This is why we are , actually , in a kind of virtual debate and are doing silly things to boot .
We like to mention a date for the sake of naming the date .
Good luck to anyone who can explain this to citizens in the European Union .
I am therefore in favour of abandoning this curious debate .
We cannot get away from Turkey 's need to meet the Copenhagen criteria , and the fact that it does not do so at the moment . Consequently , we should stop wasting any more time on this .
Imagine if Member States were to set dates at this stage which are at the moment not based on fact .
On the subject of agriculture , there is something that is still a factor for me , namely the huge differences existing between the new acceding countries , between Poland , the Czech Republic and Hungary for example .
I wonder whether we should not concentrate on making the package more tailor-made .
The Danish Presidency has set a good example in this .
Surely , farming in Poland with less than one and a half acres is mainly a social problem , one that should be dealt with in Poland , and the European Union might well be able to play a major role in this .
Farmers with up to 8 , 9 , 10 hectares will mainly need help in the form of world development programmes , which is quite different from extensive discussions about quotas and so on , as these mainly apply to the far bigger agricultural areas in Poland .
I would therefore call for more attention to be given to this area , and it would surely be extremely sad if Poland and the Polish Government were to be prevented from striking an agreement simply by our inability to offer a somewhat more targeted programme and , above all , to allow the Polish Government to develop a somewhat more targeted programme for their own farmers .
I would therefore urge some sort of creativity in this area .
With regard to the new Member States , everyone is agreed , of course , that we need to set up a system where there is no room for net contributors .
However , we should also consider how we can speed up the cash flow so that these Member States do not end up having major problems .
Let me conclude by saying this : we have an enormous opportunity in Copenhagen , and we should seize it .
Mr President , you will recall that when we had our great debate with the accession countries in Strasbourg , I finished my contribution by quoting an English saying that there is many a slip ' twixt cup and lip .
I warned that we should not celebrate prematurely the end of this process because there was still a long way to go and of course I was right .
It now seems that although we think we are close to agreement , we are actually a long way from agreement and there is a very real prospect that we could lose everything .
We should be clear on that .
If Copenhagen ends up with endless rows over highly technical issues conducted in ten parallel negotiation sessions , it does not take a brain surgeon to realise the whole process could easily seize up .
For once , I disagree with Commissioner Verheugen .
I think if we miss Copenhagen , we will not miss it for a week or a month or a couple of months , we will miss enlargement for a whole generation .
As I have said before and I will say it again , it is now or never .
This is the opportunity we have to seize .
I welcome the brave attempt by the Danish presidency to put an extra EUR 1 billion on the table in order to clear the decks so we do not have these complicated negotiations in Copenhagen .
Unfortunately , in doing so , particularly a couple of weeks in advance , they seem only to have encouraged some of the applicant States to believe that this is just one more stage in the negotiations and quite frankly we have to be clear that it is not .
This is not a constantly elastic process .
At some point we must say no .
Berlin and Brussels cannot be breached .
The moment we break budget discipline , we open a whole Pandora 's box which is liable to bring the whole project collapsing to the ground .
We also must be clear that this project is so important that we are not prepared to let any one country sabotage the whole negotiations .
If any one country wants to hold out until the last possible moment , they do so at their own risk and not at the risk of all the other accession countries , because we must be prepared to agree as each country is prepared to agree .
Equally , I must urge our leaders to ask themselves a simple question before they go to Copenhagen .
What will they do in 20 years ' time when they are sitting with their grandchildren on their knees and their grandchildren say : ' What was your real role in the great disaster when Europe failed to grasp its own destiny ?
What did you actually do ? '
Are they really going to turn around and say : ' Well , actually , we could not do it because we were not sure if Baltic sprats were big enough for our nets .
We could not do it because we could not quite agree on the right amount of sheep premium or the exact sugar quota or exactly what sort of portfolio a Commissioner should have for two months ' ?
Are we really going to say that ?
Because it is going to sound very lame .
Let us think of the big picture and remember that the money we are giving to the accession countries represents one thousandth of the GDP of the European Union .
The entire EU budget is only two thirds of what the British Government spends on social security alone .
We are actually talking about what are minor issues in the global picture of things .
Let us not lose sight of that .
Concerning Turkey , I would say that we must say to this new government , which is like a breath of fresh air in my opinion : you must meet the Copenhagen criteria .
We want you to meet it by such and such a date and if you do we will open negotiations .
But let us kill off once and for all this idea that Europe is a Christian project only .
I represent Hindus , Muslims , Jews , Sikhs , Buddhists , Taoists , all religions , and I am not prepared to say to them : ' The European Union is not for you ' .
This is the message some people in this chamber are giving out and we must kill that off .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my agreement with Mr Titley and also say that it also strikes me that the spirit of European integration is standing at a door on which there hangs a ' No Entry ' sign , as it is not wanted in negotiations that are confined to milk quotas and direct grants .
In the European Union , solidarity stops when it comes to money .
The Danish Presidency may well have tried , by means of its negotiating package , to do justice to all positions , but , as the spirit of integration was shown the door , all that has come out is a worthless patchwork of rags that is no kind of framework for a future together .
Why is this ?
The Member States ' mean-minded attitude leaves the candidate countries with the impression that they are second-class citizens who are not welcome .
That puts wind in the sails of the EU 's opponents in those countries , and jeopardises its acceptance .
Savings in the Structural Funds mean savings in cohesion , in the very heart of the European Union , and thus have adverse effects on the project of integration .
Hence the impossibility of significant impetus for rural development or an attempt at it , the most devastating indication of which is the fact that it will lose out when grants of aid are increased .
This is an attempt at making manifest the structures of an agricultural policy that has failed in the European Union , and , in practical terms , an indirect rejection of agricultural reform , meaning that the demise of farms in the candidate countries is being pre-planned without there being any alternative jobs .
That is sending the wrong signal .
We , the Group of the Greens , reject all attempts at downgrading enlargement into a national savings bank , and hereby demand that the Council and the Commission should give absolute priority to the project of support for rural areas in the candidate countries and allocate more funds to it .
Without that , the result will be social collapse , the European Union 's spirit will be endangered and so will the project for EU reform !
Mr President , the Copenhagen European Council which is being held next week will have one major , important task : to conclude accession negotiations with ten candidate countries .
It will be necessary to iron out a few last-minute financial difficulties , but we have great hopes and we particularly welcome the fact that France is willing to look at the latest proposals by the Danish Presidency in a favourable light .
They certainly demand some additional expenditure , but what is at stake is worth the effort and we must not forget that the Brussels European Council of last October had taken away almost an equivalent amount of structural aid from the new members .
Everything should therefore balance out in the end .
The second major item on the Copenhagen agenda will be Turkey 's candidacy .
We share Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's view that , as things currently stand , Turkey 's accession would spell the end of the European Union .
We have , in fact , said this several times before .
The 1999 Helsinki European Council made a serious mistake , which has unfortunately not been made good , but has since been confirmed .
This error on the part of the Union shows its lack of understanding of what it is and its ignorance of what it wants .
Mr President of the European Parliament , you yourself have suggested that Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , by adopting this position , would be removed from his role .
I do not believe this , because exactly how could the Convention draft proposals on the future of the Union , on its institutions , on its policies if it has not firstly answered the following questions . What brings us together ?
What is our model for the Union for the next fifty years ?
Where must our borders end ?
Mr Giscard d 'Estaing is therefore doing exactly the right thing by raising these questions indirectly .
In fact , in our opinion , Mr President , the Convention , under whose influence I do not know , has been too hasty in preparing technical proposals without first having answered fundamental political questions which influence them .
It is in Europe 's own interests to put things right as soon as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a few days ' time , the European Council in Copenhagen will decide to enlarge the European Union by adding to it eight countries of the former Eastern Bloc as well as Cyprus and Malta .
This is the subject of negotiation and - necessarily - of occasional dispute , and haggling over one point or another , but nothing can conceal the fact that Europe , divided until 1989 , is now , by taking this step , giving itself a new Community order , founded on the principle of democracy , the rule of law , freedom and the market economy .
I am convinced that , of all the political events we have experienced , it is this one that will be the most important for all the generations now living .
If some far-sighted person fifteen years ago had written out the agenda for this European Council , as it now is , complete with the reunification of Europe , he would have been thought to be deluded !
If , at that time , we had been asked about our willingness to pay another EUR 2.3 billion for it , I am sure that we would have answered with a loud , clear and instantaneous ' yes ' .
Sustained effort will be demanded of us if this enlargement is to be managed - politically as well as financially , of that there is no doubt - but this is the moment when this Union of ours is joined by ancient European lands , which belong with us in exactly the same way as France and Great Britain do , and will join us in standing up for the principles of freedom and democracy under the rule of law .
The European Union is founded on the applicability of the law , and it is the acknowledgement of the law 's applicability that alone holds it together .
That is why it is so significant that Parliament , in a resolution on the report on the negotiations with the Czech Republic , described the so-called Exemption Act as incompatible with our conception of law , and did so in a careful and balanced way .
This question is not just about German-Czech relations in the past , but also about Europe 's present and future , as fundamental principles of law and their applicability are at stake , and it would certainly be helpful if the Czech Republic were to say something to clarify matters before enlargement .
Now , my notes include a sentence , such as we have heard uttered so often already , to the effect that discussions on Turkey must not be allowed to dominate to some extent the enlargement summit , but I see that we ourselves have been unable to resist this temptation , so that may well be the way things are in Copenhagen as well , making it clear that this is something that people get worked up about .
A few days ago , Commissioner Verheugen was quoted in a German newspaper as saying that he was against Turkey joining and that he proposed to the Turks the establishment of a special relationship as neighbours , a treaty that could also apply to other countries contiguous to the EU .
I am sure , Commissioner Verheugen , that you will explain this as a misunderstanding or a misinterpretation and , quite rightly , point out that this represents a breach of the confidentiality you presumably agreed on .
But this is not about you not being allowed to keep to yourself something that you want to have dealt with in confidence , but about the way this way of doing things encourages the impression that , on this issue , many are saying in public the opposite of what they actually think .
Where Turkey is concerned , you would not be the only one , as a whole host of those who advocate its accession do not actually want it to join and are taking cover behind the criteria .
That is a hypocritical way of going about things , and does more harm to the EU 's relations with Turkey than it would to take stock of the situation with all the honesty that respect for this country requires . So , what we want is not offers of dates for accession , but greater honesty in our relations with Turkey !
Mr President , I rise to share the concerns of those who have expressed fear about decisions being taken without consulting Parliament on curtailing the mandate of the current European Commission .
Of course we recognise that new Member States have a right to a Commissioner as from day one of their membership of the European Union .
Of course it makes sense not to reshuffle all the portfolios of the existing Commission just for a few months .
Therefore it makes sense to curtail the mandate of the existing Commission and move rapidly to the approval of a new Commission by the new Parliament with the full democratic legitimacy that it entails .
But how can this be done ?
Under the current Treaty , there are only two ways .
One is that every single Member of the current Commission agrees to resign on an agreed date , or this Parliament adopts a motion of censure forcing them to resign .
Both scenarios would be a little bit odd unless they were subject to an agreement among the three institutions .
Another way would be for the Council to put it in the accession treaty but again if they were to do that unilaterally , without consensus and agreement , that would undermine the spirit of the Treaties .
So what I think should happen is that we do negotiate and reach an agreement on what would be sensible , which would be to fix an early date for the Commission to be replaced , on condition that the new Commission has the full legitimacy of going through the full procedure by the new house to be elected in the European elections .
That is a sine qua non .
Under those circumstances , it would make sense , as has been suggested , to bring the date of the elections forward from June to May , because then the new house in June could already vote on the President and in July we could have the hearings and vote on the Commission as a whole , which could then begin , if that were agreed , already in August or September .
That would allow us to go forward more speedily .
It would get rid of the problems of Commissioners without portfolios for a lengthily period and it would make sense in its own right to have the elections early in May , which is a good idea on its own merits .
By the way , Mr President , I am sure you would be interested in this , it would avoid us having the problems in this House of having full Members for one session only just prior to the European Elections .
I think that is the route the Council should pursue in dialogue with us .
I should like to make one brief comment .
Earlier this afternoon , Mr Barón Crespo raised the question of what had happened at the interinstitutional dialogue last week in Copenhagen with the President of the European Commission , the President-in-Office of the Council and myself .
I indicated that I made it clear that I wanted no definitive decision made on questions of dates and transition without the Parliament being fully involved , engaged and consulted .
As you will now appreciate , having heard one view from the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and an entirely different view from the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , it was not appropriate for me to seek a definitive conclusion in that dialogue other than to say that we needed to consult with the other institutions .
Evidently we also need to talk to each other .
Mr President , I should like to concur with Mr Brok .
What is crucial , of course , is that we welcome the Member States and that this House - soon to be newly elected - can codecide on the new President of the Commission , but that is where his and my line of reasoning part ways .
I am pleased that he has mentioned 1 May as an important date , but I would say that this 1 May could , in fact , be the date for European elections , in which case I would be in Mr Napolitano 's camp .

I should like to briefly update you on what has been happening in the Netherlands recently .
There , we saw a Dutch Liberal leader , Mr Gerrit Zalm , launch a kamikaze campaign .
He demanded that the Netherlands should thwart enlargement with a view to enforcing agricultural reforms .
Fortunately , Mr Zalm has been sidelined for the time being , but with the forthcoming elections on 22 January 2003 in the Netherlands , he naturally remains a dangerous force to be reckoned with .
The Dutch will hopefully elect a government that recognises the benefits of stability and economic growth , as well as the importance of a reunited Europe , thus preventing the Dutch reputation from being tarnished any further .
This does not detract in any way from the primary importance of those agricultural reforms to the enlargement countries , candidate countries , to us ourselves , and to the developing countries .
And what is evident is that , thanks to Mr Fischler 's proposals , we already have many sound proposals on the table , but that many Member States still threaten to obstruct them .
What we need is the courage to do our homework in the area of agricultural reforms , and this is also necessary to help the dollar round succeed .
Indeed , we may talk about a development round , but if no firmer and broader-based proposals benefiting agricultural reforms are tabled , then things will take a turn for the worse and this round will fail .
In that case , we will not have done our homework , which is necessary if the accession countries are to be treated fairly .
Mention is made of net and gross accounts between Europe and the enlargement countries too easily without sufficiently acknowledging the necessity of those agricultural reforms .
Could I add that I hope that the discussions we are having here will somehow serve as a lesson to us in the next step towards enlargement by the accession of more countries ?
Let us have a less ambiguous and earlier debate with our electorates , and let us have the courage to ask for their opinions in good time by means of a European referendum .
In my view , we have built in too much technocracy and not enough politics this time round .
We have learnt that these are political decisions .
We should summon up the courage to look our own people in the eye and accept their judgments .
- ( DA ) Thank you for another useful and constructive dialogue on enlargement .
The debate confirms that there is massive support for what is happening next week .
I would extend my thanks for all the good advice that has been given , on which I shall make a few comments .
I should like to thank Mr Poettering for putting the Copenhagen European Council into exactly the right perspective from the outset .
Without repeating what he said , it is this historical perspective that we must keep in view the whole time .
The thanks given to the Presidency are also due to the Commission , especially Mr Verheugen , who has now been working tirelessly on this for years .
I fully agree with Mr Titley .
I do not know about ' now or never ' , but in any case it is time for action .
It must succeed .
Despite the difficult problems that remain , we have come so far that we cannot justify failure .
As regards Cyprus , I fully agree with Mr Verheugen .
The EU and the international community must declare in plain terms their readiness to give the necessary assistance to meet the great challenges reunification will present to Cyprus and its two communities .
We must do everything we can to ensure that the UN Secretary-General 's endeavours to find a solution ahead of Copenhagen meet with success .
Concerning Turkey , the basis is clear .
Turkey is a candidate .
The accession negotiations can commence when the Copenhagen criteria have been met .
They have not been , but Turkey has made impressive progress with the far-reaching reform package .
In Copenhagen , a strong and positive signal will be sent to the Turkish politicians and population .
The precise form this signal will take is to be discussed in detail by the Heads of State and Government .
I agree with Mr Poettering that this is not the main subject for Copenhagen .
The ten countries will take centre stage there .
We shall not forget the prospect of Turkey , however , neither shall we forget Bulgaria and Romania .
These two countries have made tremendous progress in their accession negotiations , but are not ready yet .
They will be given a roadmap for the last stretch of the way .
I wish to thank the President of the Commission for his support for the content of the packages that the Presidency has presented to the ten countries , and I wish to thank Mr Verheugen for his word of caution against overloading the agenda for Copenhagen with all sorts of other issues .
He knows better than anyone how difficult and complicated the enlargement process is , and he knows the danger of entering into detailed discussions on the individual packages at the Copenhagen Summit .
My thanks to the many people who have expressed their support for keeping within the expenditure ceilings set out at Berlin and Brussels .
I also wish to thank all of those who have said that we should not argue over small amounts at this decisive historic juncture .
I must , however , advise against suggestions that we should discuss whether we can add another couple of billions to the amount set out in the ten packages .
The art is not to have opinions and make suggestions .
The art is to gain a majority , to obtain everyone 's support , and there are , of course , countries who think that the packages put together by the Danish Presidency are already too generous .
We must keep in mind that the art is to reach a consensus , or , in other words , to put the finishing touches to the packages in Copenhagen .
Mr Barón Crespo and others are right in saying that it would be best if the new countries had Commissioners with proper portfolios from the outset , and if Parliament could hold new elections in time to approve a new Commission .
This would mean that the MEPs from the new Member States could play a part in approving the Commissioners from their countries .
This is not as easy as it sounds , however .
A new election date could help ; and we have tried to arrange this , but without success .
The Presidency is willing , but we are afraid that it will not be possible .
If this is the case , it is good that we have another solution , one that may not be perfect , but is tolerable for all parties .
I believe that the Council has now stated - and in any case I have stated four or five times here in Parliament on behalf of the Council - that the new countries will be put on a completely equal footing with the old Member States at the Intergovernmental Conference , where a new treaty is to be adopted .
This is not something I have made up ; it is in Article 23 of the Treaty of Nice .
It would be entirely unreasonable for us to offer the new countries , who are perhaps about to hold referendums , a different status from the old Member States , when their populations are to say ' yes ' to a new treaty .
In a way , it is bad enough that they have to accept a treaty that we are in the process of amending .
If they are not placed on an even footing with us when the amended treaty is to be adopted , then I do not think that we are treating them properly .
Finally , I wish to give my support to something that many have expressed .
None of the applicant countries will have to wait for any of the others .
If only nine applicant countries are ready , they will join .
It is important , therefore , that the applicant countries , too , remember to strike while the iron is hot , or Mr Titley 's prediction might come true .
Lastly , I wish to say to the President that the Presidency looks forward to seeing him and the Conference of Presidents in Copenhagen directly before the summit .
There we can continue the dialogue we have had all along on these difficult but also rewarding issues that are common to the three institutions .
Mr President , as this debate draws to a close I am pleased to be able to note once again that there is broad agreement between Parliament , the Council and the Commission on the question of enlargement , and that is an important political signal in itself .
I would now like to say a brief word on the most important topics of the debate .
First , I will return to the subject of money .
I think - no one will be surprised at this - that when we reach the final stage of a negotiating process that involves a lot of money people start to back pedal in public , and those who will have to pay start to say it is too much and those who want something say it is too little .
That is quite normal and I would not get too excited about it .
There is the structural question , however , which some Members of this House have quite rightly raised , that is : are our rules really designed to allow new members , who are poorer than the European Union 's present average , to gain from their membership in the first few years ?
That is precisely the problem .
Lest anyone should be worrying for nothing , the position as I see it today is this : under the presidency 's proposal , the new Member States will receive more than EUR 9 thousand million net in actual payments in 2004 , 2005 and 2006 .
So when their own contributions are deducted there are EUR 9 thousand million net additional payments left .
That means no one is a net payer and they are all in a much better position than in 2003 .
The figure for appropriations , ladies and gentlemen , is really very impressive , I have to say , and the word meanness is not appropriate .
A net EUR 25.7 thousand million in appropriations are available for those three years .
That is quite something when you look at the size of these countries ' economies .
We should not forget that the gross national product of the countries of Eastern and Central Europe is only five per cent of that of the present European Union .
These figures are already reasonably balanced , I should say .
It is also true , however , that it repeatedly has to be pointed out by both sides that the European Union is not a cash dispenser .
You do not put a card , be it a membership card or a credit card , in at the top and get money out at the bottom .
We are not like that at all .
We are a community based on law and it is our aim that people should enjoy an equal standard of living , and we help to bring that about , but only in so far as we are actually able .
Mrs Schroedter has drawn attention to a particular matter , and unfortunately I have to agree with her , namely that this proposal that rural development funding should be made available for direct payments must actually be regretted from the Union 's point of view .
The proposal that we put forward was in fact intended precisely to make possible a socially cushioned , sensible structural development of agriculture in the new Member States .
I must however point out that it was quite a strong demand from the candidate countries themselves that they should be able to make a transfer , at least for the first three years .
The argument is as simple as it is convincing : without this measure there is no chance of winning the referendum in Poland , for example .
That is the background to this decision , but I readily admit that it is certainly regrettable from the point of view of a sensible development of agricultural policy .
Now a brief word on the subject of Turkey .
Mr Nassauer spoke to me about it in person .
I have nothing different to say about it in private than I have said in public .
What was quoted in the newspaper I have said many times , including here in the European Parliament . If , in 1999 , we had had the opportunity to develop a Turkish strategy without the 40 years of past history we already had , it would never have occurred to me , at any rate , that the correct solution might be to offer Turkey full membership of the European Union .
The problem is , however , that we did not have that option .
That option had already been attempted and had already failed and there was no other .
I am sure that all the debates of the last few weeks , including those triggered by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , have not achieved the outcome that the former French president wanted .
They have resulted precisely in those who would have preferred not to commit themselves at present - and there were quite a number who would have preferred not to do so - now being forced to endorse the outcome of Helsinki once again , namely that Turkey clearly has candidate status , that it will be treated like any other candidate , that its prospects for membership are unqualified and clear and that it is encouraged to continue down that road .
That is the outcome of the debate in 15 Member States , so far as the governments are concerned .
I am well aware that other views are being taken in public , sometimes even by the majority .
But we know that the 15 governments of the Member States are unanimous in the view that we must stick to the Helsinki strategy .
In that respect , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's contribution probably did not have the outcome he wanted .
In the debate about dates , I agree with Mr Brok that we must not allow the subject of Turkey to eclipse the decision-making process about ratification in the Member States , and there is probably already a real danger that it will .
Regarding the institutional questions , the Commission is of course more than willing to enter into intensive discussions here at any time , and as always the Commission will not have the slightest problem ; on the contrary , it will seek to ensure that Parliament 's rights are fully safeguarded .
I should just like to make two small points .
Naturally , we now needed a working hypothesis for the accessions .
Without a date we would have been unable to negotiate the financial chapter , because the date has enormous consequences for the financial situation in the first year of membership .
The financial packages for each individual country are quite different , depending on the date taken as a basis for the work .
That is why the decision was necessary .
So far as I know , it was taken by the Council primarily in the light of the amount of time the Member States said they needed for ratification .
That should also be taken into account , as I have often said .
So far as the Commission is concerned , I would like to point out once again that it suggested avoiding the transitional Commission with 30 commissioners and therefore offered to cut its term of office short , but it proved impossible to negotiate this .
Candidate countries and Member States took the view that the new commissioners must be there from the first day of accession .
In that case , I think it is sensible to keep this transitional period with 30 commissioners as short as possible .
That is why the date of 1 November emerged for the next Commission .
That is the minimum amount of time required to appoint a new Commission President , get him approved and also to give him time to put a new Commission together .
That is the full background .
I think we can discuss it together sensibly and , as I said , the Commission is willing to do so at any time .
That concludes the debate .
WRITTEN STATEMENT ( RULE 120 )
Mr President , the EU 's enlargement by ten new Member States will be a triumph for democracy if we also manage to adapt our institutions in such a way as to ensure that this enlarged Union , with its half a billion inhabitants , can also function more effectively , transparently and democratically .
This presupposes more say for the directly elected European Parliament , but also more of a Union in which peoples and regions feel at home .
All future Member States have made huge efforts to meet the Copenhagen criteria and to integrate the acquis into their legislation and national fabrics .
Turkey cannot demand a date in Copenhagen .
It is obvious that Turkey itself has a long way to go before it can meet the Copenhagen criteria .
Surely it is up to Turkey to decide what it must , can , and is willing to do to become a true democracy , respecting human rights and cultural minorities .
This should not only be evident from its legislation but also be based on reality .
This does not only depend on the Turkish Government or parliament but , above all , on the attitude of the army , and as long as the army holds such a key position , Turkey cannot be considered a democracy in the true sense of the word .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I have raised this oral question on behalf of my group in order to bring once again to this House , and therefore to a public and transparent debate , a fundamental issue which is a constitutional one .
At a time when in the Convention we are considering reforms of the Commission , the Council and all the institutions , being able to fulfil our mandate with dignity , honour and equality as European citizens is an essential issue which we have been working on for a long time .
I would add something else : we must resolve this issue during this legislature , before it comes to an end , given the political importance it has .
I tabled my question in the quest for greater support and consensus within the European Parliament because I believe it is necessary and I must say that my group believes that this is an issue which must be defined with the greatest possible transparency , both with regard to the constitutional aspects of the Statute and the rules which we have to lay down for ourselves .
What I regret at this point is that it seems that , in seeking the greatest possible agreement , disagreements have been highlighted .
I have been faced with an open and systematic accusation ; this morning , in a press conference , three parliamentary group presidents have publicly accused the Socialist Group of blocking the Statute .
As the President is well aware , it was I who proposed the amendment to the de Palacio report which was approved by 455 votes .
It was I who proposed , and this is in the joint resolution of the Liberal Group as a recital , that a group of eminent people had to be created , and Mr Haarder is well aware of this , and I proposed its membership , beginning with Mr Ersbøl .

This is what I have done on behalf of the Socialist Group .
I would like those people who have criticised us - and I do not mind the election campaign being brought forward , but it should not verge on slander - to explain in this House - which is where things should be explained - what it is they have done .
And I would say to Mr Watson , with the greatest of respect , that it would also be interesting - he has a golden opportunity - if he could explain why he feels surrounded by Germans .
We are all equal here .
I do not feel overly influenced by the Germans , it is not true .
It is not true , for example , that this system of allowances has been created to compensate the Iberians .
I come from a parliament in which they gave me the ticket , I had never earned more .
I was faced with this system and I do not know any parliament , even those which pay most , which has renounced this system .
Why do we have to have this hypocritical and cynical argument ?
I believe we have to seek unity and not offend our fellow Members because we have to work together to find a way to move ahead .
Finally , Mr President , you are well aware that I was the president of the group which most supported the idea of you being able to maintain exploratory contacts with the Council .
Now , we are in a parliament , we have to apply the parliamentary method , not the plebiscite method , and I am glad that after I raised the question , you have written to give an account of your activities , and I am also glad that you have spoken with Mr Rothley .


With regard to Mr Rothley , I must say one thing ; with Mr Rothley as rapporteur , the Statute is very difficult , without Mr Rothley , it is impossible and we must all be aware of this and , therefore , instead of increasing divisions and offending many members of this House , what we must do is work together and bring this Statute forward .
I am grateful for the letter you have written and I have one hope , Mr President , because I believe that you also take this approach .
I hope that today the Council will say that it is prepared to hold talks with us on the methods for approving the Statute .
That is all I am asking of the Council today , and I am very grateful that Mr Haarder is here because he has been fighting with us for the Statute .
I would like to mention one thing , and that is that the Treaty of Nice is now in force , which means majority approval , except on taxation issues , which will be decided unanimously .
Today , all we have to ask is that the President-in-Office of the Council hold out his hand - not to me but to Parliament .
We must do the rest through an open debate and joint work amongst us and , please , let us not increase divisions .
Let us seek unity in Parliament because this is our responsibility and we cannot transfer it to others .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing with a never-ending story here .
This House has been considering the Members ' Statute since 1998 .
I think it is high time we brought it to an end .
We are virtually at the end of a legislative period and we also have enlargement ahead of us .
I believe the legal position of the Members of this House needs to be settled now once and for all .
Of course , we also need an official response from the Council to the proposals made by official bodies of this House .
The Rothley report , which was initially adopted by the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs as an opinion for our President and the Conference of Presidents , is the only document in this House to contain a really comprehensive proposal for a Members ' Statute .
We have been waiting for a response from the Council since April this year and that is why we believe this oral question is now necessary .
It is high time .
This proposal of Mr Rothley 's is a very balanced one .
We were guided by the submissions made by the wise men who were appointed to make concrete proposals to us .
We have come to the conclusion that we ought to receive as salary one half of the basic salary of a European judge .
I believe everything about this plan is well balanced .
I find it all the more regrettable that three group chairmen this morning issued a press release on this important question , which really depends on a consensus in this House ; I think that was completely intolerable .
There was quite an obvious contradiction between the claims that were falsely made there this morning and what is actually contained in the resolution .
I would , however , point out that there is only one major difference between the motions before us here , namely the reference , in paragraph 2 of our motion for a resolution , to the Committee on Legal Affairs ' April decision , because we want the Council to adopt a clear position on this document .
Everything else is virtually identical in content .
I therefore fail completely to understand why it was claimed this morning that the large groups would oppose the statute and wanted to fill their pockets .
That is certainly not the case and it is improper to say so in that way in this House or at a press conference .
I would like to make that very clear at this point .
In this House , there is no room for cheap populism .
The large groups have a responsibility for this entire House and we are trying to fulfil it .
This oral question and this resolution have again been put on the agenda so that we can make progress in the debate about the Statute , not to hinder it .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have been negotiating now for nearly five years , and we cannot continue any longer in a situation where the Council leads Parliament a dance like a bear with a ring through its nose in a circus arena .
It must be clear by now what the Council wants .
If we know what the Council wants , we shall also be able to arrive at a sensible Statute in the ensuing discussions in the Committee on Legal Affairs in the actual legislative process under Article 190 ( 5 ) .
I hope that Mr Haarder , who after all was once a colleague of ours , has sat in this House and knows the problems and who was also formerly involved in the work on drafting the Statute , will now be in a position to give Parliament a clear , positive signal on behalf of the Danish Presidency .
What I consider unacceptable is that we should have a repeat of what has already happened with the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies .
Let me remind you . The contact group met and we were told that if we reached a compromise over taxation the problems would be solved and the Statute could come into force as proposed .
What happened ?
We went along with the compromise , one that , incidentally , I consider illegal and that the European Court of Justice will never accept .
We went along with it , however , in the interests of a common statute , and what was the outcome ?
The Council again raised other problems and issues and in the end we have made not the slightest progress .
That is why this time I would like to see on our desks not only a well-meaning letter from our President , but also a definite statement from the Council .
That is the purpose of this oral question and the resolution that accompanies it .
The question of the transparency of costs is raised again and again .
But it is not the subject of this resolution .
It is perfectly clear that we want transparency , and it is also perfectly clear that our presidency will of course submit fresh proposals for the reimbursement of costs if we get the Statute .
I take that as read and that is the subject of all the motions for a resolution that are here on the table .
Mr President , I have listened with great attention to the speeches we have already heard .
This is of course a matter I personally was very heavily involved in as a member of the European Parliament , and I attach the very greatest importance to the decision concerning a Members ' Statute .
I should like to say that , as has been pointed out , the Council wishes to help find a solution that guarantees the individual Member dignity and public respect .
Regarding the way in which such a statute is to be implemented , I must of course point out that the rules governing its implementation are set down in Article 190 , paragraph 5 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , in which it is stated that it falls to the European Parliament , after seeking an opinion from the Commission and with the approval of the Council , to determine its Members ' status and the general conditions governing the performance of duties .
When the Treaty of Nice has come into force , the Council will be able to take decisions by a qualified majority and no longer only by acting unanimously , as has been the case up until now .
That does not however apply to taxation arrangements .
Even if it is the case that Parliament adopted a draft proposal for a statute on 3 December 1998 , that is to say before the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force , Parliament has since debated the new guidelines , namely in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
A permanent dialogue has been conducted between the Council 's successive Presidencies and the interlocutors designated by Parliament , namely in the contact group set up to promote the negotiations between the two institutions .
As is well known , the Council has not adopted a position on a number of the central features of the future Statute .
In that connection , I should like to emphasise a couple of crucial elements .
According to the positions laid down so far by the Council , there must , first of all , be concordance between the Statute and primary law , for example concerning immunities and privileges .
Secondly , agreement in the Council on the tax issue must be respected and , finally , there must be transparency and respect for the principle of reimbursing expenses on the basis of expenditure that has in actual fact been incurred .
In my view , the statement from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market from April of this year does not fulfil all these conditions , and I can understand why Parliament 's President has been given the same message in his informal contacts with the governments of the Member States .
I also appreciate why , on the basis of his contacts with the Member States , Parliament 's President has drawn a number of conclusions regarding elements of a compromise which , once the Treaty of Nice has come into force , will be able to attract the necessary majority in the Council .
In conclusion , I would therefore welcome all efforts aimed at a solution acceptable to both the Council and Parliament .
I should like , on behalf of the Council , to urge Parliament not to let this opportunity pass by .
It is Parliament that is to do the proposing and the Council that is to do the approving .
The ball lies in Parliament 's court .
I would call upon us now to agree to a proposal that can attract broad support in Parliament and that can attract broad enough support in the Council for its to be able to be approved in accordance with the new rules in the Treaty of Nice that will be in force by February .
Mr President , sincere thanks for your work .
We have made progress .
Thank you also for the letter that you sent to Members , which has clarified a lot of things .
Incidentally , I have not forgotten how you supported me in the Conference of Presidents in 1998 over the question of whether the Committee on Legal Affairs should prepare a draft statute .
You were chairman of the Liberal Group at the time .
That was a long time ago .
We intend the resolution as a spur to deeper discussion with the Council of the questions that remain open .
We talk about strengthening democracy and not just about salaries , we talk about the dignity of Parliament , whose Members represent 380 million citizens of the European Union , and not just about reimbursement and allowances .
Of course those questions need to be settled .
I am convinced that the presidency , which is the only body competent to do so , will resolve the system of reimbursements in a way that is understandable and transparent for the general public .
Those who speak only about money betray their deep contempt for this Parliament .
We are not a gang of con men whose activities have to be stopped .
When the European Council introduced direct elections in 1976 , it failed to set out the constitutional rights of Members .
The Council cannot , more than two decades after the first direct elections , expect us to go without a definition of Members ' constitutional rights .
The rules on immunity date back to 1965 and were designed for delegates sent to the Parliamentary Assembly by the national parliaments .
The Council cannot expect us not to change anything in those 1965 provisions in the year 2003 .
I am quite familiar with the legal problems .
With a measure of good will on both sides they can be solved .
There is a time for everything .
Omnia tempus habent .
I have the feeling that the time for a decision is drawing near .
In 1999 the European Council itself called on us - we have quoted it - to bring the question of the Members ' Statute to a conclusion as a matter of urgency .
We shall probably deal with the matter for good early next year .
We are authorised to submit a report for the plenum .
I know there are still problems with primary law , but they can be solved and I would be very grateful if the Council would concentrate on this question and send us concrete pointers for a solution .
In any case , the Statute must be adopted before enlargement .
It will be virtually impossible afterwards .
Mr President , the starting point of my group 's deliberations on the issue of the Member 's Statute must be observing that there is a crisis of confidence between the citizens of most of our countries and the politicians .
It is a major political challenge to resolve this crisis , perhaps the most important political challenge to be tackled in the near future .
All our actions must take this objective into consideration .
As it happens , the Confederal Group of the European United Left-Nordic Green Left believes it is necessary to ensure total transparency in the conditions governing the exercise of the parliamentary mandate and to dispel any idea of privileges for Members .
In my view and in the view of the broad majority of my group , that requires two things : the first is that we need a statute in the very near future , in other words , some time before the June 2004 elections .
Therefore , in the proposals that will be negotiated with the Council , we must not include provisions that we already know are unacceptable .
Otherwise , we might as well be saying that we do not want a statute .
The second requirement , in our view , is that the content of the proposals that we put forward must respect the positions of principle that I mentioned earlier - particularly transparency and the rejection of any notion of privilege .
I do not intend to insult or offend anyone by saying this , Mr President .
It is quite simply to explain why my group is opposed - and has already said so - to Parliament sending the document by the Committee on Legal Affairs to the Council in its current form .
To give just two examples , Article 9 of the document claims to guarantee future Members virtual impunity .
This is inexcusable , and the article regarding remuneration calls for a huge rise in allowances for most Members .
At a time when the Union is advocating austerity measures to be imposed for employees and calling for public spending to be rationed , this might sound like a provocation .
Obviously we find this unacceptable .
Let us be honest therefore .
Those of you who wish to come to a swift agreement with the Council on a Members ' Statute must not , at tomorrow 's vote , approve the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs in its current form as this report would obviously rule out the prospect of reaching an effective agreement on a statute .
On the other hand , by voting in favour of the compromise resolution by Parliament 's three ' pivotal ' groups , you will leave the way clear to seek an agreement that the broad majority of us , of you , say you want .
Tomorrow , each of us will have the opportunity to shoulder our responsibilities .
Mr President , it has already become evident here that three groups have proposed a joint motion for a resolution , and , in my opinion , it is very important that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have now united in a common campaign , because it is time we obtained some concrete results .
We want a statute to be achieved and all these matters that annoy our citizens so much to be resolved .
We cannot approve of a statute that contains possible elements in the form of concealed pay .
We want all the money paid to us in the form of salary and expenses to be as transparent as possible and justifiable in the eyes of the public .
Neither can we agree to any privileges for ourselves that we cannot extend to our citizens .
As my colleague , Mr Lehne , attacked the Chairmen of the three groups here , I might remark that both the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Party of European Socialists have themselves provided the reason why the three groups have had to form an alliance .
The means the two largest groups have employed to prevent you , Mr President , from holding discussions with the Council have been totally unacceptable .
On behalf of my own group , I want to thank you for the efforts you have made , and I believe that you have already achieved more with regard to this statute issue than your predecessor did throughout her entire term .
In the letter you sent us you have stated that , given certain preconditions , we really do have the chance now to achieve a solution and we must accept that matters regarding Members ' immunity , for example , will have to be resolved in another context .
Tomorrow everyone can decide which side they are on .
If we want a statute we must continue to explore the various possibilities in the way begun by the President , and in this manner we will at last remove this issue from the agenda .
Mr President , that old favourite , the Members ' Statute , has reared its ugly head once again in the Chamber , before we can really even tell what will be the outcome of the discussion with the Council .
In our view , the reason why the negotiations are stalling is essentially because , in addition to the technical details , the European Parliament is seeking to obtain a purely European statute for its Members with remuneration paid out of the Community budget , whereas this objective runs counter to the spirit and the letter of the Treaties .
Articles 189 and 190 clearly stipulate that the Members of this House are representatives of the people who elected them .
That is why , a long time ago , we put forward a proposal which , we continue to believe , could represent a good compromise .
It consists of three parts .
First of all , MEPs should continue to receive their main salary , exactly as they do now , from the State that elected them and this will be subject to national tax regimes .
It would be excessive - and I stress these words - in our view , for a country 's representative to be paid by anyone other than his own country and for him not to have his main salary taxed in the same way as his fellow citizens .
Secondly , relocation and other costs should be fully refunded , but within a reasonable limit obviously .
Lastly , if necessary , we could , additionally , identify a set allowance paid by the European Parliament for each day of attendance .
This would constitute an income - but this time , it would be a clear and transparent income - which could be subject to Community tax .
We have thought for a long time that this proposal offers a good compromise between several objectives .
It is rational , comprehensible and transparent and lastly , we believe that it enables us to preserve an essential principle which is to establish a statutory and financial connection between all Members and the people who elected them .
Mr President , when I and my British Conservative colleagues fought the last European elections in 1999 , one of our core policies was that the unsatisfactory character of the terms and conditions which we , as MEPs , enjoy should be revised and updated .
During the last three years or so , we have talked a lot but realistically we have achieved much less .
The key to achieving a satisfactory outcome to this problem must be the attainment of a political agreement between Parliament and the Council on a package of terms and conditions for Members of the European Parliament which are appropriate to the twenty-first century .
These must then be converted into proper legal form in the manner envisaged by the Treaties .
We must not allow ourselves to be side-tracked by debates and possible disagreement over the details of the mechanics of how this process of technical transposition is to be put into effect , because if we do that it gets in the way of achieving the necessary political agreement .
Of course , that political agreement is the essential pre-condition of the next stage , the completion of the legal and constitutional formalities , and as said by almost every speaker , and there is agreement about this , that has got to be done by the next European elections .
Once all the rhetoric is cut out , it is just as simple as that .
Mr President , I rather suspect that voters outside this House would have some difficulty understanding what is going on here this afternoon and indeed some of us may .
I wonder what the public would make of it .
Surely , the top and bottom of all this is that the majority of this House wants a sensible , standard remuneration package , salary , pension , reimbursement of expenses where practical on the basis of receipts and vouchers - the same sort of system that most of our voters are subject to in their workplaces .
Of course , some will say we do not do an ordinary job of work .
We are special .
Yes , indeed we are special , we are public servants .
I have sat in this House now for three years through innumerable discussions on this issue and we seem to move no further forward .
What do we have on the table today ?
We have an exercise in subterfuge bogged down in a quagmire of procedure , I would hasten to suggest .
On the one hand , we are talking about a report - a report that was not a report , merely an advice - voted by one committee .
On the other hand , we are talking about some feedback from yourself , Mr President , for which we are very grateful .
But some people here do not even want to mention that .
Confused ?
I certainly am .
Members have nothing of substance or detail before of them , nothing that they have the right to amend or that they all have the possibility to properly vote on .
So , what are we discussing here ?
Some of us had hoped that we were at the very least talking about a process that would finally lead to a proper report setting out the detail of a proposed statute that would be clear , transparent and that every Member would have the right to amend and vote on and stand accountable to his or her voters and finally , once and for all , to draw a line under the criticism that we are so easily subject to .
Instead , we are bogged down in this interminable roundabout of discussion on procedure .
But , help is at hand !
Let us be clear , there is a very practical paragraph in the joint motion from three parties that would allow a practical process to take off .
The very paragraph , of course , that is opposed by majorities within the big groups in this House .
That paragraph is tabled individually as an amendment .
So , be on notice : if you block that amendment , you block progress , you block this House from getting an open procedure that will lead to a statute and you stop this Parliament becoming worthy of the name of parliament and you will leave our citizens even more bemused and sceptical .
I would ask you , Mr President , also to check the procedure under which this question has been brought because I really wonder if it is acceptable procedure within our rules .
I would not wish people to become any more confused than we already are .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , since I am relatively new to this House , though not new to politics , I would like to begin by saying something about myself . I once presented a youth petition for a referendum for service and justice and against privilege .
I have helped to get rules on incompatibility tightened up , worked on new rules for the separation of politics and business , on measures and decrees for greater objectivity in the filling of public sector posts and the setting up of a group of experts for the shaping of a salary structure covering all public functions in my homeland , from the Federal President to the mayors of larger towns .
The question of service and justice , mandate , profession and privilege runs through my entire political career and is always a question of the credibility of politics with the citizens .
For this very reason I have argued for this question to be put to the Council , because since I have been in this House I have always had the feeling that there is no shortage of rumours , of mutual recriminations in Parliament and Council and between the groups , but no statute .
The cause of our problem actually lies in the fact that , although we have all been elected to this House , we are not treated equally .
Part of our problem is that we have 15 national electoral laws and no European electoral law , that we do not have one incompatibility rule but several different ones .
That is one problem .
We have already discussed this topic in 1998 , 1999 and in April 2001 .
The President has told us that we have now almost reached our destination and we therefore wanted to know from the Council what matters are still outstanding and how we will reach our destination .
Today again we get no answer from the Council - because that was no answer .
I therefore ask myself how close we are to the destination if we cannot clearly say what the outstanding points are .
At the same time , I witnessed a press conference this morning at which accusations were raised against everyone who mentions the Rothley report , which is a report from a committee and contains an opinion for the President .
I consider such behaviour intolerable and the claims that were made to be untrue , and I ask myself : who is damaging the dignity of this House and the respect in which it is held ?
Is it those who make reference to a decision by a parliamentary committee or an opinion addressed to the presidency , or those who ignore that decision and want to start a parallel action ?
No national mandate can be compared with the mandate in the European Parliament .
The time involved is greater , the distance is greater and we have less time at home than any of our counterparts .
We have a decision from the Committee for Legal Affairs and the Internal Market which forms the basis for the President 's talks .
We have a group of experts that has come to a conclusion so that no one can say we are arranging things to our own liking .
We have the Rothley report and we have the legal situation where we adopt our statute and the Council approves it so it can enter into force .
With this question we wanted greater transparency instead of rumours , greater clarity instead of recriminations .
We wanted the Council 's answer , which sadly was no answer , to bring us a step closer to the decision we need .
Nor do we want to be messed about by political opportunists or the Council 's indecision .
I say to you , if we do not take ourselves seriously , no one else will .
We must therefore resist opportunism and single-mindedly go the way we in this Parliament have decided on the basis of the law .
We are of course always ready to split the report into a constitutional part and the remainder if they give us detailed reasons for doing so , but sadly this question went unanswered today as well .
Mr President , I have to describe Mr Karas 's speech as meaningless .
The question to the Council went : Is the Council , at the level of Heads of State or Government , prepared to enter into a dialogue with the European Parliament about the circumstances for the adoption of the Statute of Members ?
The answer is yes .
I said that quite clearly .
Moreover , I repeated what the Council has said all the time , namely that the ball is now in Parliament 's court .
Now Parliament has agreed on something there are prospects of the Council 's adopting and approving , I assume that the ball will be passed on to the Council .
I shall not go into details concerning the statement by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to Parliament 's Conference of Presidents .
That statement has not of course been sent to the Council , and it has not been adopted by a majority in Parliament .
The Council will not submit a detailed proposal .
That is an answer for Mr Lehne .
The ball is in Parliament 's court .
I should like to remind you of the events of 1999 , when the then German Presidency made a great effort to arrive at a compromise .
That is something I believe the present rapporteur can remember , so we do not need to repeat it .
I agree with those who have said that it is absolutely crucial for a Statute now to be adopted with clear and transparent rules that can increase the dignity accorded to the individual MEP , together with public respect for Parliament .
There must be clarity regarding the reimbursement of expenses ; there must be an appropriate salary level ; and travel expenses must be calculated on the basis of documentation .
That is what the Council has emphasised all the time .
We must have this Statute in place in good time for the next elections to the European Parliament .
In the light of impending enlargement , there will be a greater focus upon these elections than ever before and , if this problem is not solved , it will give rise to very damaging debates , especially in the new Member States .
It is bad if the electorate treat this Parliament with indifference .
There are unfortunately too many people who do just that .
This can be seen from the fact that they do not turn up and vote .
It will be even worse if , the first time they go to the polls , voters in the new Member States at the same time read about debates on the Members ' Statute on the front pages of their newspapers .
In that way , we are in danger of seeing a great many voters treating Parliament not merely with indifference but also with contempt , and that would be the worst thing of all that could happen .
Finally , I would pull no punches in now calling for the President of Parliament to be supported in the initiative he has taken and for a package solution now to be arrived at that has prospects of being approved by the Council .
The Council has of course given clear signals .
It must be possible for these things to be done , Mr President .
It lies in your hands and in those of your MEPs .
That concludes the joint debate .
I have received five motions for resolutions to wind up the debate
Mr President , there is something I need to get off my chest .
On Sunday , I expressed my solidarity with the Galician people by attending the demonstration in Santiago de Compostela .
' Nunca mais ' was their slogan , and I should like to repeat it here .
Galicia lives by the sea , and the sea was destroyed by merchant criminals who sail along the coast in old tankers full of oil .
They are nothing more than environmental criminals who allow leaking tankers to be towed into the high seas .
Now is the time to put our money where our mouth is and use the European Solidarity Fund to help the Galicians , and also to help the thousands of volunteers who are facing an impossible task .
I would also urge everyone to see this apocalyptic scene for themselves , as the reality is much worse than the television footage .
Please let this be Europe 's last oil disaster .
The Council must now take decisive action .
' Nunca mais ' - never again .
Mr President , the Prestige disaster in Galicia has the consequences of a natural disaster , but in truth it is a political disaster .
It is political because neither the Member States , nor the European Union itself , nor this Parliament were able to take appropriate measures at the time to prevent ships such as the Prestige - and there are hundreds of them - from moving around Community waters .
It is political because this Parliament , despite the fact that there have been seven disasters similar to that of the Prestige over the last twenty years off the Galician coast , did not have the courage to lay down legislation similar to the United States ' Oil Pollution Act , so that we could prevent this type of vessel , which are time bombs operated by criminal capitalist mafias , from moving through these waters .
At the moment therefore , Mr President , since there is no European emergency plan to deal with these problems , hundreds and hundreds of Galician vessels are trying - together with the help of many States , whom we thank - to prevent the fuel oil from entering the Galician Rias .
In the Arosa Ria , 500 small vessels are trying to resolve , through small-scale methods , a problem which is the responsibility of the Spanish State and the European Union .
I will end , Mr President , by saying the following : I believe that the Presidency of this Parliament should go to Galicia and demonstrate human compassion and a desire to resolve the problem which that country , like many others , is suffering from ; but especially Galicia , which is suffering this problem more than anywhere else in the world , should be shown the compassion and assistance it deserves .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , I would just like to express my profound sympathy with what Mr Nogueira Román has said .
We , in Scotland , recently in the case the Braer disaster suffered a similar misfortune .
But that is not what I wanted to speak about tonight .
I would like to mention the currently hot issue about access to the Court of Justice , especially rights of semi-privileged access in the case of regions with legislative powers .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs discussed that last week and it will come before us in a fortnight 's time as a hotly controversial point .
Tonight 's debate on fisheries brings up an interesting example which shows what the reality of the issue is .
There are big risks for Scottish fisheries of the kind which Mr Nogueira in a different sense has alluded to .
It could be that we want to raise an issue about the legality of current proposals under the primary law relating to the accession of Spain and Portugal .
That really ought to be something which can be taken up by the legislature and executive which deal with this problem as a matter of European law , then the Scottish Parliament and Executive .
Only if we get appropriate rights of access to the courts will that sort of question be answered in the proper place .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my solidarity , as a Portuguese citizen , with our neighbours in Galicia who have suffered this tragedy .
Many Portuguese citizens have been cooperating in this humanitarian effort and we are also extremely concerned about the fate of the oil slick from the Prestige , which could also reach the northern coasts of Portugal .
This is an enormous disaster and it is to be welcomed that Europe has , for once , learnt its lesson .
It seems that the Erika was not enough but the Prestige must be enough for this type of thing never to happen again !
I therefore wish to express my agreement with the proposal by Mr Nogueira Román , suggesting that Parliament 's President should visit Galicia and , if the Portuguese coasts are affected , he should visit that area too .
Above all , he should express the solidarity of this Parliament and add force , on our behalf , to the requests to strengthen European measures in this field , which will probably be discussed at the Copenhagen Summit next week .
It is extremely important that Parliament sends this forceful signal and I therefore fully support the words of Mr Nogueira Román .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think we needed the Prestige disaster or the scientific reports that we recently received from ISIS about cod and the catastrophic state of this very important species of fish to see how urgent a reform of fisheries policy is .
I think everyone who has eyes to see and ears to hear must recognise that our existing fisheries policy enables us neither to guarantee our fishermen and all those families that depend on fishing a future nor to create stable conditions that will allow our fishery resources to remain available for future generations .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is no need to over-dramatise ; the situation itself is dramatic enough .
I believe that makes today 's debate crucial for the future of the fishing industry .
We are debating several questions and several reports at once .
I would like to begin by thanking all the rapporteurs , and also the person who tabled the question , for the reports because they give us an overall view .
I would like to divide my contribution into two parts .
First of all , I would like to speak mainly about the general aspects and then I would like to speak again at the end about the various tabled amendments and the Commission 's stance on those amendments .
I would , however , like to say a word about the Prestige disaster , ladies and gentlemen .
It is a complete misnomer that this ship should be called Prestige .
The consequences for fishermen , for mussel and oyster farmers , are indeed colossal and dramatic .
We in the Commission are trying , with the means that are available to us , to help at least to avoid the worst and to get help to the stricken families as quickly as possible .
The Commission has therefore set up a task force .
It has already been to Galicia and has spoken with the people affected on the ground and with the authorities there .
We are currently working on plans for aid programmes and we are ready to use all the statutory means available to us to see that the existing instruments are applied as flexibly as possible so that we can help those affected .
I contacted the Spanish authorities myself at the very start of this disaster and I am keeping in touch with those in positions of responsibility there , and since it now appears that France , too , will be more severely affected than was previously anticipated , the same principles will of course also be applied and the same assistance made available for France .
I believe the ISIS reports were the most recent evidence of the dire straits our fishing industry is in .
As you know , in October ISIS published the news that four of the Community 's cod stocks are close to collapse .
One reason for this alarming state of affairs is that stocks were already low - and that does not only mean young fish ; there are no longer enough adults either - another is the poor spawning last season , and another is that fish mortality is still too high .
The ISIS scientists have recommended - quite clearly and unambiguously - that in the absence of a recovery plan direct cod fishing should be discontinued for the next year in the North Sea , the Irish Sea , the waters west of Scotland , the Skagerrak and Kattegat .
Fishing for haddock and whiting should also be suspended because too many cod are caught with them .
Reducing cod catches in the last few years has not been enough and unfortunately we now find that quota reductions have resulted in false returns being made and illegal fishing .
The scientists have also pointed this out .
It is not just an assumption by the Commission as many have claimed .
The scientists have repeatedly warned that we should not only set quotas , but that we must also reduce the fishing effort so that we are able both to make better controls and to ensure that unwanted catches are not too high and that the total allowable catches are appropriate .
I can only quote them .
The scientists say - they said so back in 1990 - we recommend that the fishing effort be limited because TACs alone cannot control fish mortality .
Twelve years later , ladies and gentlemen , we have still not put that recommendation into practice .
Subsequently we presented the ISIS findings to our Scientific and Technical Committee on Fisheries , and it again recommended that we should adopt a recovery plan for cod as soon as possible , a plan which , apart from cutting TACs and quotas more than originally planned , must also reduce the fishing effort accordingly .
In its opinion , that is the only way to do the one and avoid a moratorium .
As you know , the Commission proposed a year ago that the fishing effort be limited as part of a recovery plan for cod and hake .
To this day the Council has taken no decision on it , and the situation has got worse in the meantime .
Parliament , however , gave its opinion on this recovery plan on 13 June this year .
In view of this situation , the Commission has been weighing the various options that are available .
We have decided against a moratorium , going instead for an improved recovery plan , precisely because we must take both the scientific findings and the difficult situation of our fishermen seriously .
Now , how is this different from last year 's plan ?
Firstly , in terms of catches the big reduction in the fishing effort means a total allowable catch in the North Sea for the Community and Norway of 16 800 tonnes of cod , 31 600 tonnes of haddock , 10 400 tonnes of whiting , 60 000 tonnes of plaice and 16 000 tonnes of sole .
For the waters west of Scotland it means around 1 000 tonnes of cod and 7 200 tonnes of haddock , for the Irish Sea 1 200 tonnes of cod , 7 500 tonnes of haddock and 400 tonnes of whiting .
Those are only some of the catches of course .
Secondly , we propose a simplified system for the fishing effort , where we want to operate the effort not for each individual ship but for a group of ships .
Thirdly , we have tightened up our proposal concerning controls .
Member States will have to notify the Commission of the fishing effort on a monthly basis and ships must notify the controlling authorities when they change fishing zones .
I am also willing to fund further research work to help us find even better ways to rescue this fishery .
That cannot , however , mean , ladies and gentlemen , postponing the necessary measures again .
Our aim is to take a decision on this improved recovery plan together with the fisheries reform in December .
What does this all mean for our fishermen ?
I am aware that it means great hardship at first , unfortunately , I have to say , great hardship for those concerned .
I am very much aware that livelihoods are at stake here .
That is why we must not abandon the fishermen in this difficult situation .
We have therefore also submitted a corresponding action plan in order to cushion some of the possible negative socio-economic consequences .
I would like to pick out just three of those measures .
Firstly , Member States are urged to adjust their structural programmes and provide additional resources for the fishing industry and areas dependent on fishing .
Secondly , Member States can introduce targeted measures for small-scale , employment-intensive coastal fishing .
They can , for example , reserve certain fishing grounds for small vessels or they can gear their programmes to the coastal fleet in order to preserve jobs in the coastal regions in particular .
Thirdly , it is essential that the economies of the coastal regions be diversified .
Ladies and gentlemen , I turn now to the other topics on the agenda today , firstly and in particular Mr Jové 's report .
Our proposal in this connection is a new basic regulation for the common fisheries policy as the cornerstone of the reform .
The four crucial elements of this basic regulation are as follows :
Firstly , we want in future to manage stocks on a multi-annual basis .
Applying an annual principle to fish is not consistent with fish biology ; instead , we must make the biological cycles of our fish stocks the essence of our policy .
To make management consistent , for those stocks where it is sensible to do so we want to manage the fishing effort as well as TACs and quotas .
Note that I say where it is sensible to do so .
That means not everywhere , and it depends primarily on the state of the stocks .
Secondly , we propose a new fleet policy .
The ultimate objectives of the so-called MAP4 are to be the starting point for the upper limit .
This upper limit can only change in one direction , namely a reduction in fleet size .
Whenever a fisherman has his ship scrapped using public funds , the upper limit is reduced by the tonnage in question .
This means we also need a system to define the ratio by which new vessels can be exchanged for old ones , provided that is done with private funds .
Thirdly , we propose closer surveillance of fisheries .
Member States will have to coordinate their control activities and Member States ' inspectors will be able to make controls across borders .
Satellite surveillance will gradually be extended to smaller vessels , and finally there will also be greater powers for the Commission concerning controls in the Member States .
Only when everyone involved can count on his neighbour being subject to precisely the same controls as he is and to the same sanctions as he is if he breaks the rules , only then will there be justice and only then will people have confidence in the system .
Fourthly , we want the fishing industry to be more closely involved in decision-making in the regional advisory councils .
Now to the Structural Funds .
First , there is something I would like to make clear .
It is not the case , as is repeatedly claimed , that the Commission is under a legal misapprehension because the Member States are legally entitled to continue using money from their structural funds for fleet renewal .
The fact is that if the Council fails to find a compromise this December and does not reach a decision on reform , we will not be able to use any more money for fleet policy after 1 January 2003 .
That is the legal consequence of the Council 's decision of December last year .
This policy involves three specific measures .
Firstly , we propose retaining those public aids that serve to improve safety , working conditions and hygiene on board .
Secondly , we want no more aids for modernisation or the building of new ships .
In future we want these resources to benefit those who really need them ; that means the fishermen , whom we must help financially so that they can diversify their activity and have a chance - if that is what they want - of getting out of fishing .
In particular , this is aimed at the many fishermen who are in fact not far off retirement but are unable to retire because they still have loans outstanding with the bank , because their ships have not yet been paid for .
Are we taking a social attitude if we continue to ignore that or pretend it is not a problem ?
I do not think so .
Thirdly , we propose that the aids paid up until now for the export of ships and for joint ventures should in future be used to reduce overcapacity .
I am prepared to proceed differently for small vessels in order to help the many owners of small vessels in a different way because they are a source of much less pressure on fisheries .
This brings me to the final proposal , namely the emergency measures for scrapping .
We propose setting up a scrapping fund .
That is an emergency measure .
It is designed not as a long-term scheme but an emergency measure and is intended to help us restore a better balance between the sizes of our fleets and the available resources .
The fund will add the resources for scrapping that are yet to be reprogrammed to the resources already provided in the structural fund for fisheries .
These resources and the new fund will guarantee financial support for laying up fishing vessels .
There are two main elements to this .
Firstly , a 20 % higher premium , but with a time limit , for ships whose days at sea are cut by at least 25 % and , secondly , an additional EUR 32 million available for scrapping in the coming year .
We are also willing to talk if further resources are needed to help the fishermen who want it .
Then we shall also have to find a way to do it .
Mr President , I hope not to take up my five minutes , but I am not very good at controlling myself in this regard .
In any event , I would like to apologise to the members of the Committee on Fisheries because my speech is going to consist not so much of comments on the final result of the report - and I would like to stress that I have not presented any amendment to the final result of the vote in the Committee on Fisheries - but rather on the Commission 's proposal .
We are dealing with a proposal which presents various problems - several in my opinion - in terms of the lack of compatibility with the Treaties and elements of legislation .
It is true that fish populations are experiencing difficulties and that it is necessary to adopt urgent measures .
It is true that fishing should be sustainable and to this end it is necessary to preserve fish populations , obviously , but in the two-word term ' sustainable development ' , the two words are not dissociable and there must therefore be a balance : there must be fishermen and there must be regeneration of fish stocks .
But it does not make any sense to talk about sustainable development , if we dissociate the two words .
I have the impression in this regard that the Commission is proposing an approach which prioritises , or basically only takes into account , the issue of the rapid regeneration of stocks and ignores the other facet of sustainable development .
Its approach therefore , in my view , implies a greater social impact on populations dependent on fishing , which may lead to far-reaching structural changes .
Effectively , only the larger scale sections of the fleet would survive and the small-scale fleet , which generates most employment , would be heading for extinction .
Therefore , the management and the recovery of stocks should take account of the social and economic impact of recovery plans .
To this end it would be necessary , firstly , to improve the quality of scientific information and , furthermore , to introduce economic and social elements into the drawing up of recovery plans .
Only in this way , by adapting the speed of recovery of fish stocks , can we modulate and minimise the impact on the populations dependent on fishing .
And I believe that the Commission has not been careful and my interpretation is that there has been an implicit weakening in its proposal by not wanting to strengthen the Technical and Scientific Committee on Fisheries which I personally believe should be strengthened .
And naturally the focus of the multi-annual plans should be multi-specific , taking account of the relationship between species within populations , and plans involving just one species should be the exception in very serious circumstances .
In some respects the Commission 's proposal implies a de-communitisation of the fisheries policy , or at least that is how it appears to me .
For example , it is proposed to empower the Member States to adopt emergency measures in fields of Community competence or in fields where there is already a Community mechanism in place .
The Commission has presented two difficult , complex and very restrictive proposals on , for example , cod fishing .
I will take this opportunity to make the following very personal comment , which is perhaps my observation on what I have heard during this debate .
It is clear that there is a reduction in stocks going on .
Furthermore , and this is very serious , the destruction of jobs has been much greater than that of resources , and this has happened in all the States of the European Union despite the exceptions , the protection measures and discriminations , some relating to access .
I , who have not been excessively belligerent on this issue , am making this comment because now it is surely going to be necessary - let us pray that we can prevent the worst repercussions - to take tough measures which are always going to have most impact on the small-scale fleet .
This perfectly illustrates the need to change the approach of the common fisheries policy , because I believe that it is not the States but the fishermen who fish and it is necessary to adopt measures to safeguard the activity of the most sensitive sections of the fleet , of whatever nationality .
And , although I imagine that this is an issue for the future , I believe that in terms of the allocation of catch quotas by type of fish and sections of the fleet , if we want to preserve the fishing regions and the sections of the fleet which create a lot of employment , we are surely missing a unique opportunity , perhaps allowing ourselves to be carried away by too many individual interests , which the Commission to a certain extent has encouraged .
I will not comment on other Commission aspects .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for the debate , the President , Mr Stevenson , for handling this whole difficult issue , and express my group 's support for Mr Varela 's report .


Mr President , could I first of all add my thanks to the rapporteurs , Mr Jové Peres and Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , for excellent reports , and could I also say to both of them , because they come from Galicia , that they have our deepest sympathy from the Committee on Fisheries on the unfolding tragedy in that area from the wreck of the Prestige .
If the Committee on Fisheries can give any help at all , we will do whatever is necessary and find whatever help we can muster to aid the people of Galicia .
Our heart is with them at this time .
I want to speak about the cod crisis .
As the House knows , in order to tackle dwindling cod stocks in the North Sea , the Irish Sea , to the west of Scotland and the Skagerrak , the Commission are calling for massive cuts of up to 80 % on the cod and haddock fisheries and significant reductions in other parts of the white fish sector .
Cuts of this magnitude would wipe out the white fish sector in the United Kingdom and Ireland and destroy many thousands of jobs in those countries , as well as in France , Scandinavia and the Netherlands .
I have seen the revised cod and hake recovery plan from the Commission .
I have to say to the House that this is a radical change from the original cod and hake recovery plan that we considered and I believe that , under Article 37 of the Treaty , we have a right to be consulted in this House on these revised proposals .
I hope that this House will support me in saying that we demand that right and that we intend to have our say and our full consultation will be called for on these revised proposals .
In the interests of enhancing this debate , I want to ask the Commission why they are prepared to accept the flawed and out-of-date scientific data on which they have based their call for these draconian cuts , because the ICES scientific data was collected in the year 2001 , before stringent conservation measures were put in place , the benefits of which have not yet been measured .
For example : the fishermen in my constituency in Scotland extended mesh sizes to 120 millimetres , they suffered the 12 week closure of 40 000 square miles of cod spawning grounds in the North Sea last spring , 170 vessels were scrapped under the latest decommissioning rounds , leaving many thousands of tonnes of fish swimming in the sea that would otherwise have been caught .
And of course , parts of the Irish Sea have been closed for cod fisheries for the last three years , enabling cod stocks to recover .
The impact of these measures has not yet been analysed by the scientists , nor has the possibility that rising temperatures , pollution or the North Atlantic drift may have contributed to the migration of cod further northwards towards Iceland and the Faroes where many thousands of tonnes of cod are regularly being caught .
Indeed the same scientists who are calling for a minimum closure of six years for our white fish industry cannot guarantee that the cod will ever return to the North Sea even if we implement these measures .
As we know in the Committee on Fisheries , 10 years ago the Canadian government closed the Newfoundland Banks and there is no sign yet of the cod returning there .
In their place , however , Canadian fishermen are finding huge stocks of snow crab and shrimps , which are netting them around four times the dollar income that the cod used to earn .
I think a similar pattern is now emerging in the North Sea , where we are seeing large burgeoning populations of prawns , now one of our richest fisheries .
Scientists have recently revealed that , just as the cod fish will eat prawns , prawns eat cod larvae .
It may well be that , whatever draconian measures we take , we will fail to re-establish the cod .
By the end of six years of intended closure , at the very minimum , such measures would be academic in any case because according to the most recent socio-economic impact study , up to 44 000 fishermen and ancillary workers would have lost their jobs .
That is the kind of catastrophe they face this Christmas after faithfully adhering to the rules and regulations of the Common Fisheries Policy for the past twenty years .
I support the need for a sustainable fishery and the need to get fleet capacity into balance with available fish stocks , but I also recognise that a viable fishing industry needs fishermen to catch the fish .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Jové Peres on his work , on his report and on the common sense that inspired it .
Today , Commissioner , in reality , the painful situation that my country , Galicia , is currently experiencing as a result of the Prestige tragedy takes precedence over any other consideration .
Contemplating the state of the Galician coast following the disaster , and the Galician people , in their sorrow , anger , bravery and concern , who , despite everything , are looking to the future , seems to me to be the best proof that Galicia , the north-eastern region of the Iberian Peninsula , is heavily dependent on fishing , and not only because 20 % of its gross domestic product comes from fisheries and related activities .
I would also like to reiterate all the requests made by the rapporteur , Mr Varela .
What I have just said relates to Mr Jové Peres ' report because the Galicians , in the face of the Prestige disaster , are working courageously to mitigate the terrible social , fishing , economic and environmental consequences .
I believe the three aspects are inextricably linked as parts of a whole .
The proposal on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy must be based on and committed to sustainable development and environmental protection .
Both ideas are starting points , hinges , upon which the construction of CFP reform rests .
Sustainability would clearly be guaranteed if there were no development , but depending on the starting points - which are sometimes deductive and other times not well founded , but which , in all cases , are questioned or questionable - the solutions can vary , and in this , yet again , the work of the rapporteur , Mr Jové Peres , deserves to be praised for not over-emphasising across-the-board aspects , although these were important .
In this matter , the recovery we all want and are aiming for cannot rest on a single idea - the reduction , if not the disappearance of the fishing sector - because fishing is carried out by real people , human beings , family men , and for this reason alone we need to seek and find a balance between the consequences of limitation and means of conservation .
One example would be the mechanism of temporary cessation of activity , restriction of fishing days , etc .
Commissioner , a Galician newspaper this morning contained the following : ' the European Fisheries Commissioner says that cutting off aid would mitigate job losses .
The removal of state aid for the modernisation of boats will be positive , as it will contribute to maintaining jobs on-board boats ' .
In my opinion , given that the boat is not just the centre of work , but also the professional fisherman 's home , the brave workers fully deserve an improvement in their working and living conditions .
Their dignity requires it and society , in particular the fisheries sector , has requested and expects this .
Mr President , Commissioner , I was going to talk about the reports presented to Parliament and congratulate the rapporteurs , since they have all done an excellent job , but you chose to refer to the disaster that is destroying Galicia .
For the first time , you have recognised that your staff can do something for my region .
I hope that your task force has informed you that Galicia , has not only oysters , but also mussels and turbot , which make Europe the main world producer of these two species , thanks to modern , vigorous aquaculture companies , which have lost everything in the past twenty days .
I hope they have told you that our coastline is incredibly rich in biodiversity and that this biodiversity is not Galician , Commissioner , but European .
We are now rich in oil and the lack of action by our leaders has struck a glancing blow to what we love most , our way of living .
The twenty thousand people who live from fishing in Galicia do not understand you very well .
I have tried extremely hard to explain your proposals , trying to find common ground between you and my fellow countrymen .
Since we have been told about this task force , who have not informed the Galician fishermen of any plans to visit , I would like them to present their conclusions to Parliament , here and now .
We have listened to the Commissioner for Transport , who , in the face of the total lack of activity by the Spanish and Galician Governments , has drawn up practical proposals in order to table them at the Council , so that we might address this disaster and prevent a reoccurrence .
We have also heard measures proposed by Commissioner Barnier , who has shown himself to be sensitive and receptive and has agreed to appear shortly before the Committee on Regional Policy in order to explain to us how the Solidarity Fund can be mobilised .
Now it is your turn , Mr Fischler .
Is it not time , Mr Fischler , for European fishermen in Galicia to hear more than just bad news from their Commissioner ?
So far , Galician fishermen associate your name - and this must be said - with the non-agreement with Morocco , fleet scrapping and a whole series of measures that might turn out to be good or they might not .
The Socialist Group has made a huge effort and has even held a hearing to discuss CFP reform , has published a leaflet and listened to the sector but , to say the very least , the measures are not explained well enough .
All this , Commissioner , and this is my criticism of you , translates into a loss of European credibility , because your fellow Austrian citizens , as well as the Germans , will still remember the European response to the disaster you suffered due to floods , and I include myself in this European response , Commissioner .
The European citizens of Galicia would like to receive exactly the same treatment .
I cannot believe that , after a month of disaster , all you can say to us is that you have sent a task force .
I believe it is now up to you , Mr Fischler , to tell your fishermen - because they are your fishermen , not mine ; they are mine , but also yours , you are responsible for them - what they can expect from their Commissioner .
I am not going to suggest visits , although I do not think it would do any harm if you were to go to Galicia .
Tour operators are starting to think , as a way out , of offering disaster tourism , as we in Galicia are very fond of black humour .
However , Mr Fischler , do you not believe it is now time to explain , in this House , in Parliament , here and now , what the European fishermen , the Galicians , can expect from their Commissioner at this time of disaster ?
In Galicia we all know that we have two ears , one on either side of our heads , but what we did not know is that as well as two ears , we were going to have sixty thousand tonnes of oil on our beaches , and that today , in Parliament , we were going to be talking about what to restrict or deciding to prevent fishermen from continuing to deplete the sea 's natural resources .
All this , Commissioner , is Galician black humour , but it is also tragi-comedy .
That is all I have to say .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank both rapporteurs for the great job of work they have done .
The reforms of our fisheries policy that we are debating this evening are very important .
In particular , Mr Varela 's reports on public aid for the renewal and modernisation of the fishing fleet are very important .
On behalf of my group , I would at the same time express understanding for Mr Varela 's statement concerning oil pollution along the Galician coast .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports the Commission 's proposals for reform , containing those elements necessary to our being able to adapt the Community 's fishing fleet to the ocean 's resources .
We might well have been able to endorse maintaining public aid for the modernisation of fishing vessels if this would exclusively have improved safety and working conditions on board .
We could also discuss aid for renewal if we were to make the aid conditional upon more capacity 's being withdrawn than added .
Under no circumstances , however , can we accept a continuation of the present situation , in which the European fishing fleet is becoming larger and larger at the taxpayer 's expense .
One of the biggest problems for the European fishing industry is , specifically , that the fleet is too big .
There are simply too many vessels for too few fish , and there are unreasonably large discrepancies between the ways in which the Member States have so far administered fisheries policy .
To continue with this catastrophic policy , which will only exacerbate the problems and postpone the reform process which must undoubtedly take place , would be to pull the wool over the eyes of the fishermen .
With regard to the proposed ban on cod fishing , we in the ELDR Group would like to support the conservation arrangements .
We also emphasised , however , that , when such drastic measures for reducing the quotas are being proposed , we really need to be sure of the facts , for the measures would have very far-reaching consequences for the fisheries sector not only at sea but also on land .
Research must therefore be accorded high priority , and sufficient resources must be made available .
Everyone agrees that current fisheries policy has proved to be a failure .
That is why it is absolutely crucial for us to support the Commission 's proposals for reform and thus to reject the tabled amendments aimed at perpetuating current fisheries policy .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteurs on their work because the reports that we are now discussing are broadly to be welcomed , make considerable improvements to the most negative aspects of the Commission 's proposals and incorporate various amendments that I tabled in the course of the preparatory work in the Committee on Fisheries , although in some cases I disagree with the solution that has been found and I feel that the report could have gone further .
I would highlight the aspects of this revision that are most worth saving : a permanent derogation governing access to resources within the 12-nautical mile zones of Member States ' territorial waters is crucial to traditional fishing and to the socio-economic fabric of regions that are dependent on fishing , defending small-scale coastal fishing , protecting fish stocks and the most sensitive part of the coastal rim .
I would remind you that one proposal which we tabled previously has already been adopted here , calling for this derogation to be extended to 24 nautical miles .
At least the permanent nature of 12 miles should not now be called into question !
The adoption of the proposal that we tabled to extend this derogation to 50 miles in the outermost regions under the terms of their special status is also extremely positive . This special status , when confirmed by the Council , will provide clear advantages for the protection of the fisheries sector in the autonomous regions of Madeira , the Azores and in all the outermost regions , thereby contributing to their development .
We must reject the reprogramming of the Structural Funds ( FIFG ) for the fisheries sector , preventing the appropriations for the ' modernisation ' objective being transferred to the destruction of vessels , which is , as a matter of fact , in line with the Committee on Fisheries ' opinion on the 2003 budget .
As we have pointed out , there are other alternative ways of reducing the fishing effort , which have already been referred to here , such as the system based on regulating days at sea , the adoption of biological recovery periods and technical measures geared to more selective fishing .
It must be said , Commissioner , that in certain regions , what causes the greatest destruction of fish stocks is not fishing , but pollution .
And , now , unfortunately , we have the case of the Prestige , showing that this is sadly true : what causes the greatest destruction are these accidents ; the old and unsafe oil tankers that still sail around our coasts .
The scrapping of vessels must be seen as a last resort , bearing in mind that any new policy to reduce fleet capacity must be based on the degree of true compliance with previously set objectives and must not further penalise those who have already fulfilled these objectives .
Even prohibition , in some cases , for vessels less than 12 metres long , although positive , is extremely limited .
We need to go further .
We must nevertheless bear in mind that any reduction of fishing effort must go hand in hand with an increase in the financial resources for the FIFG and the Union 's internal policies , in order to compensate for the socio-economic effects of such a reduction .
I also regret the fact that the specific programme for small-scale coastal fishing has not been adopted .
The participation of fishermen and their representative organisations in the decision-making process is also crucial to the common fisheries policy and to stock management , specifically through co-management , so as to guarantee genuine decentralisation .
We also feel that it is the Member States ' responsibility to guarantee the effective monitoring , inspection and implementation of the rules laid down in the common fisheries policy . We therefore disagree with the proposals intended to undermine this principle .
Mr President , in the CFP reform process , I have consistently favoured retaining the founding principle of relative stability - installing the coastal zones as a permanent feature of the CFP at least up to 12 miles and strengthening the role of the proposed regional advisory councils so that real involvement of stakeholders can be achieved .
I have also supported in principle proposals to move to a multi-annual , multi-species and ecosystem approach to fisheries management and my views are broadly in line with the Commission 's on structural issues .
But I believe that all of the positive potential of CFP reform could be in vain if the Commission does not show itself to be willing to really listen to those who are actually affected by fisheries policy .
Our fisheries policy must be understood and not just perceived as something being arbitrarily handed down by a European Union which claims to know better but cannot really prove it .
Certainly the CFP to date has not exactly been a resounding success , as we have all acknowledged .
That means that the scientific advice has to be up-to-date , it has to be verifiable , it has to be independent and it has to be able to be proved to be so .
The cod crisis that has been looming over the North Sea for almost two years has seen fishermen already being subject to real-time closures , to swingeing cuts in fleet size and a variety of technical measures including increased mesh sizes .
Their efforts have borne at least some fruit in that the improvement of stocks of cod is only approximately 3 % short of the target set by recovery plans .
Now , these same fishermen are faced with drastic cuts and a total loss of any confidence in the Commission and its scientific advice , with measures being proposed which could totally devastate already fragile fishing communities .
I think the Commission must take into account the specific nature of this cod crisis and not tie its hands with political deadlines .
The forthcoming December Council will be the forum for finalising reform proposals and it should not be used for rushing through panic measures for cod and associated species .
I urge the Commission to transform its words into real action .
Why not establish urgently the first pilot regional advisory council - or management council , as I would prefer - and give it the task of helping to devise measures to save the stocks of white fish in the North Sea .
In that way , faith could be restored in the process at the same time .
I call on the Commission to think again too when it comes to open access to the North Sea as part of a future CFP .
The present crisis only underlines the fragility of that sea and the key stocks in its mixed fishery .
Your own words , Commissioner , in a written answer to me said : ' very little is known about the abundance and status of non-quota species in the North Sea but fishing for non-quota species would almost certainly incur by-catches of species subject to quotas ' .
I say let us get reform right and then use it ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , first of all I want to be associated very much with the words of sympathy expressed with the people of Galicia and I fully concur with the speakers and my colleagues who called for solidarity with them at this time .
I broadly welcome the Jové Peres report in its present form .
The Commission proposal is based on the principle of sustainable development and the poor state of fishery resources .
The starting point is indisputable but many views , including my own , differ as to the quantification of the state of stocks .
The basis of the proposal is that account is taken exclusively of scientific reports as regards management measures .
However , no credible measures are proposed to improve scientific knowledge even though the shortcomings in this area are well recognised .
They envisage a common fisheries policy which is geared more to the short-term interests of some Member States than to fishermen .
I say to the Commission that the CFP must be geared towards keeping alive regions which depend on fishing rather than making it a battlefield between Member States .
Fishermen share common interests .
They all need fishery resources to carry out their activities .
Decisions and objectives of the recovery plans cannot discard the social and economic consequences which they may have .
Recovery plans must seek a balance between the recovery and conservation of stocks and measures to limit the impact on the fishing industry .
The exclusive coastal zone is something that Irish fishermen are adamant about maintaining and so are fishermen from Scotland , Wales , England , France , Portugal and Holland , from Denmark , Germany and others - it is something that I am adamant must be retained .
The basic objective of the 6 to 12 miles coastal zone regime was to protect fishery resources by reserving access to small scale coastal fishery activities .
In general , this puts less pressure on stocks in these zones which often harbour nurseries in juveniles .
It also contributed to protecting the traditional fishing activities of coastal communities , thereby helping to maintain their economic and social fabric .
The current critical situation of many stocks makes it more urgent now than ever , not merely to roll out the 6 to 12 mile access regime which is totally inadequate , but rather to roll out the exclusive zone to 24 miles if we are serious about conserving stocks .
I ask you to support my amendments to extend the exclusive coastal fishing zone to 24 miles .
I have no doubt that the greater majority of your fishermen would ask you to do the same thing .
Because I regret the present unsatisfactory state of fish stocks and because I am in favour of conservation , I am adamant that highly sensitive areas must be protected .
The Irish box is one such area of very great sensitivity .
Waters in this zone are important spawning grounds , which is why there has been a derogation from free access in these waters .
Regrettably , this did not prevent the illegal plunder of stocks in the Irish box over the years by some Community fishermen flying flags of convenience .
This plunder must stop .
These waters must be protected .
Existing arrangements for access to the Irish box must be retained permanently in the reform process .
There is no bureaucratic replacement for the knowledge and experience of fishermen .
For this reason , and for many years , my group has been calling for a greater involvement of fishermen in the ways the common fishery policy is run .
The Commission has now adopted this idea , which I welcome , by proposing the creation of regional advisory councils which will include fishermen and their organisations for the very first time .
If these councils are to play a meaningful role in the future , fishermen must be involved in all phases of the management process .
Fishermen must also be more involved in the work of scientists in order to establish mutual confidence .
Only in this way can fishermen contribute to and influence Community policy .
I congratulate Mr Varela for both of his balanced reports .
I agree with his analysis .
I agree with his criticism .
I agree with his proposed changes to the Commission 's proposals .
I will be supporting his reports .
In conclusion , let me say unequivocally , as I did during the debate on the Stevenson report , that the common fisheries policy is not only about fish , it is also , and more importantly , about fishermen .
It is about their families and their families ' future .
It is about their way of life , the only one possible in many areas .
Mr President , the Souchet report , which we recently adopted by a very broad majority , has already strongly recommended maintaining state aid for the modernisation of fishing fleets .
The conclusions of the Varela report are heading in the same direction and this we welcome .
The European Parliament must confirm its support for maintaining this aid and must not approve the proposals by the Commission which is seeking to withdraw it on the pretext of preserving the marine environment .
Aid for modernisation is still needed and does not in itself contribute to overfishing .
Quite the opposite .
By using a modern and suitably equipped fleet and using more selective and controlled fishing methods , we will encourage the sustainable management of resources and combat fraud .
It is not this aid which contributes to overcapacity ; it helps to improve working conditions , hygiene and on-board safety ; it helps conservation and improves the quality of fisheries products .
It therefore has a crucial role .
More broadly speaking , having listened to Mr Fischler earlier , giving an outline of the general policy , we also wish to stress that good resource management is obviously necessary , but this has to be performed objectively , transparently , involving the professionals and with quota reductions or increases , depending on fluctuations in fish stocks .
I have one last comment to make .
If we introduce stricter legislation in the area of fisheries , will consumer demand lessen or , on the other hand , will imports from third countries increase further ?
For whose benefit ?
How can we avoid this pernicious effect ?
We would like answers to all these questions .
Mr President , someone said earlier that shrimps are netting a much higher income than cod .
Does that mean that cod will be off the menu in future , as is apparently already the case in Newfoundland ?
That reminds me of a joke .
Why do we need cod when we have fish fingers ?
But seriously , we have been preparing for this reform on 1 January 2003 for years now and just what has the European Parliament delivered in the end ?
A lot of people are saying this is a lot of hot air about nothing , because the strong wind of change expected in European fisheries is now no more than a mild breeze .
And I think that the House has given birth not to a reform but at best a mini-reform .
Oh well , be that as it may ?
Instead of safeguarding long-term fish stocks , short-term , short-sighted maintenance of the status quo is the order of the day .
Harsh words , but I stand by them .
Hardly the real reform everyone supposedly wanted .
Hardly a ray of hope for exhausted resources , more a fatal ' eyes down and charge ! '
We have too many vessels chasing fewer and fewer fish , with some stocks in a state of total collapse .
You cannot ignore the facts , even if you think it might lose you your seat .
Do you really believe that people do not see through politicians ?
I cannot continue to support public aid for new vessels with a clear conscience knowing that we simply have too many vessels .
If building new vessels were a profitable business with good profit forecasts , surely the banks would be queuing up to hand out money ?
They are not queuing up , there are no good profit forecasts and yet we expect European taxpayers to step in , whether they want to or not .
That is just plain stupid .
Sad , but true !
And there will not be any profit forecasts unless we rethink and make radical cutbacks .
Mr President , this evening we are debating three proposals for regulations which form what I think is the most important part of the package of common fisheries policy reforms and we therefore need to remind ourselves why reform is so urgently needed .
One of the most important reasons is that stocks of several species are at a critical level .
There are too few fish for too many fishing vessels and the proposed regulations need to be judged in this context .
Parliament needs to pluck up courage and stand firm if it is serious about protecting fish stocks .
Unfortunately , no thread of real reform runs through Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna 's reports .
I do not think that minor cosmetic corrections are of any use at all in the long term , be it to the fishermen or to the endangered stocks , which are on the verge of collapse .
Nor do I totally agree that we should call the voluntary scrapping measures proposed by the Commission into question .
The emphasis here is on voluntary ; to me , everything else is just talk .
As far as I am concerned , neither report is acceptable as it stands and I cannot vote for them .
The fact that all the proposed measures need a soft social and economic landing is one of our main demands and I think we all now agree on that .
But today 's debate is about the proposed reforms , not the loss of the Prestige and we must not confuse the two .
We stand by the Galician fishermen but we must keep our eye on the ball .
Mr President , we need to ensure the viability of the sector that is vital for employment and economic and social cohesion in the Union 's coastal areas .
We need to maintain sustainable marine ecosystems conserving fish stocks for future generations .
Parliament 's resolution the green paper identified the fundamental aim of the CFP as attaining a balance between the two .
ELDR amendments to the Jové Peres report seek to ensure the long-term future of the 12 mile limit and of relative stability .
These are essential both to the sustainability of fragile coastal communities and of the stocks on which they depend .
We aim to specify more clearly the other measures that need to taken to protect stocks .
We would rename regional advisory councils as regional management councils .
This makes it clear that such councils should have a real role in helping to formulate and to implement the measures needed under the reformed CFP .
In particular , we must use these councils to help achieve the fullest possible understanding of the functioning of marine ecosystems .
For example , recent research suggests that an increase rather than a decrease in nephrops quotas could actually be positive for the regeneration of cod stocks .
Finally , balancing the viability of the sector and the sustainability of stocks is not just a matter for the reform of the CFP .
It is precisely what is required in the current cod crisis .
It is good that the Commission has addressed the socio-economic problems but the measures so far seem like prescribing a couple of aspirins to cure a severe case of pneumonia .
So we are formally in support of the resolution .
Let us hope that a proper implementation of CFP reform will prevent any such crises arising in the future .
Mr President , what has been agreed to in relation to cod fishing in the Irish Sea will discriminate drastically against the Northern Ireland fleet .
More sacrifices have been made by that fleet than any other fleet in the European Union .
It has been pruned and pruned and pruned yet again .
Northern Ireland fishermen more than anyone want to maintain sustainable fisheries in the Irish Sea .
Cod amounts to about 10 % of the value of all fish annually landed in Northern Ireland .
Northern Ireland fishermen are opposed to the present proposals .
They are not viable as an economic option , either for fishermen whose assets are not really being fully used or for the governments who may be spending considerable amounts of money on aid without obtaining long-term change assuring a viable future for the industry .
Fishermen have promoted the following as alternatives in Northern Ireland : further targeted decommissioning ; real-time closures ; additional technical conservation measures .
Fishermen want to work with the scientists but the scientists who advise the Commission will not work with them .
I have been at a meeting where they invited the scientists to come and look at the Irish Sea and the scientists would not even come and look at it .
They prepared a boat for them and they would not even go out in the boat .
I say that if the scientists cannot go and argue their case in the Irish Sea then it must not be a scientific case that they are really arguing .
The chairman of the Committee on Fisheries has a proposal that would secure more money for investigating the effects of the measures already in place .
That is something that is very important .
We need to know if all the sacrifices that fishermen have made in the past have done anything to help the fishing industry , and the scientific evidence should be produced if they have it .
This should be supported , and a proper evaluation of what has already been imposed conducted , before any new decisions are taken that will have a discriminatory effect on the Northern Ireland fishing fleet .
Fears of discrimination are not myths in Northern Ireland , they are stubborn facts .
We need to have a real evaluation of what success the past cuts have had and what information is available to be examined .
Northern Ireland fishermen have made great sacrifices in the past but they are now being convinced that the knife has been turned on them .
For example , we have had an announcement from Dublin that there are going to be bigger , larger and better boats .
There is going to be an Atlantic dream financed partly by EU aid while the fishermen in Northern Ireland are being pushed to destroy their own boats .
Finally , I would like to say that not only fishermen are going to suffer but also their wives and families will suffer and death is going to come to the fishing villages and to the hopes of the future for these people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reports we are currently discussing are well structured , contain useful explanatory statements , put forward good arguments and , as Mrs Figueiredo said , are broadly to be welcomed .
I do , however , have some observations to make . The golden rule for any fisheries policy is stock preservation and the fundamental priority must be the preservation of stocks and marine life , because , to use a culinary metaphor , just as you cannot make an omelette without eggs , you cannot go fishing if there are no fish .
This problem first arose a very long time ago when , around 1600 , a renowned jurist , Hugo Grotius , wrote a book entitled ' Mare liberum ' , in which he advocated the principle of the freedom to navigate the seas , which later became a principle of international law .
Even then , some jurists added that this also implied the freedom to fish , which could also lead to the depletion of stocks .
As you see , this is an age-old problem .
In other words , the freedom to fish must be conditional on the marine resources available .
Protecting marine resources is not only about guaranteeing the future of fishing but also concerns a biological value , an essential value of humanity and of life on Earth .
Consequently , we cannot make intrinsically contradictory speeches , in which we advocate one thing and also its opposite ; speeches in which , on the one hand , we call for the preservation of stocks , but immediately also claim the right to practically unlimited and unconditional fishing .
Having said this , I should like to say something to Commissioner Fischler : as Mrs Miguélez said , what is impressive about Commissioner Fischler is his indifference to the fate of fishermen and of fishing communities , and his lack of feeling .
In fact , we need to show solidarity and understanding towards fishermen , specifically towards those who , as has already been said , are now suffering the consequences of a terrible and criminal shipwreck .
Mr President , I would like to devote my speech to the cod crisis .
It is a particularly bad state of affairs and reference is often made to the situation in Newfoundland , where fishing has gone on to the point where the Grandbanks are empty , but we should also set in motion drastic measures to stop excessive fishing .
However , we have not always done this in the past .
By way of comparison , there was a shortage of cod in the 1960s , followed by a huge surplus in the North Sea in the Seventies .
To this day , nobody can explain why that was .
We do not know enough , and certainly not everything there is to know , about cod .
During 2000 - 2001 , cutbacks by 40 % were imposed , which was very drastic .
The effects of such a measure have left the sector with little resilience to take any further knock-backs .
The sector is under pressure and we are expected to take a careful approach .
We should not consider last year 's reserves as an option ; these had a negative impact on cod stocks .
This is an example of hasty , rather than careful , decision-making , with a negative result .
Needless to say , the situation is very worrying , but I should like to repeat that we need to produce far clearer information before we can take draconian measures of this kind .
We cannot sell this to the people who work in the fishing industry .
We cannot simply discontinue cod fishing .
We can certainly not pass on the problem to the flatfish sector , since cod is caught in that sector as a secondary line .
Neither flatfish stocks , nor cod stocks would justify this .
We are not simply talking about fish stocks , but also about the socio-economic implications of another major intervention .
We should , therefore , think carefully and take informed decisions .
I am thus pleased with Mr Stevenson 's resolution .
We should think of alternatives , think in terms of cutting the link with flatfish , and consider setting up a compensation fund .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I represent a country of whose history fishing and the sea are an integral part and in which the fisheries sector still provides around fifty thousand jobs .
Against this backdrop , some fundamental criticism must be made of the Commission proposals .
In their current wording , these proposals are unacceptable .
Our first criticism is that ending aid for fleet modernisation is totally unacceptable .
Given that 40 % of Portugal 's fleet is more than 25 years old , this would definitively sideline the overwhelming majority of Portuguese fishermen and prevent them from undertaking any modernisation .
Our second criticism is that the ban on aid for the creation of joint enterprises for fishing outside Community waters will only serve to increase our imports from third countries ; it would , therefore be sensible to continue to allow vessels decommissioned from the Community fleet to fish in the waters of third countries under these joint enterprises .
Lastly account must be taken of the efforts that some countries , in this case Portugal , have already made under the Multi-Annual Guidance Plans for fisheries , where the effort that has already been made to reduce the fleet should now be considered and deducted from their targets .
To conclude , Commissioner , I should also like to say that other issues have not been given due consideration .
For example : if a stock preservation programme exists , why are we continuing to allow fishing for the manufacture of fishmeal to take place ?
Also , why is it that no specific measures have been envisaged for the outermost regions , whose aquatic ecosystems are highly sensitive ?
In this regard it is crucial that a specific solution is found for these outermost regions which , in Portugal 's case , are Madeira and the Azores .
I also hope that the opinion delivered by the European Parliament will take account of those aspects that have not been considered and that the Council is able to reach a reasonable agreement .
Mr President , I would like to concentrate on the cod crisis .
It is a tragic day today if we are meeting here not to focus on the positive reform of the CFP but to debate the fate of fisheries in the North Sea .
As we all know , ISIS has recommended no fishing for haddock and whiting in these areas unless ways to harvest these stocks - and I am quoting - ' without by-catch or discards of cod ' can be demonstrated .
ISIS has also implied severe restrictions in the fisheries of nephrops , plaice and sole with - and I quote - ' stringent restrictions on the catch and discard rates of cod with effective monitoring of compliance with those restrictions ' .
I am glad that the Commission has moved away from an all-out moratorium .
However , sadly , due to the nature of mixed fisheries , 80 % would still effectively mean the same : a closure of fisheries in the North Sea .
I would like to commend the work of the UK and Scottish Fisheries Ministers ; the UK Fisheries Minister Mr Elliot Moreley , the Scottish Fisheries Minister Mr Ross Finny and the Secretary of State for Scotland , Mrs Helen Liddle .
They are fighting for the future of Scottish fisheries and the final decision ultimately rests at their doors , not ours .
However , we have to consider what kind of future we want .
Do we actually want to say : ' sod the cod and allow fishing to continue and just hope for the best . The other stocks will not go the same way as the cod ' ?
Or , do we want to work through , in a cooperative manner , with industry , ministers and other organisations to seek a common solution ?
Whatever solution is agreed , change is inevitable .
At present there is no specific UK / Scottish counter-proposal to what the Commission is proposing .
However , doing nothing in the light of declining cod stocks is not an option .
The difficult task of reaching a quota figure that is sustainable yet scientifically credible remains .
The next two weeks will be critical to finding a solution to this crisis .
Commissioner , once again , this evening , you have heard many Members express dissatisfaction for a number of different reasons , and these are exacerbated by the problems in the North Sea and Galicia - and we send the people of these regions our heartfelt sympathy - although I do not feel that Mr Nogueira 's approach was the most appropriate way to defend the cause of Galicia ; I would therefore call upon the other Members to be more objective and aware of the fact that this is , in actual fact , a Europe-wide issue .


There is something I really do fail to understand , however , Commissioner . We have the same perspectives and goals and we understand the concerns expressed by the Commission : we understand its concerns regarding the conservation of stocks ; we understand its concerns about not increasing fishing effort .
Parliament is on your side .
We even agree on providing incentives for scrapping and , therefore , encouraging some fishermen to leave the fisheries sector .
I genuinely fail to understand , however , why it is that we cannot succeed in coming to an agreement .
You continue to deny that modernisation , specifically modernisation of the fleet , is essential , even though , in our countries , fishing vessels provide the most unliveable working conditions still existing in Europe .
Then the other point is the reliability of the scientific data , which we have mentioned several times .
Now , I do not believe that an agreement cannot be reached between Parliament and the Commission , given that our goals are the same .
I would add just one thing , Commissioner : consider the political implications if we were to fail in this matter .
We are on the eve of redefining the Europe we want , and we want it to be more intergovernmental and more Community-based .
If you do not succeed in this , it will be evidence that more Community-based organisation means a European Union which is more removed from the citizens and less attentive to their concerns .
I do not believe that we will fail , but we must fight this battle together , to ensure that everything we have built up over the past 50 years is not lost .
Commissioner , how can we convince you to restore state aid ?
You are as stubborn on this issue as a deep-sea fisherman .
You have conceded a small amount of ground for vessels less than 12 metres long , which is positive .
In my view , however , it is not because the money is public money that fish are disappearing !
And you are well aware that without state aid , deep-sea fishermen , or a number of them at least , will prolong the life of their boats , using them for sea-fishing for longer .
An old boat , however , is a dangerous boat .
An old trawler is as dangerous as an old oil tanker .
Here are the statistics from France , which were published a few weeks ago .
According to the ' Accident Investigation ' Bureau , there have been 30 shipwrecks and 22 people have died .
What sort of boats are involved , however ?
All of them were more than 30 years old - that is obvious .
Above all , however , most of them were modernised some months or not long before , in other words destabilised and made heavier , because fishermen have no other choice .
I therefore believe and hope that , in December , you will also find an answer for vessels over 12 metres long as well , in other words , for small-scale fishing , which is dependent not only on the size of boats but on the skipper being on board too .
You want to find a solution without increasing capacity .
Fine . Small-scale fishing has no proper funding and so , without a boost from the state , nothing will change .
For my part , I believe we need a solution other than ' nothing ' , so I hope that you will adopt a slightly more flexible approach by the end of our debate .
Mr President , I should first of all like to express my solidarity with the Galician people and with the MEPs who hail from that region .
In the light of recent events , it is only right and proper that the European Union , and also the Commission , should express solidarity .
I note that the Commissioner has , in fact , taken the bull by the horns with regard to what is wrong with the fish stocks .
It is true that , as far as cod is concerned , something is amiss .
It is also true that cod may well be found in other locations , but the fact is that cod levels in the North Sea are at an all-time low .
However , we should also be careful , if we want to adopt a fair and sound administration in Europe , not to throw out the baby with the bathwater .
We should look at the situation fairly and consider the underlying causes .
There is , of course , the warming of sea water to some extent , but we should also examine the probable causes of overfishing in the first place .
Why was quota control not in place ?
Let us mainly focus on these issues .
I should now like to turn to the next topic .
It is unacceptable for the good to be punished along with the bad .
If the Commission indicates that it also believes that quota for flatfish should be cut , for example by between 30 % and 40 % , then I have to say that I do not go along with this .
Sound quota management in that very sector has meant that , relatively speaking , this sector is doing well , certainly taking into consideration the drastic cutbacks in additional catches .
This is why the flatfish fishing quota can be cut disproportionately in relation to those for cod , as has been illustrated in Denmark , Germany and certainly in my own country , the Netherlands .
I should also add that over the space of ten years , cod catches from the Netherlands have decreased by 70 % .
It is unacceptable for fishermen to have to suffer extra for sole and plaice .
If the European Union wants to remain credible , it is essential that this policy on flatfish should not be carried through in other sectors , and I assume that the Commission will act fairly in this too .
Mr President , I think that reform of the common fisheries policy is one of the most pressing problems we have in the EU and , even if Commissioner Fischler looks a little tired , the proposal for a new fisheries reform deserves high praise .
There is a real need to set out a fisheries policy that creates a balance between resources and their use , that is based upon the principle of sustainability and that takes much more extensive account of environmental and ecological considerations than the previous policy did .
We need the multiannual management plans proposed by the Commissioner , based upon scientific advice and to be applied to all the stocks .
We must get away from the annual quota lotteries and the emergency crisis resolution that takes place every single year .
The collapse of cod stocks in the North Sea , Irish Sea and Skagerrak is , in reality , a judgment upon fisheries policy so far .
If the Member States had followed the scientific advice and warnings , including the Commission 's proposal from June of last year for a rescue plan , this collapse would presumably not have happened .
It is the lack of political responsibility and monitoring on the part of the governments that is now giving rise to a range of serious social , environmental and economic consequences in the region concerned .
We need to cut back on the combined fishing fleet , something which necessarily means using the subsidies for eliminating the fishing fleet 's overcapacity and , if need be , for supporting those fishermen affected by the measures required . We must not , however , use the subsidies for renewing and converting the fishing fleet .
Moreover , we need to establish much more efficient common supervision of fisheries .
On that point , the Commissioner should know that aid will be required .
I cannot endorse Mr Varela 's reports .
I think that they are both on the wrong track .
I hope that a sustainable fisheries reform may be implemented before the New Year , and it might be useful if the Commissioner could confirm that the work is continuing in accordance with this timetable and if he could provide his assessments of the options .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as part of the reform of the common fisheries policy , the Commission has decided to move ahead with an amendment to the regulation on the structural policy of fisheries , laying down emergency measures for the destruction of vessels and even providing for an increase in premiums for scrapping , despite the fact that Europe is currently in a period of budgetary restrictions .
In our joint debate on this proposal , I should first of all like to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna and underline the remarkable quality of the work he has submitted for our consideration .
Like the rapporteur , I acknowledge that the Commission proposal is largely unacceptable .
Without calling into question the entire concept of vessel scrapping , I must stress the irreversible nature of this measure and draw attention to its enormous socio-economic costs in the Member State that I represent and especially in my home region , the Algarve .
This is the reality of the situation in Portugal : fifty thousand jobs in the fisheries sector , 90 % of vessels are old and small and are engaged in traditional forms of fishing .
I would point out that there are other measures that are not irreversible and which will cause less upset in achieving a balance between fleet capacity and available fish resources .
Portugal has been extremely committed to fulfilling and even exceeding its targets for the multi-annual guidance plans , unlike other Member States , which have made no effort or have even increased their fleet capacity , with total impunity .
Portugal is becoming increasingly concerned to see the Commission ignoring this situation , rejecting inspections and continuing blindly to ask all Member States to make the same sacrifices .
Returning to the Commission proposal , the sudden redirection of funds from the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance ( FIFG ) , raises serious doubts at the legal , financial and budgetary levels .
It is therefore becoming unjustifiable at all levels to reprogramme funds already earmarked for the period until 2006 and which have been planned with the national and regional bodies and the economic and social operators .
As the rapporteur quite rightly said , this Commission proposal appears , more than anything , to be a leap in the dark .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you for the very extensive debate we have had here .
May I say to everyone who referred to the shipwreck of the Prestige that perhaps it was not perfectly clear from my first speech that we , by which I mean the services responsible for shipping in the transport DG under Mrs Loyola de Palacio , the environmental experts under Mrs Margot Wallström , the Structural Fund experts and my experts , have joined in setting up a task force .
All these experts have been in Galicia for some time now and have been looking at ideas in situ , together with the agencies responsible , as to how we can best help here .
As far as direct responsibility for fisheries is concerned , as you know , the current rules only allow 4 % of total structural resources for fisheries to be used for compensation following a disaster .
I have said that this is too little .
We need to do more here and I am in the process of doing something about this .
I shall be bending the rules as far as I possibly can without actually breaking them .
We are also prepared to look , with the Spanish Government , at how we can put structural resources for fisheries to the best possible use here .
We want the compensation ruling to be flexible enough to include joint activities undertaken by groups or organisations in the fisheries sector .
We really cannot completely ignore the polluter pays principle here but , as you know , there is a sort of solidarity over and above that , in the form of a fund of EUR 300 million , which the Commission has been demanding to see increased to EUR 1 billion for some time now - for several months in fact .
It is not up to the Commission to take the decisions here ; this is a decision for the Council .
Now to the cod plan and the oral question .
I really must categorically reject what Mr Stevenson said about everything being based on out-of-date data and hence not being very relevant .
These are the latest data available and the evaluations were not carried out by just any scientists ; they were carried out by scientists from all the Member States who worked as a group , were paid by the Member States and had to reach a common verdict .
To say this was an academic exercise which , if you want , you can ignore , is totally uncalled for .
For the most part , catch data for 2001 were used .
If 2001 brought about such dramatic results , then it is obvious from stock patterns that 2002 will bring about even more dramatic results .
If you believe these fish have all moved to Iceland , you are deluding yourself !
Why is the situation in Iceland better ?
Because the Icelanders introduced a multiannual cod management plan years ago .
It is we who need to catch up , not the other way round .
And we need to stick to the facts if we want to make any headway here .
Now to the reports . I should like to comment mainly on the proposed amendments .
First to Mr Jové Peres 's report and stock management .
I am more than happy to accept Amendments Nos 4 , 14 , 27 and 30 , because the Commission too feels that fisheries management should include social and economic aspects .
However , I must reject Amendment No 2 , because economic considerations cannot be used as an excuse for watering down the measures needed .
I must also reject Amendments Nos 24 , 31 and 99 , because our wording for the precautionary principle is in keeping with international maritime law and cannot therefore be watered down .
Amendments Nos 19 and 50 do not pose any substantive problems ; however , the precautionary principle already takes account of environmental considerations per se and I therefore feel that these amendments are superfluous .
However , I welcome your support for multiannual management plans , Mr Jové Peres , and gladly accept Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 6 , 29 and 32 .
I cannot accept Amendments Nos 35 and 36 because it is up to the Council to set the framework for management plans .
However , I gladly accept Amendment No 22 on international guidelines for sustainable fisheries management .
I must reject Amendments Nos 67 and 68 , although I agree that we urgently need better scientific data on third country stocks and we shall be sending Parliament a separate communication on this in the spring of 2003 .
Now to access to waters and stocks .
I gladly accept Amendments Nos 8 and 46 , but I must reject Amendments Nos 70 to 74 and 94 , because I think we need to keep the twelve-mile zone .
I must also reject Amendment No 45 , because we shall be examining access restrictions such as the Shetland Box in 2003 .
I must reject Amendments Nos 9 , 47 , 95 and 97 on a 50-nautical-mile economic zone for the outermost regions as they stand , because this is a matter of national law .
I reject the proposed amendments on relative stability because I think that relative stability is part and parcel of our common fisheries policy .

I can accept Amendments Nos 28 and 76 but I must reject Amendment No 11 , because both the Commission and the Council legal services are of the unanimous opinion that the system for western waters needs to be changed and that these Member States should be treated on a equal footing with other Member States when it comes to the fishing effort planned for this zone .
And so to fleet policy . I am delighted that the rapporteur agrees in general with our proposals and I welcome these amendments .
I accept Amendment No 44 , although we must comply with Community provisions governing data protection .
I also accept Amendment No 78 .
However , I must reject Amendments Nos 7 , 26 , 34 and 39 to 43 , because they add nothing new of substance and create a whole host of practical problems .
Now for your proposed amendments to the chapter on controls .
I am delighted that many here are in favour of stepping up controls and the implementation of a common fisheries policy and gladly accept Amendments Nos 51 , 57 and 61 .
However , I should like to accept Amendments Nos 51 and 57 in a slightly different form .
I cannot accept Amendments Nos 52 to 56 or 62 .
Nor can I accept Amendment No 12 , because we need effective tools if those who break the rules are to be held liable for the damage they cause .
And that includes quota reductions .
Now to decision-making procedures and consultations .
I must reject Amendments Nos 21 , 37 , 65 , 66 , 80 , 84 and 86 to 89 for the sake of institutional equilibrium , although I gladly accept your Amendment No 64 and part of Amendment No 85 to do with regional consultative committees and the demand that they should also be set up in third countries .
Finally , I am unfortunately unable to accept your Amendment No 69 , because the basic principles will be included in our new framework regulation in the future .
Now to the proposed amendments in Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna 's two reports . First , I have made the Commission 's standpoint on this quite clear .
I must say , to my great disappointment , that many of the proposed amendments are designed merely to maintain the status quo .
I find that unacceptable and must therefore reject the proposed amendments which refer to it .
I am convinced that it makes no sense to hand out money for scrapping with one hand and to finance new ships with the other , because all that does is to put more pressure on endangered stocks and subsidise this absurd state of affairs out of taxpayers ' money .
Nor do I agree with you on exports or joint ventures .
These mechanisms do nothing to reduce excess capacity in our waters because most of the vessels which receive public aid for joint ventures or export were already fishing in third countries .
However , I can accept Amendment No 3 on the possibility of adapting programme planning during the current Structural Fund period .
I can only accept the part of Amendments Nos 19 and 37 designed to promote the diversification of vessels out of fisheries .
Finally , I think that Amendment No 27 is superfluous .
Now to the final proposal on scrapping . Unfortunately , I must reject Amendments Nos 2 and 9 , because if we ask the taxpayer to fund the scrapping of vessels out of additional public money , then it is only logical that we re-programme public aid for fleet renewal at the same time .
As far as Amendments Nos 3 to 6 and 8 are concerned , here too I must beg to differ .
Scientists have been telling us for years that our fleet is far too big and that stocks are depleting under the tremendous pressure from fisheries .
Our scientists have repeatedly concluded that TACs and quotas and technical measures alone are not enough .
As far as additional funds for scrapping are concerned , we have drawn up calculations based on empirical values .
Of course they are only estimates , but the majority of Member States see them as an upper limit , which is why I cannot agree with Amendments Nos 3 to 6 and 8 .
Nor can I accept Amendment No 7 , because the Commission has indeed honoured its obligations by instituting infringement proceedings against Member States who fail to achieve their fleet targets .
As for Amendment No 10 , the point here is that Member States must meet all the conditions of MAP 4 , that is , overall fleet targets and individual targets , if they want to claim additional scrapping premiums .
Anything else would put Member States who have achieved their overall fleet target at a disadvantage .
Mr President , the Commissioner said that he could not address the principle of relative stability because it is part of the CFP .
CFP reform , which we should embark on today and in the next few days , is based precisely on the principle of relative stability , which is not unchangeable .
On the other hand , the Commissioner said that another amendment was to maintain the status quo .
The status quo in Community waters is maintained by the Commission and Mr Fischler , Mr President .
I have received the motion for a resolution corresponding to this oral question on the cod crisis .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0389 / 2002 ) by Mr Pérez Álvarez , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the agreement between the European Economic Community and the Government of the Republic of Senegal on fishing off the coast of Senegal for the period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2006 [ COM ( 2002 ) 497 - C5-0493 / 2002 - 2002 / 0238 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first may I thank you , Mr Pérez Álvarez , for your report on our proposal on the conclusion of a new fisheries protocol with Senegal .
I am delighted that you support this proposal .
It will enable our fishermen to continue fishing in Senegal until 30 June 2006 .
I think this protocol is of huge interest to both parties .
Senegal will receive a financial contribution of EUR 16 million and we shall be helping Senegal to build up sustainable fisheries .
In addition , more Senegalese fishermen and observers will be deployed on board our vessels , although fishing opportunities for our vessels have been cut back , in line with data from Senegalese scientists .
The fishing zones for Community ships have been reduced and coastal zones have been reserved for the local artisanal fleet .
Finally , we have increased compulsory landings for the Senegalese fishing industry in the new protocol .
The agreement offers our fleet stability , because the new protocol will run for four years , and flexibility , thanks to the new system for calculating fishing opportunities .
In turn , this will foster higher utilisation rates and hence a better cost-benefit ratio .
The Senegalese authorities have confirmed that our fisheries will not endanger stocks because , even during the period from 1997 to 2001 , Community catches only accounted for between 1.7 % to 3.3 % of total catches in Senegal .
By comparison , our vessels accounted for 25 % of landings for the local industry in 1997 .
Now to the proposed amendments .
I agree with the content of Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 4 but in form they are , I think , superfluous .
The Commission already passes on the information called for .
We are required to do so under the interinstitutional agreements , especially the framework agreement between the Commission and Parliament .
I cannot accept Amendment No 5 , because this is a protocol to a fisheries agreement .
As an addendum to a framework agreement , no new mandate is required in order to renew a protocol .
I must also reject Amendment No 2 for this fisheries protocol .
However , I promise to propose this sort of clause during negotiations on future fisheries agreements with third countries .
Madam President , I would like to refer briefly to the earlier debate simply to ask the Commissioner to promote all these possible measures to help Galicia as much as you can , and try to speed them up , because those suffering from the damage in Galicia have identity cards and human faces ; they are the fishermen , their neighbours , small businessmen , etc .
It is true that whoever causes damage should pay for it , and here those responsible are hiding behind a legal web , under the umbrella of an anonymous public limited company , and here I mean ' anonymous ' in the literal sense of the word .
Perhaps , Commissioner , it would be a good idea to promote measures for transparency , clarity and flexibility as well within the scope of maritime trading legislation .
I shall now move on to the EU / Senegal Fisheries Agreement , to say that we should set out fisheries possibilities in Senegalese waters and the financial contribution .
I believe that the conclusion of a new protocol on fisheries relations between Senegal and the European Union - which is of particular importance following the failed agreement with Morocco - should be welcomed .
As you said , the impact of the protocol on fish populations in Senegalese waters is minimal , given that the fisheries activities of the European Union only represent between 1.7 % and 3 % of total catches in the area .
Furthermore , fishing possibilities for EU vessels have been decreased on sensitive stocks and technical measures including a two-month biological rest period have been agreed to give more protection to fish stocks and to minimise the risk of competition with the artisanal fleet .
I do not want to say too much because a great deal of data already appears in the report .
Allow me , however , to say that with regard to demersal species , the opportunities for pelagic fishing have vanished and the opportunities for tuna fishing have remained at the same level .
Allow me to say also that financial compensation from the EU will increase from EUR 12 million to EUR 16 million annually and of these EUR 16 million , EUR 3 million will be allocated to specific measures : developing local industry and the informal commitment - what a pity this is not included in the agreement - by the Senegalese authorities to pass on 50 % of total compensation to the sector , which is important because the Senegalese economy is heavily dependent on fishing and one in six Senegalese nationals of working age works in this sector .
I would also highlight that the biological rest period is obligatory unlike the simple provisions of the previous agreement , and states that the aim of prohibiting deep-sea fishing is to foster the conservation of vulnerable species and promote the small fishing sector and defend the sustainability of fishing in Senegal .
All of which , like the setting of lower by-catch rates and larger mesh sizes , demonstrates the importance of this .
It is equally important to ensure an increased number of Senegalese seamen on board EU vessels .
I would like , Commissioner , to emphasise a reference to Amendment No 3 , which has a clear social content - I am a member of the Committee on Social Affairs - and , overall , sets out similar working conditions , rights and freedoms for all seamen on board EU vessels , whether or not they are EU seamen .
The European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights therefore does not draw any distinctions and its first article states that human dignity is inviolable .
In conclusion , this seems to be a good agreement : an achievable agreement is always the best one .
The agreement is clearly a meeting of wills , and often - almost always - both parties must make concessions in order to reach the agreement .
The Members of this Parliament are not in the habit of offering congratulations , but I believe this is a good agreement and we should congratulate the Commission .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
First of all , my thanks to you , Mr Lage , for your report .
I am delighted that you support this proposal granting Community vessels access to Angolan waters until 2 August 2004 .
The new protocol is in the mutual interest of the Community and Angola and contains a few new clauses , which I should like to comment on .
Stocks in Angolan waters will be checked annually by local scientists in the interest of sustainable fisheries .
As a basis for this scientific knowledge , or should I say as a result of this scientific knowledge , fishing opportunities will be revised in line with it .
36 % of the financial contribution will be used to set up a partnership between the EU and Angola , in order to develop research , artisanal fisheries , training and aquaculture .
This is a net improvement over the 28 % earmarked for targeted action in the last protocol .
Not just tuna vessels but all fishing vessels will have to carry six Angolan fishermen , compared with five previously .
This will create an additional 160 to 180 jobs locally .
I should like to comment briefly on the proposed amendments .
Basically , the same applies as I said earlier about the protocol with Senegal .
On the question of including the Member States ' obligation under Regulation 500 / 2001 , with ships declaring their catches in third countries , this is not possible .
But I am more than willing to include this obligation in any new agreement , because this is something that needs to be negotiated .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commissioner has already addressed the basic issue : the report adopts the results of the negotiations between the Commission and Angola , and even welcomes the way in which the negotiations were concluded and the protocol offers interesting fishing opportunities for the Member State fleets and is today the second largest , I believe , after the agreement signed with Mauritania .
The new protocol is the ninth since the Fisheries Agreement between the European Community and Angola entered into force in 1997 ; this new protocol applies to the period between August 2002 and August 2004 , provides access for 33 tuna vessels and 22 shrimp-fishing vessels .
The tuna fishing quotas are shared out between France , Spain and Portugal - it should be noted that the previous protocol provided access for 43 European Tuna vessels , slightly more than the current number .
With regard to demersal fishing , Spain has received the lion 's share , with Portugal , Italy and Greece sharing the rest .
The annual financial compensation has risen from EUR 14 million to EUR 15.5 million , which is to be applauded . This is a contribution by the European Union to the development of fishing in Angola .
EUR 5.5 billion are going to specific measures for research , control and monitoring , as the Commissioner has already rightly pointed out .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would not want to end my brief intervention without mentioning the fact that Angola is a terrible and shocking paradox : Angola is a vast territory , with a population of around 13 million inhabitants , has truly amazing underground resources such as oil and diamonds - suffice it to say that its oil , the production of which will increase in the next two years , represents around 15 % of US consumption - but most of this money does not go to those in Angola who are suffering an appalling tragedy of hunger and misery .
One report by the International Monetary Fund even states that EUR four billion have been poured into the State 's coffers but have moved along impenetrable and tortuous routes .
Does this mean that the European Union should not support Angola ?
No it does not !
What it means is that Angola has entered a new phase in its history , which has been plagued by civil wars , death and destruction .
Angola 's fishing industry is extremely interesting .
I remember , although it is always risky to depend on one 's memory , that in 1973 , when Portugal was still the colonial administrator , around 490 000 tonnes of fish were brought into Angolan ports . This is something I read in a book on the history and economy of Angola .
In 1999 , around 190 000 tonnes were brought in . This means , then , that Angolan fishing has suffered a major fall and is now recovering , partly because it is no longer a State-run industry and is essentially in private hands .
It also means , however , if the scientific data are not misleading , that Angola has considerable opportunities for fishing and that Angolan waters contain a wealth of fish .
The texts also state that fishing in Angola represents 3 % of the gross national product and so any effort to support the Angolan fishing industry is to be welcomed .
I therefore wish to congratulate the Commissioner and the Commission on the result they have achieved .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to start by congratulating our rapporteur , Carlos Lage , on this report which is extremely well structured and clear in terms of its proposals .
As Mr Lage himself stated , this is a further renewal of the Fisheries Agreement with Angola that began in 1987 and is now being renewed once again .
As has also been said , European Union vessels fish in those waters for tuna , shrimp , demersal species and , on an experimental basis , some pelagic species .
This new protocol clearly shows that there has been a slight increase in demersal fishing and a noticeable decline in tuna fishing , which is all the more worrying because we know that for some years , this area , with all the tuna migration , has been experiencing a major decrease in numbers , which is largely due to what we call IUU , or illegal , unregulated and unreported fishing .
We are seeing a great deal of illegal tuna fishing , especially in tropical waters , such as the Gulf of Guinea , in which the tuna are killed before they even have time to reproduce .
Perhaps this situation of illegal tuna fishing in all tropical waters will not be too different to this reduction in the tuna fishing quota in the Agreement with Angola .
It should also be emphasised that when calculating the EU 's financial compensation , which is also increasing , we must also take account of the rates paid by shipowners .
As the report also clearly states , EU compensation has risen from EUR 14 million to EUR 15.5 million and in fact it is important to note that 35 % of these appropriations are specifically earmarked for the development of the fishing sector .
It should also be stated that this agreement with Angola represents gradual progress in the field of fisheries agreements with third countries .
This considerable allocation of appropriations to the fishing sector is important and shows that it is possible to conclude commercial fishing agreements that contain a development component .
I believe that we must not show any prejudice - in other words , fishing agreements must be made an integral part of the common fisheries policy : they can be of benefit to third countries , aiding their development and to the European Union , by improving the supply of its markets .
Lastly , I feel it would also be reasonable , linking this with the reform of the CFP , for vessels scrapped in the European Union to be able to join the joint enterprises that fish in these waters .
I should also like to mention , on behalf of my group , the PPE-DE , that we will be supporting this report , which we believe to be well-grounded .
Madam President , the complete , total and disgraceful failure of the common fisheries policy and the consequent collapse of fish stocks means that the EU must now cast its net wider and wider to satisfy voracious Spanish demands .
Not content with destroying the North Sea , Africa is now the prize .
There are now 16 third country agreements in place .
Today we are discussing Angola and , according to the World Wildlife Fund , this deal will strip a vulnerable African coastal community of a precious asset .
When each deal is debated , my colleague , Mr Nigel Farage , has urged you to open your eyes to the environmental destruction and , more seriously , to the deaths of many hundreds of black African fishermen which European Union boats are causing every year .
Exhaustive documentary evidence from Mauritania and Senegal confirms the scale of this tragedy .
The contempt with which our pleadings have met leads me to think that most of the rest of you must inhabit a different planet .
There is a better way .
Ten years ago , Namibia threw out the Spanish boats and took control over her 200-mile territorial waters .
14 000 people now work in an industry worth USD 350 million a year .
Namibia should be our model if we really want to help the third world .
Let us stop exploiting these poor countries and encourage them to modernise their industries .
Let us recognise that the only fishery management schemes that work around the world are the ones with national control .
We have the whole of ' blue Europe ' stretching out before us waiting to be reorganised .
The reality of the situation is that fisheries resources are being depleted , whilst the discussion focuses on the reliability of instruments used to measure the extent of the rarity of fish shoals .
Our instruments for managing catches , the market , fleets and relations with third countries are criticised by professionals .
The Commission wants to act as a substitute for the Council of Ministers in decision-making processes .
It persists in its Malthusianism tactics by scrapping boats and even by refusing to fund modernisation .
This is how , in addition to jeopardising the safety of fishermen , the problem of unfair competition arises .
Whilst we undermine our own industry 's fishing possibilities , other fishermen from third countries are coming in their place .
The margin for manoeuvre is , nevertheless , very small .
Even aquaculture is not a genuine solution as , in order to ' manufacture ' one kilo of farmed fish , you need to use between 4 and 7 kg of fish meal .
This is the absolute limit of industrial fishing .
The potential solutions are acknowledged : regionalisation of management for greater flexibility , more accurate scientific evaluation of resources to avoid disputes , greater involvement of the profession ?
( Written statement abbreviated in accordance with Rule 120 ( 7 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what I have to say about today 's report is this . One : the goal of the Lisbon strategy is to transform the European Union into the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , an economy capable of bringing about permanent economic growth , more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
Two : in order to do this , we need an economic , employment , education , research policy and social policy strategy developed jointly by the Member States , the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
Three : Europe is moving from a market economy towards a social market economy and is in the process of taking the next step and making the eco-social market economy the order of the day for the twenty-first century .
As someone so nicely put it , the twenty-first century will be the century of Europe but only , I would add , if we want it to be .
Four : assuming we really mean it , the Lisbon strategy and an eco-social market economy will allow us , at long last , to get past the received wisdom of capital versus labour , social policy versus economic policy , public versus private sector , Europe versus the Member States .
Five : it would all be quite simple if we could agree on a few basic principles : that the economy creates labour , that everything labour creates is social and that social cohesion and environmental protection are mutually supportive for the purpose of sustainability .
This all depends primarily on human rather than state resources , not on equality for all , but on competitive ideas that strengthen the continent of Europe as a whole .
Six : we should therefore emphasise that economic policy has not been communitised and lies primarily within the sphere of competence of the Member States and that , under Article 99 , economic policy must be regarded , and coordinated by the Member States , as a matter of common interest .
Seven : we therefore welcome , by way of conclusion , the overall approach of the Commission communication on streamlining the annual economic and employment policy coordination cycles .
We need this coordination in order to achieve common objectives despite differing jurisdictions .
But this coordination depends on the Member States ' doing their bit , on their passing fast , clear information to the Commission , on defining individual responsibilities within the overall concept - because a chain is only as strong as its weakest link - and on the euro zone becoming more aware of its responsibility within Europe .
We make a huge point of this in paragraph 18 of the report by calling for the role of the social partners in implementing the Lisbon and Gothenburg strategy , in other words the European social partnership , to be strengthened . We therefore call for a tripartite social summit to be set up , with the participation of the European Parliament .
We have no time for legal wrangling between institutions ; we need to foster this social dialogue jointly and involve organisations of social partners .
Which is precisely why we are demanding more rights in fora and in this process , by which we mean more involvement and more right of involvement on the part of the European Parliament .
We stress in point 8 of the report that anyone who wants to see this democratic involvement must be concerned that the new timetable for the guidelines package gives the European Parliament even less time than before to agree on its position .
We welcome the fact that this process has been streamlined .
We welcome the fact that the focus is on implementation .
We welcome specific timing arrangements and we welcome the fact that a strategic , medium-term policy concept is being strengthened .
If we ensure that life is breathed into this communication , then we shall be one step closer to the Lisbon strategy .
Madam President , economic prospects are not at their best at the moment and the European Union has realised that it needs to coordinate economic policy and employment policy more efficiently .
The Commission proposal on streamlining coordination cycles has attracted the interest of all the institutions and numerous discussions have been held at various levels , illustrating that this proposal is not merely a technical proposal , as it might appear at first sight ; it is , of course , guided by important political objectives , such as efficiency and transparency in the application of the Lisbon agenda and the role of the European Employment Strategy which , after five years in practice , is now firmly established .
May I make a point of thanking the rapporteur , Mr Karas , and the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mr Bullmann , on a job extremely well done .
I shall confine my comments to a few basic issues .
First , the report supports the focus on the medium term .
This means that we need to be much more sparing when changing and revising the guidelines .
The Commission will approve a package of guidelines in keeping with the new programme for the first time in April 2003 , covering the three years up to 2006 .
We need to avoid any major changes in the guidelines before this mid-term review in 2006 .
We have proven that it is far better to keep to the guidelines and ensure they are applied than to constantly add new elements .
Secondly , this medium-term focus will require greater discipline on the part of everyone involved : the Commission , the Council , the European Parliament and all other interested parties .
Of course , the Commission will review the employment recommendations for each individual country every year in order to ensure that they still reflect political developments in each Member State .
May I remind you that the Treaty requires us to produce this annual report , which will take the form of application monitoring .
That brings me to the second aspect , which is consistency and complementarity .
It is vital that the two procedures complement each other if we are to achieve the maximum possible coordination between economic policy and employment policy .
We had a fair degree of overlap in the past ; on occasions , however , we also had contradictory approaches to the two strategies .
Thirdly , there is a need to focus on application .
Now that the employment strategy has been up and running for a number of years , we have identified the basic practical problems and the gap which often arises between submitting national action plans on employment and implementing them .
I should like to stress in particular that this streamlining procedure should result in closer collaboration , not just between the various Councils - the Ecofin Council and the Council on Employment will need to find a clearer and more efficient way of working together - but also between the institutions of the European Union .
I think that Parliament - and the entire procedure , of course - will benefit from this proposed streamlining of procedures , especially from more transparent information , with the main elements of the application of financial policies and employment policies being provided in a coordinated manner .
May I remind you that , in the past , information on these two procedures often came in at different times , giving rise to a great deal of confusion .
Fourthly , streamlining means a better governance model for these procedures , which in turn means more efficient consultation with the European Parliament and greater involvement on the part of the social partners and civil society .
The big issue as far as evaluating employment policies is concerned is that neither the social partners nor the national parliaments have been properly involved .
Finally , I must say that this proposal respects the need for autonomous procedures , as required under the Treaty .
In short , the economic guidelines provide an overall framework for economic policy but the employment strategy has the necessary degree of autonomy .
I am delighted that Parliament supports this approach .
So what next ?
This entire procedure coincides with the review of the employment strategy .
We shall be presenting an initial communication in January 2003 and both these documents , the communication on the revision of the employment strategy and the draft joint report , which we submitted a month ago , will be the two basic political papers and will need to be debated so that we can get to the spring Council and then start applying the new procedure with the guidelines .
We have a long history of collaboration with the European Parliament on the employment strategy .
I think that we now have an opportunity for even more efficient and substantial collaboration .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . Parliament has worked on this Commission proposal in a very focused manner , in a very focused and very concerted manner .
We were quick and we agreed across the committee and party political divide , under Mr Karas 's guidance , on what I think is a good position .
And because we have worked in such a quick and concerted manner , we can formulate clear demands on exactly what sort of coordination is required .
First , at no time , not for a minute , not for a second , does anyone have any authority whatsoever to subordinate the social goals of Lisbon , the employment policy ambitions of the Lisbon agenda , to a one-dimensional interpretation of the internal market .
This must be crystal clear and must be expressed in the procedures we choose .
On the contrary , only if you take specific measures to promote social integration , only if you develop the full potential of people in Europe and get them into work , will you have any chance of putting Lisbon 's demanding agenda into practice .
I say that quite advisedly in the present debate on job market reforms and the reform of social security systems .
Of course we need systems to be flexible and adaptable , but we also need them to be modern .
And a modern system is a system that offers security , security for job seekers , job security , security in the event of illness , old age or disability .
That is why economic reform is a means to an end when it comes to maintaining and renewing the European social model , not the other way round .
If this is what we want , we have to put the objectives of competitiveness , social security and full employment on a par with each other .
We have to find ways of linking these goals and making them mutually supportive .
And if that is what we want , we must also make sure that the relevant Councils and Commission departments are involved on an equal footing and that no new hierarchies are created or old hierarchies reaffirmed .
We shall be measuring you in your spring report , in your guideline package , on the basis of whether you meet these targets and do justice to what the streamlining concept promises .
Secondly , if we want to do justice to Lisbon and Gothenburg , we must stop beating about the environmental bush .
We must use the full potential of environmental policy in order to make it work for qualifications and employment .
Thirdly , as Mr Karas quite rightly points out in his report , economic policy is a matter of common interest which deserves to be coordinated .
If we want to coordinate it , then we also need to pluck up the courage to talk about investments and about an offensive in this area in the face of around 8 % unemployment and a growth rate of under 1 % .
Parliament will be involved in this discussion and we must secure our rightful place in it .
Madam President , the Commission communication actually takes up a proposal which Parliament has debated time and again in this Chamber since the second stage of monetary union , namely the need to try and coordinate and interlink the various political areas much more closely .
We have always taken the view that this will only work once all the political areas have been put on an equal footing and all the Councils are considered equal under a guiding General Council .
Unfortunately it took the Lisbon process , some six years later , to grab this opportunity and I am delighted that we have now moved from theory into practice . Commissioner , we have great expectations of the Commission ; we expect an agreement to be reached .
Europe is sorely in need of one .
And that applies not just to economic and employment policy ; it also applies to social and environmental policy .
Europe is sorely in need of one because we cannot afford the luxury of uncoordinated policies .
The Delors Commission concluded at one point that uncoordinated policies were costing us growth , which automatically means they are costing us jobs in the European Union .
We are counting on an end to this situation and from that point of view this new paper really is most welcome .
But it is only most welcome if it can rely on a more secure data situation than is presently the case and we can explain to our citizens that the coordination process is not just yet another euro-word or instrument which will not stand up in practice .
What do I mean by that ?
We need to be able to show that certain economic or employment or environmental policy decisions in one Member State also harm or benefit the national economy or the job market or the environment in another Member State and can halt , freeze or foster growth , and we need statistics that can provide us with the relevant data .
Unfortunately , to the disappointment of European economic researchers , this is still not the case .
What we need is a coordination profile and this profile may become clear in the question of how we bundle investments , investments in research and development for example , where Europe unfortunately still has a great deal of catching up to do .
The main thing is that Parliament should be involved under an interinstitutional agreement , at the very latest by the time the Convention completes its reforms and the Treaty is amended .
Madam President , no coordination , no procedure can be effective if there is a lack of political will .
This must be our starting point .
Some good objectives were set out in Lisbon and Gothenburg , but there is a huge gap between what is said and what is done .
The European Union is facing serious economic problems , its growth potential is slowing down , public and private investment is very weak and it is lacking skills .
Neither the Stability and Growth Pact nor the monetary policy is dealing with these challenges .
They are assigning everything to the Member States , and coordination cycles , which are designed to be the Member States ' area of discipline , cannot work if the Union also fails to adopt and implement common policies .
There is no genuine European economic policy due to differences between the Member States .
Coordination cycles do not examine economic relationships between countries .
And we do not yet have a global approach to the European economy and the eurozone , considered in the context of globalisation .
We do not yet have a policy on demand , networks or human capacities .
The Union is still an area of regulatory and fiscal competition , where the very notion of social market economy is not accepted and will not be incorporated , in my view , in the future constitution , especially since there is still genuine aversion towards economic affairs .
I shall now turn to institutional procedures .
What the Commission is proposing to us is purely technocratic .
I am in favour of merging different areas and setting up a cycle .
I agree with the principle of streamlining .
However , this will not remove the aforementioned political obstacles , hence my suggestions .
First of all , the Treaties provide no solid basis for communitarisation of the economic policy .
Our priority must therefore be to establish this basis in the Convention .
Secondly , no reliable comparative statistical and analytical tool exists , particularly for social cohesion and sustainable development .
As a priority , we must therefore provide the Union with investigative and analytical resources which are equal to its statements .
Thirdly , the proposed procedures do not yet have any democratic value .
We urgently need a broad public deliberation on the situations and options prior to the Commission 's package , as well as a subsequent evaluation , by civil society and the elected representatives , and not only by the Commission .
Fourthly , I do not believe that the European Parliament is today still capable of properly debating and of choosing a coherent economic policy .
Too many positions held are marked by national interests alone and ideological mindsets .
Having said that , Parliament is better placed than the Council and the Commission to deliberate and assess the economic policy .
An annual interactive discussion is therefore necessary between national communities and the Community institutions at Parliament 's initiative .
Only then will the Commission draft its proposals , only then will the decision be referred back to the Council , but Parliament could then have a power of ratification .
To sum up , without shared political will and a common democratic procedure , the coordination of national policies will fail .
Madam President , I would like to thank our rapporteur Mr Karas .
He has had a very challenging task to streamline the measures of coordination .
I fully welcome the efforts of the Commission in this respect and I want to thank our Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou , for your courage in proposing these items .
I do not want to be the black sheep of the House today , but I think that we should also be critical when it comes to expanding methods of open coordination to different areas .
In the report , Parliament says that we have two items which are important .
If you look at paragraph ( e ) in the Karas report - I will read an extract from the paragraph : ' Whereas a better streamlined review of implementation in the form of a new implementation package requires information on the implementation of policies agreed on Europe leading to an evaluation of implementation in the relevant policy areas ' .
This is a text from the report and it shows that , for Parliament , implementation of present coordination mechanisms is really important .
We have not seen enough concrete results from the coordination mechanisms and we need concrete results .
The other worry of Parliament concerns the role of Parliament and you can see from all of the reports that our role as a parliament , as a representative of the citizens , is very worrying for us .
In the working group of economic governors in the Convention of which I was a member , we had a majority of members who thought that the European Parliament and the European Commission should have a role to play and that the methods of open coordination and processes should be included in the Constitutional Treaty .
Unfortunately , I was in the minority in this working group , because I think that the main aim of the open method of coordination is to be flexible , and that it should not be in the Treaty .
We should use the current mechanisms .
Madam President , I would like to express my full support for the report on which we are about to vote , particularly for its comprehensive approach to the sustainable development strategy , as defined at Lisbon and , then , more specifically , at Gothenburg : it is not a formula for lumping economic , employment and environmental objectives together under one umbrella but an integrated approach which orients sectoral and horizontal policies towards a new concept of development .
In practice , this will allow us to discharge our responsibility towards future generations and the countries whose development is lagging behind .
I would like to focus briefly on the instruments necessary for the practical implementation of this strategy .
If we genuinely adopt the approach that quality of social conditions and of the environment are central rather than secondary to growth and that is an essential factor in competitiveness , the most appropriate implementation instrument would appear to be the method of open coordination , although it does need to be strengthened and streamlined , as the report states , particularly as regards the involvement of the European Parliament , which , moreover , needs to be better , much better equipped in this regard .
The success of such a policy depends on the genuine participation of all the institutional levels and all the social players .
Without this widespread committed involvement , development will not be sustainable .
Lastly , I would like to take this opportunity to sound the alarm , and in this I am supported , inter alia , by the Civil Society Contact Group .
The preliminary draft Constitutional Treaty presented by the Chairman of the Convention does not contain any reference to the concept of sustainable development .
If we do not reinvigorate what has already been affirmed by the Treaty and at Gothenburg , it will be a genuine cultural regression , a step backwards which , not least , will reduce Europe 's influence as a global player .
Madam President , we welcome the important step being taken today in the field of health and safety at work .
The proposal on risks to workers from physical agents was submitted eight years ago and the first part , on noise , was approved this year .
So we realise just how difficult , both technically and politically , this type of legislation is .
On behalf of the Commission , I should therefore like to congratulate the European Parliament , especially the members of the conciliation committee , on implementing what is , technically and politically , a particularly tricky issue .
Today 's final draft of the directive contains three important achievements .
First , it provides greater protection for workers in all sectors of the economy , including sea and air transport , which were not covered under current legislation .
Secondly , it recognises that the music and entertainment industry is a special case and grants it a five-year transitional period in which to draw up the codes of conduct needed so that workers and employers can honour their legal obligations and , thirdly , it reduces the limit of exposure from 90 db , which was the limit set in the 1986 directive , to 87 db .
Clear progress indeed .
Approval of this directive completes the second stage of the Commission proposal on risks from physical agents .
More work is needed on the remaining two sections of the Commission proposal , namely electromagnetic fields and optical radiation .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to call on the co-legislators to keep up their efforts to complete this legal framework on physical agents , which will give us an integrated framework for protecting workers and which , it must be said , has been lying on the negotiating table for far too long .

Madam President , I would thank the Commissioner for having eventually dealt with the other physical agents , for in that way I do not have to say that there are still elements we have missing . I am delighted , moreover , that the Commission has consistently placed the issue high on its agenda .
We all know that noise is a very serious problem for the working environment .
It is an area which has been fully explained in terms of science .
We know that , in actual fact , very little noise is needed to cause lasting damage to hearing .
We also know that damage to hearing can lead to a reduction in people 's capacity to work or to their possibly not being able to obtain jobs in the labour market ever again .
It is , then , a very serious state of affairs we are talking about .
I am therefore extremely pleased at our being able , tomorrow , to adopt a directive that gives workers better protection than that which they have at present .
It is , then , a better directive with which we are concerned here , first of all because we are now at long last obtaining a proper upper limit on the noise to which workers may be exposed .
I should like to have seen a lower limit , which is something I also proposed .
I should also like to have seen no account taken of protection from personal protection measures , but what we have here is nonetheless an improvement .
The other very positive factor is that the directive systematically attaches importance to the prevention made so much of in the framework directive .
Prevention is in terms of action values but , in connection with the directive , we have also attached importance to ensuring the presence of properly functioning hearing protectors .
There are , however , a number of other provisions that are to be avoided .
We must implement alternative working methods that minimise exposure to noise .
We must examine the work tools used in enterprises . Overall , employers ' responsibility for making the directive work is emphasised in the directive itself .
The directive provides protection and , in addition , it naturally makes clear the responsibility of employers in individual work situations .
Finally , a couple of words about the music and entertainment sectors .
This is a much discussed subject .
We have heard about the British pop industry and about bagpipe players , all of which livened up the debate .
It is not that I wish to provoke anyone with whom we have been debating this matter , but I should very much like to repeat that noise is , and remains , purely and simply noise .
Irrespective of whether it sounds pleasant or unpleasant , noise can cause very serious damage to hearing .
We have only to look to our own experience .
We are of course aware of who is most often affected by the illness known as tinnitus .
It is , in point of fact , people who have lived with pleasant noise or who have been affected by very pleasant noise , namely music .
We know , therefore , that noise is noise .
I am pleased that the directive recognises this so clearly .
The directive also acknowledges that the music sector may possibly have difficulty implementing the directive 's provisions within the deadline that has been fixed .
It has therefore extended the deadline for implementing the directive .
I am also very pleased that we have attached importance to prevention and to getting things to work in practice .
We have established a transitional period , but this is also to be used for preparing standards governing the behaviour of the whole of the music and entertainment sectors .
I am very satisfied with these standards because they are forward-looking and because they will , in a practical way , help the sector to observe the rules .
It is also worth pointing out that those standards of behaviour , or ideas for standards of behaviour , arose in the course of the actual work done by the trialogue , and this is therefore a good example of the way in which cooperation through the trialogue can lead to constructive and positive results .
It is not just a question of being combative .
Good ideas emerge too , which can lead to constructive compromises , and that is something many of us are pleased about .
In that connection , gratitude must also of course be expressed to the Commission for the role it has played and to the Council for its constructive cooperation .
Finally , I just want to say how pleased I am that we have achieved such a broad compromise and such considerable support here in the Chamber .
I now hope that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party will support this compromise and so confirm what its MEPs normally say in the committee , namely that , when there is scientific data and clear evidence that an issue constitutes a problem for workers , we must also legislate to solve that problem .
That is a view I hope the ELDR Group will comply with tomorrow .
I look forward to our obtaining a really large majority for a good directive .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , to follow on from the rapporteur 's closing words , both I and the PPE-DE Group are happy with the report and with the compromise which has been reached .
I think that this report lays another important stone in the edifice of health protection for European workers , even if , unfortunately , it will still be far too long before we have common European protection standards .
In this particular instance , the first proposal dates back to 1993 .
The noise directive was certainly no easy task , with the Council and Parliament taking up somewhat different positions .
But the whole purpose of the conciliation procedure is to bring about agreement even so .
Such agreement is , by its very nature , always a compromise but , as I said , we all have reason to be satisfied with this particular compromise .
Objectively speaking , noise protection has been increased ; the previous speaker explained the technical data and details .
But what is important is that it is clear-cut ; there are no grey areas or confusing discretionary powers when it comes to implementation .
The employer 's obligation to provide hearing protectors , check they are effective and make sure people wear them is new .
This sets out employers ' general duty of care without any room for misunderstanding .
My group was also concerned that an allowance should be made for the music and entertainment industry when it comes to applying the directive .
This is a welcome move for reasons of legal truth and legal clarity because it makes no sense to have to keep turning a blind eye to the fact that the directive applies to orchestra members in theory but is never applied in practice for reasons of comfort or on aesthetic grounds .
It is therefore simply more honest to allow a transitional period here and let the individual Member States and social partners decide what they want to do themselves .
I should just like to emphasise that , however pleasing it is on paper , this directive needs to be applied in practice .
I am becoming more and more convinced that employee protection directives look very pretty on paper but that nobody actually wants to implement them .
That may have something to do with economic developments , but it is precisely during hard times that we need to make sure that directives are implemented .
I say that with one eye very firmly on the candidate countries because we must set a very clear example here too .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work and I very much welcome the outcome of conciliation on the subject , but I think we have several causes for complaint as well .
Four subjects were covered by the original physical agents directive , noise was one , but the original 1986 directive on noise was due for revision in 1991 .
Here we are almost at the end of 2002 before we finally have a revised text .
Vibration was another subject but it took Council eight years to reach a common position on vibration , and , as we have heard from the Commissioner , we still have the aspects concerning fields and waves and optical radiation to be dealt with .
Progress is painfully slow .
Yet , all around us in this high-tech era we are increasingly being bombarded by fields and waves from wireless local access networks , from blue tooth devices , from class I lasers and the like .
I hope we will see a renewed sense of urgency on the part of Council .
The directive is to be welcomed .
It will bring about direct improvements .
Workers will be exposed less to noise at work .
Then their representatives will play a part in risk assessment in the choice of hearing protectors .
Our preventative audio-metric testing will be made available under certain circumstances .
All of these things and many others are to be welcomed .
For the music and entertainment sector , I think we have established a very good approach .
Member States will , as we have heard , draw up a code of conduct in consultation with the social partners and will give practical guidelines on how employers and employees can meet their obligations in that sector .
The approach has been very much welcomed by the Musicians Union of Great Britain who acted to coordinate the work of musicians ' unions across the European Union .
In the interests of time , I will make just one other point .
Many voices were raised in conciliation about the importance of business impact assessment on proposals of this sort - rigorous impact assessment .
I will pose the question here that I posed in Committee : what value should we place upon whether a person in their 40s or 50s can actually hear and communicate with their infant grandchildren ?
Because that is the part of the hearing spectrum industrial hearing loss often destroys .
So , let us have a cost-benefit assessment by all means , but let us take all of the costs and all of the benefits into account , not just narrow financial ones .
Madam President , we have moved a long way from when the rapporteur brought a report first to the Employment and Social Affairs Committee .
I think we still have problems for the entertainment and leisure industry but the rest of industry and the workers will find this directive very easy to live with .
If the original proposals had gone through , industry across the EU would have been decimated and workers thrown out of work - particularly in the construction industry , cement industry , mining and quite a lot of engineering industry - so thank goodness we have returned to some sort of sensible solution and moved back to the Council position where hearing protection can be taken into account when measuring decibel levels .
I am glad we have moved back to the weekly measurement granted by Member States if they so deem necessary .
But the amendment granting the leisure and entertainment business a five-year delay for implementation while the Commission looked at the best way to regulate this industry , taking into account the special problems faced by the pub and club industry in particular , was unfortunately lost that in conciliation , although , with a code of conduct , it is better than was first proposed .
I grant you that .
But at the present moment the current noise directive is not being implemented in the pub and club industries , neither in the UK nor in Denmark or in many other Member States .
The reason it is not being implemented is because it is not workable .
My problem is that if we add another layer of bureaucracy for the pub and club industry like this , we will cause tremendous problems .
That is why I personally refuse to sign off the conciliation because I believe we could have got more from the Council .
I was on my own apart from one notable exception so I appreciate the vote tomorrow will not make any difference at all to the final outcome .
We have , through a lot of hard work , got a better deal for industry and workers alike .
We could have got a better deal for the entertainment and leisure sector and I am sorry we did not take that opportunity .
Madam President , may I just say what a pleasure it is to be invited to take the floor at five minutes to midnight .
I often think - because it is usually the case with employment legislation - that it is all a plot by the Secretariat to remind us of the folly of the working time directive , not that we need to be reminded of that particular folly on that particular directive .
Regarding this one , this conciliated text is in my view a bad compromise on a bad directive .
It would have been much better for both parties to have kept their original positions and for the legislation to have fallen .
Certainly I voted against it ; I was the notable exception referred to by my colleague Liz Lynne .
I also voted against it in the conciliation committee for this reason , even though we did manage to dilute many of the dafter amendments during that committee process .
As far as the UK is concerned , existing noise regulations have been well thought through and these tighter regulations at EU level are neither necessary nor appropriate .
Mr Hughes mentioned the importance of business impact assessments and that they should be carried out thoroughly .
I agree with that .
It is significant that there has been no proper regulatory impact assessment at EU level to determine the costs and benefits of the proposed directive .
Certainly there was one done by the UK which established that the costs far outweighed the benefits and perhaps that is why the EU decided not to do one .
This legislation does not reflect the real world .
Coming two weeks after Parliament approved the atypical workers directive , where extra costs and red tape could mean the loss of 160 000 temporary worker jobs in the UK alone , this latest directive shows that the EU continues to operate in a time warp when it comes to employment and social legislation .
Finally , I would like to say that during the progress of the legislation through the European Parliament there have been three different ministers back in the UK , which may explain why the UK Government has made such a limp response to it .
The UK Conservative response will not be limp .
We will stand up for common sense and vote against it .
Mr President , as the final member speaking on this issue , I would like to repeat and underline that the directive will , over time , render occupational noise-induced hearing loss and associated conditions diseases of the past .
That is an achievement by the rapporteur , compounded by the fact that there were a number of national positions which were very difficult at the outset of this report , as has been said by other members .
A huge amount of work went into that position .
From the United Kingdom position , we were left with the situation where a number of issues had to be ironed out .
We now have a situation where our Government - and I am surprised at Mr Bushill-Matthews ' statement on this : we may have had three different ministers involved , but the fact is that the United Kingdom Government - and this is one of the governments most interested in this particular health and safety measure , believes that this strikes a good balance between improved worker protection and the need to avoid excessive and unnecessary regulation .
I think it is important not to caricature health and safety measures when a huge amount of work has gone into ironing out those national positions .
We heard a lot from Mrs Lynne about the impact on musicians in the entertainment sector .
We have all in the United Kingdom heard much said on this .
The fact is that those sectors have been satisfied by what could have been a far more difficult directive .
The rapporteur is to be congratulated on the progress made .
That is why I will be voting in favour .
Mr President , it is estimated that around 12 million vertebrate animals are used annually in the European Union for the development and the testing of drugs , vaccines , chemicals and other products .
A further nine million are bred and destroyed as surplus to requirements .
Since Directive 86 / 609 , which controls the use of animals in experiments , was first implemented more than 16 years ago , a great deal has changed .
The original purpose of the Directive was to avoid distortions in trade .
The European Union did not then have a duty , as it does now , to consider the welfare of animals in agriculture , research , transport or single market policies .
Today , animal welfare is the subject of extensive public debate and interest and concern about the use of animals has escalated .
Also , enormous progress has been made in scientific knowledge and practice .
For these reasons , as well as deficiencies in the actual operation of the Directive , with many cases of infringement action taken by the Commission over the years , it is clear that this Directive is in urgent need of revision .
The Commission has already made a commitment to review the Directive next year .
I hope that the points on which we have focussed in this report will guide their work because there are many lessons to be learnt .
The first is the need for a central European Union inspectorate to coordinate the work of inspectors in the Member States but with the power to visit facilities and revoke licences if necessary .
In 1986 , Parliament called for a standing committee to monitor the implementation of the Directive but it was not done .
I believe this has proved to be a mistake .
There is great variation between the Member States in the way that information is collated and in the way that replacement , reduction and refinement are applied .
For example , the Commission has already published two sets of statistics on the number and use of animals in experiments .
The data is required every three years .
It does not have to contain very much detail and there has been no standard format for presenting it .
Some Member States publish very detailed statistics annually while others publish the bare minimum as infrequently as possible .
This has made evaluating the implementation of the Directive difficult .
We need data to be published annually and in a standard format .
The use of alternative testing methods is , of course , central .
Animal experiments should be seen as exceptions to the rule rather than normal scientific procedures .
Work on alternatives is progressing fast .
This is where Member States should be concentrating and giving priority .
Related to this is Article 7 ( 2 ) of this Directive , which states that animals should be used for experiments only where there is no scientifically viable alternative .
Given that the Commission does not currently require detailed information on statistics , it is impossible to monitor whether this article is actually being implemented .
That is why the report recommends a central EU database including information on all animal experiments approved , currently performed and finalised .
This would allow for EU-wide checks to ensure that article was being implemented and that experiments were not being duplicated .
While the number of animals used for experiments had appeared to be reducing , the use of transgenic animals is rising .
This is something that could not have been foreseen in 1986 when the Directive was adopted .
There is inadequate provision for it in the Directive as a result .
Transgenic animals must be included .
Finally , many complaints from NGOs and other bodies and organisations relate to breaches of Article 5 on the general care and accommodation of animals .
This can largely be overcome by an EU-wide standard training course including animal welfare and the ethics of experiments .
There are four amendments to the report .
I would like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment .
I would also like to thank Mr Nisticò in particular for discussing his amendments with me .
I regret that I cannot support amendments 1 and 2 as they weaken the report considerably on a point which is of great concern , that is , the use of primates , especially wild caught primates .
I can support Amendment No 3 .
I believe there is general agreement in Parliament and in the Commission that Directive 86 / 609 is neither suitable nor effective today and that we need new legislation .
I hope that the Commission will take up Parliament 's recommendations .
I welcome the own-initiative report by the European Parliament on the Directive on the protection of laboratory animals .
I would like to thank Parliament and Mrs Evans for the initiative and the work accomplished .
The report comes at the right moment to maintain the momentum for the in-depth revision of the Directive .
In March 2003 , we will convene a meeting of a technical expert working group .
Experts from all stakeholders should elaborate on specific issues including those raised in the report .
However , I would just like to say that development and testing of weapons on animals and the respective ban proposed in the report are not covered by Community competence .
The report further highlights several cases of incorrect transposition of the Directive into Member States ' national legislation and cases of incorrect practical application .
We have been actively pursuing these cases and therefore four out of the nine cases presented in the report have already been successfully closed .
In conclusion , I consider the report to be most welcome .
It provides the key elements for the in-depth revision of the Directive .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your support for the two-step approach we have taken for amending the Directive .
The first step is currently under way and concerns the inclusion of the procedure for technical adaptation into the Directive .
Parliament adopted the proposal in July 2002 without amendments .
However , a modification in the wording has recently become necessary and Council is likely to adopt a common position .
Therefore , for the second reading , I would like to ask you again for a rapid adoption .
The second step for amending the Directive will , of course , be the in-depth revision .
I would again like to emphasise that I consider the Parliament 's report as an important input and I hope that I can count on Parliament 's continued support in our efforts to further improve the welfare of animals used in experiments in the European Union .
Madam President , the European Parliament has , on a number of occasions , expressed strong feeling about this matter and declared itself to be opposed to the use of laboratory animals when experiments are repeats of experiments which have already been carried out in other technologically advanced countries , when alternative , internationally approved methods exist and when the products in question are not strictly necessary , as in the case of cosmetics .
Directive 86 / 609 establishes boundaries and standards which the individual countries of the European Union have to respect in order to ensure maximum protection for animals : I hope that these are applied throughout the European Union .
We must remember , however , that the people who devote their lives to scientific research are skilled professionals , as are the Commission 's scientific consultants , who are therefore fully aware of this responsibility and perform experiments with the noble aim of eliminating diseases which are still incurable and fatal .
Moreover , we need to acknowledge that , for certain specific purposes , it is still necessary to use subhuman primates today .
It is necessary for the purposes of assessing the effectiveness and safety of Aids vaccines - every year , another two million people die - for the production of monoclonal antibody vaccines to fight diseases such as cancer , polio , tuberculosis or malaria , and where there are no alternative methods in existence .
To prohibit these types of experiments on primates would be to jeopardise the lives of a great many children and adults , Commissioner , depriving them of drugs and vaccines which are essential for the preservation of their lives .
I have tabled three amendments .
I am going to withdraw the second , but Amendments Nos 1 and 3 stand as before .
Amendment No 1 is particularly important to me , and I therefore hope that reason will prevail over emotion tomorrow , for No 1 is of fundamental importance for the protection of human health itself .
If Amendment No 1 is not adopted , I shall regrettably be forced - as I have already told the rapporteur - to abstain in the final vote .
Madam President , I should first like to thank Mrs Evans for an outstanding report and to thank Mrs Wallström for the positive reception she has given to Parliament 's report .
I think we were right to highlight the Member States 's poor implementation of the 1986 directive .
I also think that the report shows very clearly the need for tightening up the current rules .
I can fully support the Commission 's being obliged , by no later than next year , to table a proposal regarding the way in which animal experiments are to be regulated in future .
Among the areas I would earmark for tightening up is the area of application .
I think it important that animal experiments should also cover the use of animals for educational purposes , and we must look at the conditions under which transgenic and genetically modified animals are used in experiments .
We must establish some clear ethical rules .
I also believe it is very important for us to obtain a central database for approved animal experiments , both current and completed and both successful and manifestly unsuccessful .
I think it important that we obtain a combined database of this kind so that we avoid repeating experiments that have already been carried out .
Finally , I want to support Mrs Evans 's idea of obtaining better supervision of the circumstances in which animals are kept , possibly through a common EU inspectorate that can help ensure that the rules are observed .
May I say that I am able to support Amendment No 3 and that there will be a free vote on Amendment No 4 in the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
On the other hand , we are unable to support Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
I am looking forward to a proposal from the Commission that will live up to the expectations to which - inspired by Mrs Evans - Parliament 's report has given expression .
Madam President , I will start by saying that I do not belong to the cross-party group of animal rights extremists either by nature or by inclination , I have never been a vegetarian and I am not one of those people who likes to sleep with their dog on their bed .
I firmly believe that we are not bound to love animals but that we do have a duty to respect them .
This , too , is a way of measuring the degree of civilisation of a people .
The almost complete lack of attention on the part of many of the Member States to the need for proper implementation of Directive 86 / 609 on animals used for experimental purposes , the appalling shortcomings of the directive itself and the delay in realising the need for it to be updated are confirmation of at least two things : firstly , that animal welfare is a taboo subject in this wealthy , opulent Europe , and secondly , that international economic lobbies are still succeeding in preventing free , political debate on certain subjects .
Admitting , as I do , that scientific progress includes animal experimentation does not mean allowing the Member States to flout and repeatedly violate standards and to subject laboratory animals to unnecessary suffering .
Therefore , the European Commission must speed up its reform process in this area and step up its control and monitoring of non-compliant States , and Parliament , without allowing there to be tension between its head and its heart , must summon up the courage , with the resolution before us today , to take up arms and wage ideological war against the egoism and evil ways of mankind and , without jeopardising scientific research , confirm our unquestionable duty to respect defenceless animals .
Mr President , it is always a pleasure to hear a committed rapporteur and a committed Commissioner speaking on their common concern in this matter .
That , of course , has made the whole debate briefer because it is not interrogatory .
I want to say two things .
Firstly , it is extraordinary that a Directive promulgated in 1986 has still not been properly implemented in some Member States .
If Ms Evan 's report does nothing else , it has brought to our attention the need to speed up the process , because that is at the heart of the reform of our procedures generally : implementation , how it is done , rather than innovation , is now always the motto .
I agree with Mr Lund about Mr Nisticò 's amendments .
I have to say with great respect that I do not think I can support Amendments Nos 1 or 2 which he has withdrawn .
The reason , very simply , is that it seems to me to devalue animals caught in the wild , as though they are a cheap supply that can be brought in whilst all our concern goes towards zoo-bred animals and the contents of laboratories .
I also feel that we need to look very carefully in this Directive at exactly how the process of experimentation will go in the future .
We have this triptych here neatly from Ms Evans : replacement , reduction and scaling down .
I would add reflection - we ought to reflect before every experiment is carried out .
Why are we doing this ?
Is it being duplicated ?
What will the results be ?
It will be a good day for Parliament if we can do this as well as for the animals under consideration .
Madam President , a great deal has been said this evening on this subject .
Each speaker has explained his position calmly and resolutely , and , indeed , I do not even want to use all the time available to me for fear of repeating what has already been said .
Directive 86 / 609 laid down provisions which reflected the - as yet quite limited - understanding of that time .
Over 15 years have passed since that directive , during which time I would say it has had hardly any effect at all , for every day we receive news not of progressive alignment with the directive but of ill-treatment of animals and unlawful behaviour .
The States have to a large degree failed to comply with the directive ; the whole of society - human society as well as , of course , the animal kingdom - has not felt protected .
The report contains a number of very specific provisions on the behaviour of what are , indeed , major countries - Austria , Belgium , France , Ireland , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Portugal , Spain and the United Kingdom - which have behaved in different ways but , in any case , in such a manner as to justify the assertion that almost all the States have failed to comply with the directive for a long time .
This failure to comply has taken different forms but it is still failure to comply .
Few countries in the European Union have escaped criticism , and that may well be because they were not yet part of the European Union at the time in question and have therefore not been assessed .
I believe that there must be an undertaking in this regard .
The report 's proposals are certainly sound , the recommendations made by the Commissioner - although I feel she is a little overoptimistic - are certainly sound , but the important thing is for the legislation to be implemented , and so we need inspectors , we need monitoring , we need all possible endeavours to ensure that the directive is respected , even before we start to revise it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place later today at 11 a.m.
Short-term residence permits
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before we go into the discussion of Mrs Sörensen 's report proper , I wish to express my appreciation of the quality of her work and congratulate her on her personal involvement in the fight against the veritable scourge that is the trafficking in human beings .
The proposal for a directive we are considering today is undoubtedly an extremely worrying problem ; illegal immigration in its two particularly odious forms - on the one hand , the development of networks of smugglers who act for reasons that are far from humanitarian and , on the other , the exploitation of migrants in the trafficking of human beings .
More precisely , this directive concerns the victims of trafficking and smuggling under these two types of offence , which must not be confused with one another .
One of the key elements of dismantling networks that exploit migrants lies in obtaining information .
The victims are in the best position to be able to provide this type of information to the authorities . And , without this information , the authorities will find it more difficult to combat trafficking networks .
The aim of this proposal is therefore to strengthen the instruments for combating networks , by establishing a residence permit for the victims of action to facilitate illegal immigration or trafficking in human beings with arrangements that encourage them to cooperate with the competent authorities against the perpetrators of the offences in question , but avoiding any type of abuse in the way this mechanism is used .
It should be highlighted that , since trafficking in human beings and action facilitating illegal immigration are often interlinked , the scope of the text covers both offences , because these are basically parts of the same fight .
. ( NL ) Mr President , let me begin by thanking all those fellow MEPs who have contributed so much time and energy to what I think has been an extremely fruitful collaborative exercise .
It was in mid-September , and in this Chamber , that by far the most important conference on the subject of trafficking in human beings to date was organised by the International Organisation for Migration and the European Commission .
It resulted in the so-called Brussels Declaration , and in this Brussels Declaration you can clearly see the central importance of the directive that you have before you to vote on today .
It is important to point out straightaway that trafficking in human beings and smuggling of human beings form an integral part of our economy today .
It is essentially about treating people as if they were nothing more than merchandise .
At the same time victims of trafficking in human beings are victims of a whole range of abuses and criminal practices .
Trafficking in human beings has now also become the subject matter for committees , with nearly everyone seeming to want to take up a position on it .
What is frequently overlooked is that trafficking in human beings is proliferating because corruption , along with indifference and disbelief , is proliferating .
In a number of countries soon to become members of the European Union , parents sell their children in the hope of giving them a better future .
This proposal for a directive is a first and consequently important step towards eventual concrete action .
The directive requires the Member States to issue a short-term residence permit to victims of smuggling of human beings or of trafficking in human beings who are prepared to cooperate with the competent authorities .
The essence of the proposal is that , here , governments and the victims have shared interests , in particular that the criminal networks be shut down .
For the purposes of this special directive , the Commission has taken trafficking in human beings and smuggling of human beings together .
It is indeed the case that in purely legal terms they are two quite different things , but in reality the distinction is extremely difficult to make .
This proposal for a directive is however based on thorough practical knowledge of experts active in the field .
The experience we have acquired in Belgium for example proves that the instrument of a short-term residence permit does not miss its mark .
Other Member States too have such systems , albeit with varying degrees of success .
I fully support the Commission 's proposal and it is fundamentally important that its content remains intact .
First and foremost this means that some of the amendments touched on by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs are unacceptable , in particular , for me , Amendments Nos 7 and 27 , for the simple reason that they tear the proposal apart .
They turn it into an empty shell .
Voting for these amendments will be barely concealed approval for the practices of organised crime .
What I want to say is that this directive stands or falls by the minimum social provision for victims .
A victim will never want to cooperate if he or she is not offered the beginnings of an alternative to the situation in which they currently find themselves .
Allow me to say a few words on two other points .
Firstly , there are some who would want this directive to apply immediately to minors too .
At first glance this seems a good idea , simply because we can never do enough for the extremely vulnerable position of minors .
What is forgotten , however , is that what this directive is offering in the end is only a minimum .
Minors are offered very much more today in all the Member States and it would therefore be a real step back if minors were only accorded such minimal protection and rights .
This does not alter the fact that there is a real need for a special effort for victims who are minors .
Finally , I would like to say something else regarding a number of original amendments from Mrs van der Laan - Amendments Nos 20 , 25 and 35 .
Her alert legal mind envisages the possibility that in certain cases contact between victim and criminal can be accepted by the authorities to further the investigation .
It is a tempting idea , but it is a legal minefield in a number of countries .
The risk of kidnappings or even of manipulation and intimidation is also very real .
Victims willing to cooperate with the authorities want absolutely no contact at all with the criminals , not even from a distance .
I should also like to emphasise that this directive sets aside a special place for specialised and recognised NGOs , but also for international organisations and government agencies .
As Mrs van der Laan has likewise rightly said - and , although this , because of a technical error , does not appear in the text in front of you , it has been noted on the voting list - NGOs also have a special part to play as intermediaries between the investigation and prosecution services on the one hand and the victim on the other .
It is also important in this regard to emphasise that where NGOs are concerned they must be NGOs recognised by the state .
After all , anyone , even criminals , can set up NGOs .
Or , as not uncommonly happens , NGOs can be infiltrated and manipulated .
I therefore think that everyone involved with this matter should sign a code of conduct .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , international estimates indicate that traffickers in human beings transport up to 700 000 people every year , mainly women and children .
Every year , 120 000 women and children are lured into the European Union from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe alone .
These figures do not take account of either illegal immigration or the smuggling of human beings .
This highlights the urgent need for coordinated measures against this form of organised crime .
The proposal for a directive , which provides for short-term residence permits to be issued to victims who cooperate with the competent authorities , is an important step .
Up to now , there have not been any pan-European arrangements for dealing with the victims of action to facilitate illegal immigration or trafficking in human beings .
However , we need common European standards if we are to combat this form of crime .
The short-term residence permits proposed here will not undermine the current practice of deporting illegal immigrants .
Instead , the authorities will be put in a position to obtain information and incriminating evidence from victims who cooperate , with a view to apprehending traffickers and smugglers of human beings and commencing criminal proceedings against them .
Immediate deportation of victims may improve the statistics , but it does not bring us any closer at all to achieving our objective of effectively combating organised crime , whereas short-term residence permits for victims who cooperate make it possible to identify structures , break up criminal rings and bring criminals to justice .
That must be our goal .
At this point I would once again like to thank Mrs Sörensen very sincerely for all the commitment she has put into this report .
I would also like to thank the Commission and the other groups for their helpful cooperation , which I believe has led to a good end result in this report .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal is a creditable attempt as a Union , to get a better grip on smuggling of human beings and trafficking in human beings .
The circumstances under which people enter countries illegally are tragic and degrading .
All legal means must be used to tackle the criminals who show no mercy in their quest to earn big money .
The means proposed here can make a contribution to this .
Similar legislation for victims of trafficking in human beings was successfully introduced in the Netherlands some years ago .
Mrs Sörensen however immediately puts her finger on the weak point in the Commission 's proposal .
The definition ' victims of action to facilitate illegal immigration ' is unclear .
She proposes following the lead of the UN protocol against smuggling of migrants and using the term ' victims of smuggling of human beings ' .
The Commission is opposed to following this lead precisely in order to prevent misunderstandings .
This directive in fact affects a different group of people from those in the UN protocol .
The directive is only concerned with those who can reasonably be regarded as victims and who have experienced harm such as threat to life or assault on their physical integrity .
I understand this reasoning , but think that the Commission 's definition will provide for at least as many misunderstandings .
In effect we are talking about the same terms .
The problem is just that the term must bring to the fore that the people concerned have suffered disproportionate harm .
Mrs Sörensen tries to solve this by proposing the term ' victims of smuggling of human beings resulting in exploitation ' .
This term does not fit the bill either however because what happens then to the physical harm the Commission is talking about ?
Both definitions threaten to lead to abuse of the regulation .
The Council must consider carefully whether the offence of smuggling of human beings should be included in the directive in this way .
Especially as legislation in this area exists only in Spain .
I should also like to note that the deletion of Article 12 does not seem to me to be a good idea .
Access to the labour market , to vocational training and education is just one part of what this system should set up .
If it is omitted , what reason does the victim then have to cooperate with proceedings against the smugglers of human beings and traffickers in human beings ?
It is precisely through the opportunity to earn a little money and to receive some training that in the end you give them more opportunities in their homeland and you also give the homeland itself more opportunities .
Mr President , the resolution before Parliament derives its legal justification from an institutional framework where it is not hard to acknowledge the commitment of the European institutions , particularly the European Parliament , to the important and necessary action to stamp out one of the most dangerous and vile forms of criminal trafficking in existence : the trafficking of human beings . We must not forget that this encompasses the even more frightening phenomenon , which is often omitted and overlooked , of human organ trafficking .
In this connection , my country 's legal authorities have already carried out many detailed investigations , especially with regard to the north-east border , which , in an irresponsible move , had its border controls removed a long time ago .
I will now turn to the content of the resolution .
Without prejudice to the fundamental reasons behind this approach , which , of course , should be endorsed - for precisely these reasons and because of the need to take concrete steps to clamp down on trafficking in human beings and the promotion of illegal immigration - we must not ignore the risk . The danger is that , through the practical application of these rules in support of those who cooperate , we may create clandestine means whereby the same organisations can , through false or perfunctory cooperation , establish another method to bring persons into European Union territory illegally .
It is therefore extremely important to limit the scope and legal procedures , and clearly delineate the legal procedures of this process , precisely in order to avoid delays being contrived and the possibility of re-entry .
Lastly , I would like to remember the victim of an horrific reverse race murder two years ago : a young Swede killed by racists in Salem , a suburb of Stockholm .
Mr President , I too would like to explain once again why we feel totally unable to vote in favour of this report ; it is because the premises it is based upon are totally flawed .
Migrants put themselves in the hands of traffickers and smugglers of human beings because legal immigration into ' fortress Europe ' is virtually impossible nowadays .
That and that alone is the starting point for all this .
That is why trafficking in human beings and smuggling of human beings happen in the first place , and it is because people who come here in this way are forced into acting illegally that they find themselves in a precarious situation .
It is for that reason alone that it is possible to exploit them in the way that they are being exploited .
To that extent , I can say that I find the Commission 's proposal honest at least , because the title itself makes it clear that this is about ensuring that any form of illegal immigration is made more difficult , rather than about helping the ' clients ' of traffickers and smugglers of human beings .
That is evident from the fact that this report also covers smugglers who do nothing apart from transporting people across borders in return for payment .
That is why I have only this to say : if this really were a matter of helping people , which some Members have suggested to be the case , then we should be working to dismantle border arrangements in a consistent way and to guarantee that people have the freedom to choose where in the world they live .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by thanking everyone for their contribution to this debate and for the support expressed for the Commission 's proposal .
We agree with the amendments intended to clarify the system that has been proposed .
I am referring here to simplifying the residence permit , to the possibility of extending the reasonable reflection period on the basis of serious grounds and to the need for the victim who has been issued with a residence permit to remain available to the competent authorities .
Similarly , we can support the amendments specifying that the victim must be informed in a language they understand or that they can submit a request for asylum as well as the amendments stipulating that the decisions to withdraw or not to renew a residence permit can be appealed against and that the withdrawal of authorisation must have good reason .
We also support the amendments that seek to clarify certain concepts , such as the seriousness of the offences referred to or the examples of vulnerable persons .
We cannot , however , support the proposals that eliminate the granting of social benefits such as access to the labour market , to vocational training and to education .
We are talking about short-term residence permits and these measures will not only have a major economic impact but will above all provide an important incentive for cooperation with police authorities .
Similarly , we feel that minors must not be included in the common rules .
The provision of a specific framework that guarantees greater protection for minors , who are particularly vulnerable victims , is of the utmost importance .
Lastly , we believe that giving victims the opportunity to maintain relations with trafficking networks in order to work as informers could have terrible consequences .
We must be aware of the power of these networks , of the vulnerability of the victims and of the risk that such a solution would entail .
Lastly , we cannot accept the amendments which , although reasonable and well-founded , appear to exceed the legal basis of this instrument : I am referring to the protection of privacy , to the identification of the victim in a court case and to the recognition of harm suffered and compensation for this , which are covered in other texts , both at European and at national level .
I wish once again to thank Parliament for the support it has given this Commission initiative .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
That now brings us to the next item on the agenda , but we have a slight problem .
Mr Prodi , the President of the Commission , is on his way here , but it will be a little while before he reaches the Chamber .
The sitting will therefore be suspended for a few minutes .
( The sitting was suspended at 9.35 a.m. and resumed at 9.45 a.m. )

Mr President , this is not a procedural issue .
At this very moment an oil tanker is moored in the port of Gibraltar , the ' Moskowsky Festival ' , which the Spanish Government , specifically the Spanish navy , expelled last Saturday , sending it more than 400 miles from Galicia .
This is an oil tanker which is not good for Galicia , which is not good for Community seas and which should not be moored in a free port nor in waters which both Spain and Gibraltar consider to be their own .
The next item is the Commission statement on its contribution to the work of the European Convention .
. ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , the Commission will present its second contribution to the Convention on the future institutional structure of the Union .
To avoid any misunderstandings created by press reports , I would like to make it clear from the outset that , today , I am here to present , as agreed , only the text that the Commission has adopted .
The document on the Constitution of the European Union , which has been reported by the press , is nothing more than a working document , a feasibility study that Commissioner Barnier , Commissioner Vitorino and I commissioned from a group of legal experts in the Commission , in order to have an initial idea of how a Treaty could be organised .
The document was essentially drawn up on the basis of the structure of the preliminary draft presented to the Convention by the Praesidium .
As it is simply , I repeat , a technical working tool , it was neither discussed by the College nor submitted for its approval , and the College has therefore no political responsibility for its content .
Although it was formulated mainly for internal use , I thought it my duty to inform Mr Giscard d 'Estaing of its existence , and , for the sake of transparency , we have decided to post it on the Internet by the end of the day in order to make it available , as others have done in the past , as a working tool for the Convention and for all those interested .
To set the tone for my presentation and the subsequent debate , I would like to recall someone who played a leading role in laying the first foundations of the European project .
This is what Jean Monnet said about his famous method : ' I never thought we could change human nature .
But by changing the context in which people live , by giving them the same rules and the same democratic institutions , we can succeed in changing the way they behave towards each other .
Within the Community , Europeans are learning to live together as one and the same people .
We are not merging states , we were uniting human beings . '
If we want to look ahead , far ahead into the future , we need to climb onto the shoulders of the great statesmen who have gone before us .
That requires a responsible and humble approach , and it is with humility that I propose to follow Jean Monnet 's intuition in order to meet the great challenges of the future .
To unite all the citizens of Europe , we must create true harmony between the States and between the peoples .
The debate that has taken place in recent months since the Convention opened has already clarified many unclear areas and answered many questions .
First , the debate has made it plain that citizens do not want the Union to withdraw from areas where it is present .
On the contrary , people want the Union to be more prominent in foreign policy , in justice and security and in social affairs .
Moreover , there is broad agreement on the Community method , which is at the heart of so many of our achievements .
Relations between the main institutions certainly need to be streamlined and clarified , but even the most sceptical have realised that without a strong Community element , Europe would become less effective and less democratic too .
Our contribution to the Convention seeks to respond to these concerns .
In short , it has three objectives : the Union must become more democratic , more effective and clearer .
The path to these goals has not yet been marked out in detail , but we already know where the starting and finishing lines are .
The reshaping of the Union must be grounded on its twofold nature as a Union of peoples and of States , together with a third source of the Union 's legitimacy , the fact that it safeguards the common interest .
Our path must lead us to build the world 's first true supranational democracy .
To give more democratic substance to our structure , we need to establish the roles and responsibilities of the main institutions more clearly .
We therefore have two proposals for reform .
The first concerns the appointment of the Commission .
The President of the Commission should be elected by the European Parliament by at least two-thirds of the votes cast in a secret ballot .
Once it has confirmed the appointment of the President of the Commission , the Council , by common agreement with him or her , will designate the other members of the Commission .
The European Parliament will then approve the whole Commission , as appointed by the Council .
The second innovation concerns the Commission 's dual accountability to the European Parliament and the Council .
We propose that both institutions should have the right to pass a motion of censure on the Commission .
This will give the institutional triangle more balance and will strengthen the Commission 's position as guarantor of the general interest .
Clearly , this is a particularly delicate and bold proposal , but , in my view , the proposed arrangement divides decision-making power more fairly between the representatives of the national governments and the representatives of the people , that is , between the Council and Parliament .
For the same reason , we propose to make codecision the rule .
All European legislation must be put forward by a Commission proposal , adopted by a majority vote in the Council and codecided by the European Parliament .
Lastly , as I have often said in this House , the time has come to put Parliament on the same footing as every other democratically elected parliament , by reforming the way the Union is financed .
Its responsibilities are typical of those of all the world 's parliaments .
We want to give the European Parliament more power to make decisions on resources .
The Union 's budget must therefore be adopted by the European Parliament and the Council by a procedure derived from codecision , as I mentioned a moment ago .
As the Praesidium also acknowledges in its draft Constitutional Treaty , the Union must have its own resources . This would remove the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
Ladies and gentlemen , the key points in the Communication form a single unit .
The democratic legitimacy of our institutions , for example , is closely bound up with their functions .
Our main proposals in this respect can be summed up in three points .
The first point is to abolish unanimous voting , as this rule has played a part in the darkest periods of the Union 's recent history .
If the veto has frequently paralysed decision-making with 15 Member States , just think what could happen with 25 or more .
That is why I believe majority voting should be the rule .
However , the current system of weighting is extremely complex and a mystery to the citizens , and not just to them : experts find it impossible to understand too .
We therefore propose that the Council should take practically all decisions by a twofold , simple-majority vote , that is , a vote which represents both a majority of the Member States and a majority of the citizens .
More sensitive decisions would clearly require enhanced majorities .
The second point concerns the Presidency of the Council , an issue that has caused rivers of ink to flow .
I believe that the proposal for a President of the Union , put forward by several quarters , creates more problems than it solves .
On the one hand , it enhances the continuity and visibility of the Union , but , on the other , it denies the Member States and deprives us all of the opportunity for involvement at European level .
There are other concerns too .
Who would elect the President of the Union ?
Who would this President be accountable to ?
And above all , as Mr Verhofstadt remarked , what would this President do for the other 360 days of the year when the Council is not in session and George Bush is not calling ?
It is clear that such a position would open a rift in our institutional structure .
We therefore recommend maintaining the system of rotation for the Presidency of the European Council , the General Affairs Council and the Committee of Permanent Representatives .
For all other Council configurations , we propose a new formula , that members of Council configurations should elect a president from one of their number , with a one-year mandate .
This formula will bring greater continuity to the Council 's work and put the Presidency in the hands of persons who enjoy the full confidence of their peers .
The third point concerns our external representation .
The Union must act as one in the international arena in order to defend its values and promote its social model .
In terms of trade , the Union is already on an equal footing with the other leading players on the world stage .
Why , then , can we not be equally credible in the political arena ?
This requires imagination and courage because it is vital for the Union to speak with a single voice in international politics .
What we propose is a new post of Secretary of the Union for Foreign Affairs .
The Secretary will be appointed jointly by the European Council and the President of the Commission , and will also be a Vice-President of the Commission .
It follows that the Secretary of the Union must report personally to both the European Council and the President of the Commission .
As a member of the Commission , though , the Secretary will be jointly accountable along with the other Commissioners before the European Parliament .
As you can see , this is a major innovation , but , I repeat , it is unavoidable .
Given the magnitude of the change - and this is important - we plan to have a transitional period , at the end of which the Secretary of the Union will take full charge of his duties .
I would like to outline these briefly .
The Secretary of the Union will autonomously exercise the Commission 's right of initiative in foreign policy in accordance with the Council 's guidelines .
The Council , or a group of Member States , may , however , ask the Secretary to present suitable proposals to the Council to achieve common objectives .
The Secretary of the Union for Foreign Affairs will also be responsible for implementing common decisions and , most importantly , the Secretary will be the Union 's sole representative for foreign policy in relations with non-Member countries and other international bodies .
Various Union activities , such as trade and development cooperation policy , are connected with foreign policy .
Continuity in these areas will be ensured by collaboration between the Secretary of the Union and the President of the Commission who , in this respect , will coordinate matters .
The issue of the Union 's external representation is also relevant to economic affairs .
Representation of the euro area in the international arena needs to be settled .
The euro 's economic strength is now recognised : it also needs to become a force politically and make its presence felt in the wider world .
The third and final key point of our proposal is simplification and clarity .
The current volume of directives , decisions and regulations that combine to form our body of legislation is possibly the biggest barrier citizens face in understanding the European institutions .
The Commission believes it is time to put in order the instruments at our disposal .
We propose , therefore , to classify legislation into just three categories : organic laws adopted by enhanced majorities by the European Parliament and the Council ; laws adopted by codecision by Parliament and the Council ; implementing regulations adopted by the Commission in order to put these laws into effect .
The Constitutional Treaty must make a clear distinction between laws and implementing regulations .
Moreover , it must be clear who implements European legislation in practice .
We propose that the Commission should have exclusive competence for implementing - I repeat , implementing - European legislation , and , as I said , it will be accountable for this to both Parliament and the Council .
The principle of transparency must also apply to what is known as comitology .
We therefore feel that only advisory committees should be maintained .
When the legislator decides to adopt laws at European level , I repeat , the Commission alone should have responsibility for their implementation .
However , where the Commission is to perform a legislative role by delegation , then it is only right that both branches of the legislative - the Council and Parliament - should be on the same footing as regards the possibility of monitoring the Commission 's activity , referred to as ' call back ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , When I quoted Jean Monnet at the start , I said that , at this stage of European integration , we need to look far ahead .
The debate aroused by the Convention in recent months has already widened our horizons .
The national parliaments and governments have believed in it right from the start , and sent major figures to represent them .
The goal of the Convention has become more ambitious .
It is no longer just a question of ensuring that the institutions work well after enlargement : it must establish the overall shape of the Union for generations to come .
I am pleased to see this development .
The Convention that Parliament and I too wanted so keenly is providing our fellow citizens and the whole world with an analysis of all aspects of our institutions .
I am also pleased that this is taking place in the light of day .
The coming months will see the emergence of a new , united Europe , and we can be proud that it will have come into being democratically and transparently .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we warmly applauded the President of the Commission just now .
I am pleased for him personally , but I am also pleased about the case he has been making .
We cannot always applaud the President of the Commission so enthusiastically .
Mr Prodi , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats wishes to sincerely thank you and the whole Commission for the work you have done .
I would also like to add that our group very much supports the Commission as regards the future of the European Union and its institutions .
That does not mean that there will not be differences of opinion between us on points of detail , and today 's debate is one which forms part of a process in which we need to exchange views , and a process in which others are also involved , such as governments , with whom we ultimately need to achieve a result as well .
I believe that the most important thing in the debate over the coming months will be for the Commission and Parliament to ensure in no uncertain terms that the outcome of the Convention is underpinned by the Community method .
The Community method means the institutions of the European Union acting together and it particularly means that we must very firmly reject the intergovernmental method .
I want to make this point crystal clear , and in the full public gaze : if at the end of the Convention the intergovernmental method wins the day , we could not support that .
In that respect , we are totally at one with the Commission .
We want a democratic Europe , and as far as we are concerned a democratic Europe means a representative democracy at EU level .
That means the European Parliament being closely involved in all legislative issues , as a 100 % co-legislator , as Mr Romano Prodi said .
However , a democratic Europe based on representative democracy also means that we recognise the principle of subsidiarity .
If we do not want a chamber at EU level consisting of national Members of Parliament , then we also need to strive to define what tasks are European tasks .
All other tasks are tasks for the Member States of the European Union and it is the job of the Member States of the European Union to define what are national matters , what are regional matters and what are matters for local authorities .
The principle of representative democracy must apply at all four of these levels - local authorities , regions , nations and the European Union .
That implies that we need to link the Community method at EU level with the principle of subsidiarity .
We need Europe to be effective - let me emphasise that point - and to be clearer and easier to understand .
As far as we are concerned , a key issue and one linked with the Community method is that the Europe we are building should be a legal Community .
Because if it is not a legal Community it will be an intergovernmental Europe , and that would be opening the way to political opportunism , and history has shown that to be a very bad thing for Europe .
It is not possible for me to talk very much about the many points of detail in the four minutes I have at my disposal , but I urge us all to consistently be guided by the issue of method when we have individual decisions to make .
My request to the members of the Convention , and let me repeat it here , is this : make sure that the Convention achieves results .
If we do not manage to achieve any results in the Convention , and transfer this task to the Intergovernmental Conference , the outcome of that conference will owe less to the Community method than what we can achieve in the Convention .
That is why I am calling for our work in the Convention to be completed and for a willingness to compromise to be demonstrated in that forum , so that by the end of June 2003 we will be able to present a reasonable proposal for a European constitution .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to inform the House that I have written to President Prodi , as I did on 14 August to ask for solidarity with the Germans , the Austrians and the Czechs , telling him that now that the oil slick has reached Galicia we have to remember that the Galicians are European citizens .
I am not asking you to take four Commissioners , as you did when you went to Germany , to wade around in the mud , but I would ask you , Mr President of the Commission , to make a clear gesture of solidarity .
Furthermore , bear in mind that you have important responsibilities which affect many areas .
For example , it would be good if Commissioner Fischler , who is an inland person , could see that 60 % of the world industrial production of turbot is in danger .
With regard to the Commission 's proposal on the Convention , I would say first of all that the Socialist Group , President Prodi , welcomes the fact that the Commission has done its duty as a driving force - although you have come to Parliament on foot ? and as guardian of the Treaties .
You have presented , at an appropriate moment , a proposal which my group considers to be positive and which , furthermore , must contribute to making the work of the Convention more dynamic .
We believe it is a good proposal .
There are many aspects on which we are in complete agreement : the removal of the unanimity rule in the Council ; the proposal of a democratic budget with the removal of obligatory expenditure and , with regard to the issue of revenue , I can tell you that my group has voted and the majority of us are in favour of a Community tax ; the proposal for European lists for elections , a harmonised electoral process , promising positions on comitology .
There are other proposals which we welcome as working proposals . One of them is that the President of the Commission should be elected by the European Parliament , something which I believe a large majority of this House advocates .
We are not convinced that the unanimous approval of the European Council is required .
I would point out that the European Council already voted in Corfu and since then votes for the President of the Commission by majority .
Although in your case it was by acclamation .
Similarly we approved the merger of the High Representative of the Council and the Vice-President of the Commission for External Affairs , and this may give us more strength .
In any event , we have to take a decisive step towards a common foreign , security and defence policy .
And now I will mention those proposals with which we clearly disagree .
Firstly , we cannot accept the idea that the European Council can pass a vote of no confidence in the Commission .
This would ruin the balance between the institutions .
We must move on from co-decision to shared legislative power .
To this end there must be a Legislative Council which is truly a second Chamber , that is , one that legislates in public and democratically , transparently and clearly .
We must tackle the problem of the Council 's combination of executive and legislative power .
I would suggest that in this regard we incorporate the Trumpf and Solana proposals and the contents of the Poos report , which are very sensible .
A final point , Mr President of the Commission , is that Parliament asked last month for a proposal to the Convention for a legal basis for the protection of pluralism in the European media .
There is nothing of this sort in your proposal and I hope that the Convention will include it .
Mr President , with regard to the Penelope document , I believe we must work like Penelope but in shifts .
Certainly the Commission and Parliament will have to work by night to try to redo what others are going to undo by day .
And I would remind you that the time for transactions , pacts and compromises is at the end , that is , at the end of the Convention .
In the meantime , we will have to work shoulder to shoulder for the common Community cause .
( Applause )
Mr President , sometimes it is an advantage to be spokesman for the third group in Parliament because it has provided me with time to read the Commission 's paper .
I can , therefore , say with some authority that I strongly welcome it .
It is a strong assertion of the Commission 's orthodox function and it should shift the debate about where a power lies , centre stage inside the Convention .
It represents a challenge to those Prime Ministers who prefer to opine on the fringes of the Convention but who seem far too frightened to contribute official proposals .
As most of the items in the Commission 's programme appear also in my draft for a federal Union it is clear that I shan 't be your fiercest critic and , while I commend the firm rejection of an idea of a Super-President of the Council , I do have concerns and reservations about the proposal for an executive Presidency of the Council .
I wonder if this would not lead to more of the inconsistency and the conflict with the Commission that we have at present .
Surely it would be an improvement to follow the logic of what you propose for foreign and security policy , which is the virtual cloning of Mr Solana and Mr Patten , and to follow that practice in the other two areas where the Council enjoys executive authority .
Why not let the Commissioner responsible chair the Council in its formations for economic policy and interior affairs ?
Nevertheless , despite some reserves the Parliamentary delegation in the Convention will follow the principal lines of this proposal and I look forward to future close collaboration inside the Convention with Mr Barnier and Mr Vitorino .

Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , unlike my Liberal fellow-Member , I have not been able , in my capacity as spokesperson of the fourth group in this House , to read the Commission communication in the time available , as I have just discovered that it is 145 pages long , and I congratulate Mr Duff on his ability to speed-read this document !
Mr President , I would like to specifically mention that I welcome the fact that the Commission is at present making a substantial and constructive contribution to the Convention and has presented its views to us here at the appropriate time , because that guarantees that the Commission 's contribution can be taken on board in the Convention 's work .
In January we will be starting work on the actual content of the constitutional treaty , and I am sure that the Commission 's proposals will play an important part then .
Mr President of the Commission , I am in agreement with the objectives you mentioned , because this is a matter of making the European Union more democratic , more efficient and more transparent .
I specifically welcome the fact that you highlighted the dual nature of the European Union as a union of Member States and a union of peoples , and I think that it is indeed one of the Convention 's jobs to make the European Union the first genuinely supranational democracy in the world , as you just called it .
I would very briefly like to mention those points which , on the basis of what you have just said , I support .
I have in mind the clear commitment to the Community method , your proposals for enhancing and strengthening the role of Parliament , and the extension of the codecision procedure to all legislative decisions .
I support the proposal for the European Parliament to elect the President of the Commission in future , and I also agree with your rejection of the creation of a permanent President of the Council .
I also support the proposals for law making that you have just mentioned .
I would like to touch on a problem that you did not mention in your speech , and that is the issue of dividing the treaty into two parts .
It is generally assumed that this is connected with the fact that the whole constitutional treaty is to be primary legislation .
However , no one has explained yet how that justifies splitting the constitutional treaty into two parts , and the question naturally arises of the different procedures for reviewing points of law stipulated in these two parts of the treaty .
That is why I would be interested to know , Mr President of the Commission , whether your proposal today provides for different review procedures in the constitutional treaty .
I ask because one thing is clear : under German law it would not be feasible , for example to facilitate adjustments to the ' second part ' of the constitutional treaty , that is to say if it emerged that the EU was in practice to be given a ' competence competence ' .
In other words , it must be clear that the second part of the treaty must also be subject to the ratification procedure by national parliaments in future , in which case , as I have already said , I would be interested to know what the Commission 's line is on this .
Mr President , it is a case of better late than never as far as the Commission is concerned !
There has been virtually no major stage in the history of European integration so far that did not begin with a vision on the part of the Commission , underpinned by a major plan and a White Paper .
This constitutional process is in fact the first major step where the Commission has lagged cautiously behind and has , if anything , been reactive instead of leading the way .
I nevertheless welcome what President Prodi has said .
He has summarised the results of the Convention so far , and he has come down on the side of the angels on some contentious issues - by which , if I may be so bold , I mean on the side of the European Parliament - and in particular he has come down on the side of a Community Europe , and against an intergovernmental Europe , and he has presented a whole raft of intelligent proposals .
I too have been unable to read this document as quickly as our friend Andrew Duff has , so I can only make a few limited comments .
One thing needs to be said about this paper - it does not make any sparks fly !
It does not generate any great enthusiasm or paint any broad canvases .
It does not attempt to involve the public , the citizens of Europe , in this mighty battle for power .
It is a very cautious , perhaps technocratic and certainly intelligent , and sometimes even clever paper .
Yes , you have come down in favour of the Community method , but in that case you should also have presented a bolder picture of European unity .
There are major tasks and important horizons involved in this process of European integration , but you have not presented them here .
The social dimension , which is may be the main issue on which the Convention will founder , scarcely gets a mention .
The same applies to European democracy .
This paper talks , for example , about a ' constitutional text ' rather than about a constitution as such .
Yes , you are in favour of scrapping the unanimity rule , but it is nevertheless to be retained when it comes to modifying Commission proposals .
Unity and democracy are all very well , but being given power is a little more important .
As regards the Charter of Fundamental Rights , I cannot find any reference here to access to the European Court of Justice , which rules on fundamental rights .
The role of Parliament is to be enhanced , but the right of initiative remains exclusively that of the Commission .
Parliament is to elect the President of the Commission , but the President is also to be accountable to the Council .
And the responsibility of the Commission is far from clear , with the Commission being given greater scope for tactical manoeuvring , while the public is to gain relatively little .
I do not want to allow this to become too much of a critique .
This is a proposal that also makes the Commission Parliament 's ally , but I would have liked to have seen more determination to tackle the really important tasks and to respond with a sense of vision , particularly as regards Europe 's response to the dangers of globalisation , to the unprecedented intellectual and political challenge of developing a supranational democracy , of taking the separation of powers seriously , of taking the rejection of an intergovernmental Europe seriously , and of making the legislative process more open and giving the public access to all documentation .
I hope that we can still persuade the Commission not to be merely cautious in making common cause with us , but also to be our ally as regards new horizons in European integration .
President Prodi , we have listened attentively , of course , to your speech and have drawn some positive aspects from it as well as others with which we cannot agree .
This is to be expected and is healthy in a democracy .
What needs to be emphasised is that this is a significant contribution to the definition of the Europe of the future , which , alongside other contributions , will enable the Convention to continue its work to achieve a result which is based on consensus and which is politically realistic . This is the only way in which we can hope to wield some power and influence over the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
In addition to various proposals and concrete solutions that we will be discussing in the Convention and which of course reflect the position of the Commission and its idea of increasing internal power within the existing institutional framework , the main conclusion we drew from your words was the concern to answer one key question .
The fundamental issue that everyone , including the Commission , has to face is how to maintain an enlarged European Union 's ability to pursue its fundamental aims of development and economic and social cohesion and freedom and security for the present and future citizens of its Member States .
We must acknowledge that European integration is an increasingly complex process , not only as a consequence of its internal dynamic , which is a victim of the natural conflict between national sovereignties and the concept of consolidating a European sovereignty , but also because this is happening against an international backdrop that is increasingly subject to the consequences and dangers of globalisation , to the threats of terrorism , to violent conflicts more or less everywhere , to financial , environmental , and energy crises as well as unemployment , exclusion and poverty .
Nevertheless , we must acknowledge that , in the Convention , all issues have been discussed openly , frankly and fairly .
We cannot have closed issues and nor must obstacles be thrown in the way of the debate .
The peoples of the current and future Member States demand and deserve this .
We feel that confidence in the Convention is , in fact , growing , because , in addition to the now traditional Community institutions , it also encompasses national institutions , in other words , the governments and the parliaments of the Member States and of the candidate countries .
Without wishing to state that there are two sides involved , not least because , as a result of circumstance , all parties have become mixed up together within the Convention , and rightly so , the fact is that this national component provides added value to the debate .
I say this because , instead of there being one European public , we now have fifteen , soon to be twenty-five and later there will be even more national public opinions and it is to these that we should be addressing our words , because these have the ability to influence the direction Europe will take .
Let us speak , however , in practical terms .
What is at stake here ?
In political terms , what is at stake is questioning , debating and defining ' things ' as simple as the democratic legitimacy and the governability of the European Union ; also at stake are the aims of the Union and its place in the world , the allocation and the definition of EU competences and their adaptation to the Community acquis , the simplification of the Union 's instruments , its democracy , transparency and efficiency , the role of national parliaments , the efficiency of the decision-making process and the functioning of the institutions in an enlarged Union and the drafting or otherwise , of a European Constitution .
Everything , then , is at stake and rightly so , because this is how debates should be undertaken .
Consequently , the first question that we should ask is : what sort of Europe do we want to build ?
To this end we need to define this European model in political terms .
This task is the responsibility as well as the duty of everyone .
The Commission has today once again performed this task and I could add that we have confidence - still - in the nations and , consequently , we believe in Europe .
We trust in the Nation-State , and consequently believe in a Europe based on its nations having the freedom to take decisions which is underpinned by the States having equal legal status .
We have confidence in the peoples of Europe and therefore believe in a Europe that means greater democracy and not the opposite , which is greater bureaucracy .
We have confidence in diversity and we therefore believe in a Europe that respects the traditions of its Member States , preserves their cultural heritage and safeguards their respective languages .
We have confidence in subsidiarity , and therefore believe in a Europe that does not seek to retain for itself decisions that could more advantageously be taken by the Member States .
We have confidence in solidarity , and therefore believe in a Europe in which economic and social cohesion also results in the prosperity of the peoples and of all the remote and outermost regions without exception .
We have confidence in peace , stability and security and therefore believe in a Europe that is united but not uniform , which can be mobilised by great causes , and which is governed by values and guided by principles .
I shall conclude by saying that the obvious target of the Commission 's contribution to the debate here is the Convention .
The Convention is now entering the critical stage of its work , and so we hope that the proposals that it puts forward , which we would like to be politically realistic and consensual , fulfil their task of enabling the Heads of State and Government who are present at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference to take the best decisions on behalf of the Member States and the peoples that they represent .
This is , furthermore , our duty .
Mr President , not unexpectedly , the Commission is proposing that it be given more power .
The European Parliament and the EU 's prime ministers are also agitating to be given more power .
It is not difficult to foresee the compromise at the Rome Summit in December of next year .
The prime ministers scarcely wish to relinquish foreign and security policy , so they will choose someone from the European Council to represent the EU to the outside world .
They may , for example , get Tony Blair to become the EU 's first president and then make Mr Aznar President of the next Commission .
Instead of concerning itself with foreign and security policy , the Commission would be given power over the developed cooperation on juridico-political and police matters for which , of course , Mr Aznar has a special predilection .
The Commission may also be given increased executive powers , and Mr Aznar 's leadership become a proper government that stands accountable .
Yes , but to whom ?
It will scarcely be the European Parliament alone but , presumably , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's proposed Congress in which the national parliaments too may be taken hostage and find themselves with nothing but a congress of yes men , designed for applauding the prime ministers ' election of commissioners by majority voting .
In return , the European Parliament will see the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure abolished and so be given more power over expenditure . It will also see common decision-making extended to include more areas and so be given greater influence over legislation .
The EU 's prime ministers are being given more power and the Commission is being strengthened , as is the European Parliament .
When all the supranational institutions are reinforced , someone must lose out , and it is the voters , who will no longer have the final word concerning legislation in quite a few areas .
They are left with less democracy , every time that more supranational and undemocratic power is handed out in the EU .
Mr President , the draft institutional reform that the Commission is today presenting to the Convention and to Parliament , and the essence of which at least was communicated to the press two days ago , is clearly breaking new ground in its proposals on the responsibility of the Commission before the Council .
This ' innovation ' , however , serves as a pretext in all areas to increase the powers of the body , previously considered to be the sole guardian of Europe 's general interest .
That , however , is a biased approach .
Let us take the case of the monopoly of initiative that the Commission is proposing to consolidate and to extend to the whole of what it calls the legislative domain .
Why should 20 commissioners have a better understanding of Europe 's general interest than all of the governments within the Council ?
Admittedly , it is said that each government protects its national interest , but their debate makes it possible to go beyond that .
The same applies to the market : each consumer protects his own selfish interest , but nevertheless , all their transactions set prices which provide the best general approach .
The Commission , with its monopoly of initiative , therefore finds itself in the position of a planner who claims to know prices better than the market .
In a world of openness , freedom and democracy , this is unacceptable .
The monopoly of initiative , strengthened by the requirement for unanimity within the Council in order to dismiss the Commission 's proposals and by extending the majority needed to accept them , distorts the entire European decision-making process and certainly contributes to the rift perceived between the Union and the citizens .
In our opinion , we must reform it by taking an overview of the institutions .
Either we open up the monopoly of initiative to other players such as the European Parliament and the national parliaments , which possess an undeniable democratic legitimacy , or we maintain it , but then , in return , we are making a right of veto official for each national parliament .
In any case , it seemed that the recent debate within the Convention on the Commission 's monopoly of initiative was drawn to a close even before it had started .
Let us hope , Mr President , that the Commission 's new document will have the unforeseen effect of re-launching the debate .
Mr President , it seems to me that a document like this Commission communication , which carries the slogan ' peace , freedom and solidarity ' , is a good omen , and I believe that that slogan could be the slogan of the European Constitution .
By the way , although I have read the text very quickly , I notice that the Commission is being a little timid and talks of a text of a constitutional nature .
Let us talk of a Constitution .
The skeleton presented by Parliament in the European Convention talks of a treaty which establishes a Constitution for Europe ; let us talk happily about a Constitution , which is what it is going to be .
I also believe , Mr Prodi , that what you have said here , what your communication seeks - efficiency , democracy and clarity - are good objectives .
I believe that for these to be at the forefront of our considerations is a good thing .
So is the idea of double legitimacy , although I believe we must give this some careful thought .
The European Union is traditionally a union of States and of peoples , and I believe we must begin to talk about a union of States and citizens , because ' peoples ' is a concept from the 1950s .
In Maastricht we introduced the concept of European citizenship , and we must therefore begin to talk about European citizens as subjects of the European Union .
Therefore , a union of States and citizens .
My group 's spokesman , Mr Poettering , has defended something which this Parliament has always had as a first priority , and here we are in agreement with you , which is the defence of the Community method .
If we were to make an analysis of the last fifty years of European construction , it seems to me that the most important thing is this Community method and we will therefore be with you .
The Community method , however , also means something which I learned many years ago from a person who I admired , Émile Noel , which is institutional balance .
Ours is a Community system , which is difficult to explain outside these four walls ; and it is a system in which the balance between institutions surely does not correspond to the usual notion of the separation of powers which we know in our own Member States .
I know that in the Convention - and this is a good thing - we are following the formula of George Washington , who said for Philadelphia that the Convention can debate everything and propose everything .
Therefore , the debate is an open one .
If you will allow me to use the expression , there is a ' free bar ' in terms of considering constitutional models .
But I believe that on this issue , and of course I must read what the Commission is proposing carefully , we must be prudent , because if we interfere with constitutional mechanisms , we may find that there are surprises in store .
I believe we must consider whether it is in the Commission 's interest to be elected by the European Parliament and to be able to be dissolved by the Council .
Because the important thing for the Commission is to be independent and autonomous , and I believe that to establish more links with other institutions could eventually make a Commission which should be independent into a partisan Commission .
I therefore believe we should give this some consideration .
In any event , Mr Prodi , I believe that this is a good document .
You have done what you had to do and we are going to debate it in the Convention .
On the other hand , let me tell you something which I did not like , which is the famous Penelope text which you mentioned earlier .
My friend , Mr Barón , spoke about Penelope , the wife of Ulysses .
There was a song made famous by Serrat in Spain which was also called Penelope , about a woman who is waiting on a platform for a train and ends up going mad .
I believe that by bringing out this text at the same as your declaration , you have not done yourselves a political favour .
Today everybody is talking about this Penelope project and nobody is talking about the good document you have presented .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , we have been calling for a Commission proposal to solve the institutional problems that exist . It is at long last before us , and we welcome that .
Your paper makes a further interesting and important contribution to the work of the Convention , but it does not provide a total solution for all institutional problems .
It does cast some light on the Commission 's position regarding a whole raft of issues . For example , majority voting in the Council as a general rule , which we welcome .
Majority voting by Parliament on legislation as a general rule , which we also welcome . Bringing justice and home affairs within the Community framework , which is also good , and the creation of a Secretary of the Union for foreign affairs as Vice-President of the Commission with a special relationship with the Council , that is fine , and it represents a workable compromise as a means of solving a difficult problem .
And there is much more besides .
I can see many positive points in your proposals .
However , in some areas , Mr Prodi , your proposals do not make things clearer - they just create greater confusion .
Let me pick out one of them in particular .
This is the issue of the appointment and political responsibility of the Commission .
You are suggesting that the European Parliament should elect the President of the Commission .
That is a good proposal , and a much-needed step forward .
But at the same time you say that this President of the Commission must be elected by a two-thirds majority of the European Parliament , which prevents the results of the European elections from being reflected in a decision regarding an appointment at European Union level .
In other words it prevents something from happening that is precisely what you want : it prevents voters from deciding who they want as Commission President for the next five years .
This means building in a permanent compromise , rather like the permanent grand coalition in Austria .
We cannot and we will not go along with that !
The second issue is that the European Council is to confirm the election of the President of the Commission by the European Parliament .
How is that to happen ?
By a majority or unanimously ?
What do you have in mind ?
And if the Council does not confirm the President , what then ?
Does Parliament have the right to dissolve the Council ?
That is what I would suggest .
Your proposals do not include any mechanisms for resolving conflicts .
Ultimately , and this really takes the biscuit , the Commission is accountable to both Parliament and the Council .
So how will that work out in practice ?
Will you resign every time ?
If Parliament says that it has confidence in you , will you stay , and if the Council says you must resign , will you resign ?
What sort of message does that send about building the institutions of the European Union ?
It is simply a recipe for confusion !
Mr President of the Commission , your proposal in this respect creates more problems than it solves , and the European Parliament regards what you want to tell us is a step forward as actually being two steps back !
Mr President , today , on behalf of the European Commission , President Prodi set out a position of great political and institutional importance .
Adhering to Jean Monnet 's vision and the Community method , the Commission is today reinvigorating its ambitious and forward-looking role in European integration with a blueprint that meets our expectations .
I would like to focus on three issues : firstly , Europe has to become a global political power .
The new position of Secretary of the Union for Foreign Affairs would represent a strong Europe , able to set out its position in international bodies through a single representative .
Mr President , you are aware of my personal desire to see faster work and a substantial increase in the quality of our capabilities in the area of defence .
I am saying this as a friend of the United States : the world will be a better place if it contains a strong Europe , capable of acting on the strength of its values .
Secondly , the Commission has to become the sole repository of executive power , reinforced in its role as the expression of the common interest of the Union ; in other words , we must move towards a genuine Union government , elected by the democratic representatives of European citizens and accountable to the institutions which represent the citizens and the States .
Other institutional figures , lacking a clearly defined role and which would undermine the unity of representation abroad , must not interfere with the government of the Union .
Thirdly , Europe must become more effective and coherent , capable of vigorously rebutting the attacks launched by eurosceptic groupings which , in my country too , use Europe as a scapegoat for domestic failures .
In short , to create a partnership between Europe and its citizens , we need to simplify our procedures and make them more transparent by making codecision the rule , reducing the number of legislative instruments , abolishing unanimous voting and reforming the way the Union is financed .
I would add that we must strive to combat corruption and promote the pluralism of information .
Mr President , only if we proceed on this basis will we be able to conclude this process , at the end of 2003 , with a Constitution and a second , high quality , credible Treaty of Rome .
Mr President , in the position he adopted on this issue , Mr Prodi was a strong advocate of the Community method , which is the federation method .
He also represented opportunism on a large scale .
If you swear by the Community method you are not supposed to suggest that the Council has a right to dismiss the Commission .
To use President Prodi 's own language , the proposal is stupid - stupide .
The Commissioners are a collection of civil servants who do not need to inspire parliamentary confidence .
If there are abuses they must be penalised just like other civil servants .
The Commission wants to increase its power at the expense of political decision-makers .
It was unclear as to whether the earlier proposal to grant the Commissioners unequal status is to remain in force .
If it is , it means the EU would have its own ' Politburo ' , consisting , one assumes , of representatives of the big countries .
From the point of view of the small countries , that is not democracy .
The Commission 's demand to withdraw the system of consensual decision-making , or Member States ' right of veto , is an attack on the Member States .
The right of veto is the last defence against supranational , unequal systems of decision-making under the Community method .
Those representing the Commission in the Convention 's working group have been militarising the Union and creating a new European legal area in which there would be Euro-law and Euro-order .
The Commission is calling for the common foreign and security policy to come under its control , with competence to be transferred from the Member States to the Commission .
We must not allow the last vestiges of Member State independence to be crushed .
The Commission had and still has support here for its proposal from the European federalists , whose aim it is to erode the independence of Member States and turn the EU into a federation .
There is already a federal currency .
The federal army will commence operations next year .
Federal law and order are being got ready .
The federalists are over-represented in the Convention on the constitution of the EU .
Member States should not approve draft proposals for a federation drawn up by the Commission or the Convention simply as they are .
We must not make compromises over the Commission 's status as a body of civil servants as opposed to a political government .
Mr Prodi , power wielded by the Commission is not democracy .
You are a servant , who has now adopted a position on matters that are the business of your masters .
Mr President , in reply to Mr Seppänen 's point , I do not know many civil services in the world which are appointed only after a hearing by the Parliament and have to acquire the confidence of the Parliament to take office or which are dismissible as a college by Parliament .
That is one of the important features of the situation as it obtains at the moment .
As Mr Prodi has said , what we are looking for is a supranational democracy in Europe and that will be , in important ways , a democracy sui generis , not exactly like that of any pre-existing state or society .
I welcome a lot of what he has said today about the way the Commission should take office and hold office .
This is an attempt to retain the kind of balance between the three institutions which ought to characterise Europe and which does not at the moment in anything like the same way characterise many of our Member States , where the government has become the controller of the legislature of the parliament rather than the other way around .
That is a good feature of his proposals .
Although Mr Hänsch has pointed very accurately to some difficulties and potential contradictions that will mean that these proposals have to be more fully thought through to deal with the question , what about the risks of deadlock in the system which you are suggesting ?
Another point that picks up what Mr Poettering said and which nobody else has spoken of is that a European democracy must be a democracy at many levels .
One of the great disappointments of the Convention so far has been the tiny attention it has given to those levels of democracy which exist within and below the level of the Member State .
If we do not take account , adequately and properly , of substantial constitutional regions with legislative powers - the internal nations of the Member States - then this Union will not work as a successful democracy .
Mr Napoletano has prepared a report today to the Constitutional Affairs Committee of this Parliament .
We have amended it in committee and we believe that we have strengthened it .
He is not fully happy with all that we have reached there but I hope that the Commission and the Convention are going to listen to this because if they do not also attend to this vital level of democracy in Europe all will fail .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the President of the Commission has today presented the Commission 's draft Constitution , or rather , I would say , his draft Constitution .
He himself and other Members have mentioned the name of Jean Monnet .
Now , I believe that there is a fundamental difference between Jean Monnet 's work and the proposal before us today .
In my view , Jean Monnet always endeavoured to focus on the essentials and to achieve the - albeit modest , sometimes even miniscule - goals he set , and , in 40 years , many of his proposals have genuinely been brought to fruition .
Now , with regard to this proposal , over and above the acclaim it will certainly receive in the media and its success throughout most of this House , I genuinely wonder , without wanting to be antagonistic , how many of these proposals will actually be carried through , as would have happened when Jean Monnet was at the helm .
There are some differences between the two cases , I feel .
Why do I say that ?
Of course , it is lovely to be able to say ' What good proposals the Commission is putting forward on many points , with codecision for these matters , a different procedures for others ... ' but , clearly , all this must actually work in practice , and I therefore wonder whether the present Commission , the Prodi Commission , as opposed to the Commissions which preceded it and contributed to Maastricht , the Single Act and so on , will have the same ability to succeed .
We will see in the coming days .
I wish President Prodi and his proposals every success , although , frankly , Mr Prodi , I want to make it clear that what concerns me , what concerns us , the Radical Members , what I personally consider to be the Achilles ' heel of this proposal and would alone weaken it considerably , is the question of the President being elected by two thirds of the Members of the House .
That means that all it would take is for the Mr Poetterings and the Mr Barón Crespos of the future to meet in private and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my very sincere thanks for the initiative the Commission has taken in this constitutional process with the paper before us today .
I particularly appreciate the fact that in the key areas the Community method has been adopted as the guiding principle .
The issues of the decision-making process , codecision and the extension of qualified majority voting , and the replacement of the Council decision-making process stemming from the Treaty of Nice by the simple dual majority are essential approaches that could lead to improvement .
As I only have limited speaking time , I would like to follow up these initial comments with some critical observations concerning the Commission 's attempt to have itself legitimated by both Parliament and the Council .
I see this as running counter to Montesquieu 's division of powers .
It creates a confusion of executive and legislative roles , a muddle that is really the opposite of transparency and accountability .
It would lead to a marked weakening of Parliament 's role , as up to now the Commission has been accountable to Parliament alone , and Parliament alone has been able to dismiss the Commission .
The question of accountability remains .
The right to dismiss the Commission by a two-thirds majority also remains , but now we are also supposed to elect the President of the Commission by a two-thirds majority !
That is a total repudiation of the role of this House - the European Parliament is being emasculated !
I regard this as a very difficult situation .
I do not know if the Commission will get what it is looking for here , because once it has the same relationship with the Council as it has with Parliament in all these areas , the natural alliance between Parliament and the Commission will cease to exist .
That means that we will be losing something without gaining anything , because Parliament in its day-to-day technical work will have to take up the cudgels with both institutions , with the Commission and the Council alike , whereas up to now the Commission and Parliament have been in agreement .
It is worth considering the fact that the role of the EU Secretary for foreign affairs , which is viewed positively in the paper , will of course appear in a very different , and rather negative , light in this institutional context .
The point is that this will also have another consequence : the European Council has the power to remove the Commission from office , yet the Commission President is a member of the Council .
It does not seem the right approach to me to allow the Commission President alone not to take part in such a discussion about possible dismissal .
If the European Council is to have an almost parliamentary right of control over the Commission , then the President of the Commission should not be a member of the European Council .
That follows as night follows day : he can in no way be a member of the European Council , because how can a body have a right of control and hold someone to account if that person is a member of that body himself ?
I think that does not seem to work at all .
I would therefore urge the Commission to reconsider this very carefully , especially as it is extraordinarily weak on such a key issue .
The key issue facing the Convention is whether the Council , in its role as legislator , is a legislative Council , with a second chamber that meets in public .
The Commission 's response to that is that this proposal should be examined .
That is all it says !
I would have expected the Commission to formulate a clear position on that point .
The fact that it leaves the issue of the legislative Council so unclear and presents the relationship between the European Council and the Commission in such a way seems to point to a weakening both of the rights of Parliament and of transparency in general .
That is why I regard this proposal on such a vital issue as being highly questionable .


Mr President , I shall be listening with interest to Mr Prodi 's response following the comments of Mr Hänsch and Mr Brok , who are very much in agreement on this point .
The struggles for power and for the social face of Europe have now really broken out .
There is of course a battle between large and small , between technocrats and democrats , between results-orientation and bureaucracy , and everything revolves around the question of who is going to be pulling the strings in the Europe of tomorrow .
And with more power for the European Council , as some want , we will of course be breaking the balance between the institutions .
That means the triumph of the back-room politics of the big countries , and this will have a paralysing effect .
Just look at migration policy - fewer results , less democracy .

We can also vote for democracy , however , for a Europe that its citizens can understand - in other words , the Community method , in which the Commission is the elected European government and the premier is chosen by Parliament , the direct representatives of European citizens .
This is the best guarantee for small and medium-sized Member States such as the Netherlands that their interests count too .
At the same time we can make effective European policy .
Consider migration and in particular the Vitorino proposals .
Result : democracy and citizens over against this continent 's Sun Kings .
Aux armes democratiques , President Prodi .
And at the same time , the struggle over the choice of whether or not we have a social Europe .
Conservative , free-market thinking Europe , even here in the European Parliament , refuses to anchor the European social model as a task in the European constitution .
And it is precisely on this that citizens , social organisations and we as social democrats want to do battle , because it goes to the heart of the matter .
Are we going to choose a Europe as social protection for our citizens or are we going for the Europe of the free market , which is powerless in the face of globalisation , in which citizens feel alienated and at times of mass redundancies are regarded as disposable items ?
Once again President Prodi : aux armes democratiques , Commission et citoyens .
Convention , seize your opportunity !
Mr President , the Commission 's major contribution to the work of the Convention can only encourage those who believe that Europe needs a Constitutional Treaty before the reunification stage starts .
The new constitutional engineering work can only be based on in-depth , responsible dialogue between the representatives of the European and national institutions .
The Convention will therefore increasingly have to become a forum not for thrashing out different positions but for finding the best compromise , a compromise which confirms the two forms of legitimacy in Europe - the Community and the intergovernmental .
The new Europe , founded on the principles of solidarity and subsidiarity , must be politically strong and have economic credibility .
To this end , we need to give it a single voice in foreign policy .
It must be a Europe with a small number of effective , well-defined competences , including , in addition to foreign policy , defence , security , immigration control , the single market and the management of the economy .
It must be a federation of nation States but not an interfering Superstate . It must be an institution with a stable balance of the powers of the three institutions : Parliament , Council and Commission .
Of course , the principle of the six-monthly rotation of the Presidency of the Union will have to be changed .
The Commission 's proposal , outlined yesterday in Le Monde and today in this House , is reminiscent of the French model , with the Commission in the role of Mr Raffarin and the Council in the role of Mr Chirac .
I wonder whether it might be possible to achieve a compromise whereby there would be a single Commission and Council President , who would be put forward by the Council and elected by two-thirds majority vote in Parliament .
One last point . The Europe we are building cannot afford to lose its Judaeo-Christian roots , which are the guarantee of the secularity of the institution .
If , in the future , we were to attempt to build a Union without taking into account our history , that would be tantamount to building a castle with no foundations .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fact that the Members are coming into the Chamber for voting time while the debate is still in progress means that it will be difficult for the speakers who have yet to speak and President Prodi to make themselves heard .
I would ask you all to cooperate and to concentrate on the debate until the start of voting time .
President of the Commission , thank you for your contribution to the work of the Convention .
We are also looking forward to the end of this never-ending task because I believe that , with everyone adopting a position , with everyone drafting their own Constitution , it is fortunate that some members of the Commission are concerning themselves with this common task and are making their contribution .
Thank you too for your proposals regarding the appointment of your successors and of the Commission 's three-stage appointment procedure .
We feel it is worthwhile and relevant .
I have a question to ask , however .
I understand that you are in a negotiating position , but it seems to me that , when we speak of preserving the Community method , and this is obviously what the Commission desires , this method is based on the role of the three points of a triangle , with a necessary balance .
From that point of view , I must admit that your proposal to satisfy the desire of the Heads of State and Government and their ministers to strengthen and go beyond the rotating Council presidency will be badly handled and will be viewed as a weak point of your contribution .
Consequently , the positions that you adopt regarding the Secretary of the Union will be regarded enthusiastically and be reproduced in other sectors .
From this point of view , the idea that the Secretary of the Union would not chair the Council responsible for these issues seems to me to be a weak point .
You say that the president of the Council could not seek compromise at the same time as making proposals .
We all know many assemblies where these two roles are carried out by the same person .
I therefore believe that this is a point that we should examine in greater depth and I think that , in the area of external representation of the euro zone , these proposals could be reproduced .
Mr President , I thank you for calling our fellow Members to order .
What you need is a loud speaker so as to be able to broadcast this message to those outside the Chamber , as it is those who are coming back in who are disturbing our work .
Thank you , Mrs Berès , for that valuable suggestion .
Maybe the Members who are listening to me could ask the Members entering the Chamber to do so in silence and in an orderly fashion in order to allow the speakers to make themselves heard .
Mr President , Mr Prodi can indeed understand me , because I am sitting right beside him , so we can communicate fairly easily .
I wanted to start by complimenting the Commission President on the excellent document that has been presented .
I am also pleased that this document is so very much in keeping with Parliament 's position and that it is also so much in tune with the Benelux Memorandum that has just come out .
First of all I am pleased that Mr Prodi does not favour a President of the European Union as Mr Giscard d 'Estaing has proposed .
We mainly see the President of the European Union in the role of President of the Commission .
These two positions must coincide as far as possible .
If there is to be a President of the European Union , then it must be the President of the Commission .
What seems a good idea to us , or at least what seems a good idea to me , is that the future Commission will certainly have three , if not four Vice-Presidents .
For example , one for foreign policy , that could be Mr Solana 's role .
One for internal security , Mr Vitorino 's range of responsibilities .
One for socio-economic affairs and one for the more technical Commissioners .
If you divide the work up in this way , then the President of the Commission will have rather more freedom to take on these presidential duties .
We are also very pleased with the emphasis on the Community method and that there are proposals for legislative simplification .
There are good proposals for this in the Convention , that go a little further than what the Commission has proposed .
We think that in the future there should really only be talk of regulations , of directives , of decisions and of the implementing legislation and that will be enough .
And that as far as possible everything must be done by way of codecision .
Finally , we are also pleased that the Commission has not put forward the absurd idea of a Congress .
We think this Congress a bad idea .
What we do think important is that there should be greater involvement of citizens and that greater transparency should make citizens better aware of what is happening in the European Union .
This is what the Commission is proposing .
Consequently , Mr Prodi , you have our full support .
President Prodi , I agree with what Mrs Maij-Weggen said just now .
The communication you have presented to us is extremely interesting and is broadly compatible with the positions of the European Parliament .
However , there is no clear proposal on one fundamental point , namely the integration of the Charter of Fundamental Rights - its integration , not the inclusion of a reference to it - for there is no modern Constitution which does not enshrine human rights .
I hope that the Commission will not go against the development of modern constitutional practice and take the line that Europe should have a short Constitution with human rights hidden away in an Annex .
I welcome the proposal to generalise the Community method , codecision and majority voting .
I welcome the idea of a single spokesman for foreign policy , who is part of the Commission but is personally accountable to the Council too .
There are many other points which need to be clarified and discussed but we agree that we should not create new , unnecessary institutions and that the decision-making power of the Eurogroup and the Union 's financial system should be strengthened .
Lastly , we welcome the fact that a proper distinction is made between those who make laws and those who implement them : Montesquieu has come to the European Union at last .
I hope that the Union 's future Constitution will be that of a supranational democracy , as called for by the European Parliament , the Commission and the majority of the citizens , and that a way will be found to avoid a few eurosceptics preventing the countries that wish to move forward from doing so .
Mr President , I do not think it is yet entirely clear how long what the Commission has proposed actually is .
I have read a document running to 23 pages .
Mrs Kaufmann thought just now that there were more than a hundred , so I do not know how things are precisely , but those 23 pages are very interesting .
They contain relatively little on socio-economic issues , and , as for what they do contain , I do rather wonder whether we might agree with it .
I would just like to say a word about open coordination .
This is a particularly thorny problem in the Treaty at the moment and it is actually poorly provided for .
And what does the Commission say ?
It says that it must be decided by the Council , having been prepared by the Commission , and then in brackets we have ' where appropriate after consulting the European Parliament ' .
This is of course quite impossible .
If the Commission wants to crush open coordination at some time , then I think this is how they must do it .
One of the three institutions on which this Community is based cannot simply be disregarded in this way on such an important issue .
That is the principal message .
The second message is that in general the social element in the Convention has so far had rather too little attention paid to it .
It is very fortunate that a working group has now been set up with particular concern for the social issue .
I think it is possible for the major parties in particular to reach agreement on this , based on the experiences we have acquired in the European social model ; it is possible , but we must be careful .
There is one major difference between the two parties , the PPE-DE on the one hand and the socialists on the other , and this difference is where you start .
Do you start with the economic or do you start with the social ?
This is important if we are to bring this to a successful conclusion .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission 's intention to make the EU the first supranational democracy in the world .
That is a fantastic project , and people understand it and support it .
In any democracy , the government is elected by parliament , and that is why I also welcome the proposal that here in the EU the Commission and its President should at last be elected by this House and not by the European Council .
The present approach is really topsy-turvy , and I think that we need to reinstate Montesquieu 's principles .
So I congratulate you on having managed to get there .
This is a really important point , and one where Parliament and the Commission can now pull in the same direction .
I would also like to congratulate you on clearly advocating that there should be just one executive and not two .
There cannot be an elected President of the European Council alongside the elected President of the Commission .
We do not want the institutions to be renationalised , what we need is to apply the Community method , and in this paper the Commission and Parliament are on the same track .
We must get that through in the Convention !
Mr President , I will be very brief , not least because we are behind schedule and the European Parliament needs to continue its work with all speed .
I will just make a few brief points , the first of which is addressed to Mr Barón Crespo .
We have been looking into the problems in Galicia very carefully and are continuing to do so .
Commissioner de Palacio has already visited the area , Commissioner Wallström is going there tomorrow and Commissioner Fischler has already recommended the measures that should be taken . Most importantly , we are summoning and coordinating all our resources so as to be able to take the broadest , most cohesive action possible .
We can confirm that , in our opinion , this incident could and should have been avoided .
We must therefore address this matter as thoroughly as possible because , if similar incidents occur in the future , it will be our responsibility .
The Commission has already put pressure on the Member States to limit the circulation of obsolete vessels , and we will continue to work on that .
A few very brief comments .
I would like , first of all , to thank you for your enthusiastic support for our proposals , for your enthusiastic support for the Community method and for your understanding of the very simple fact that this is not a final proposal - it is neither the Commission 's initial nor its final proposal - it is a major step forward which will allow us to discuss the issues together .
The points on which there is dissent are extremely important points which we will have to discuss .
As regards what Mr Brok said , for instance regarding the issue of the Commission being accountable to both the Council and Parliament , this is an area we need to explore , but we believe that it is fully in line with what he called the Montesquieu rule , although it is true that , should the Council have to adopt measures affecting the Commission , in that case , the President of the Commission would not be part of the Council and the confusion described by Mr Brok would be avoided .


There is , moreover , a common concept underlying these proposals , and it is the concept of countries and peoples : we have taken a coherent , fully cohesive approach in this regard .
In this respect , we often find that we are in almost complete harmony with the Benelux document - not that we developed this approach together , we just seem to have the same perspective on these issues , the same belief that this is a union of nations and peoples , or , as Mr Méndez de Vigo rightly says , of citizens , and that is the approach we are pursuing .

I will not go into specific points because I know you are pushed for time .
I would just stress one essential point : the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I can confirm that the Commission intends to propose that the Charter be integrated into the future Constitution .
Indeed , we have already proposed this in the feasibility study I commissioned , and we demonstrated that it is entirely feasible .
As regards this feasibility study , I would stress that it is just a technical working document : it was not submitted for the Commission 's approval and it was not discussed .
It is a feasibility study which is an extremely useful working document .
To avoid it being confused with the document we have proposed and endorsed in the Commission , I will not distribute it at the Convention today either : it will be posted on the Internet immediately afterwards , like all the working documents we have used during this phase .
I assure you that this is a working document , nothing more , nothing less : just a working document .
( Applause )
Thank you , President Prodi .
I feel this has been an important opportunity to develop the debate on the future of Europe .
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0411 / 2002 ) by Carlos Westendorp y Cabeza , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision on providing further supplementary-financial assistance to Moldova ( COM ( 2002 ) 538 - C5-0484 / 2002 - 2002 / 0236 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
After the vote :
Mr President , I would like to propose some amendments to the Minutes .
On page 26 , paragraph 11 , concerning the statute for Members of the European Parliament , the PPE-DE 's motion for a resolution of 14 November is not shown , although I have the electronic record of transmission here , and the two compromise amendments tabled by both the small groups and the two larger groups are not mentioned either .
Could that please be corrected ?
Mr President , this has been voted on and I have no problem with that , but I had asked for the floor .
With regard to Amendments Nos 35 , 36 and 37 , you have said that they have been withdrawn , which is correct , but I have not understood what has happened about the admissibility of Amendments Nos 4 and 17 .
Are these amendments going to be voted on or not ?
Amendments Nos 4 and 17 are not going to be voted on because the President has ruled them inadmissible .
In his view they belong more in the explanatory statement than in the legislative text .
Mr President , I would like to tell you that yesterday I had contacts with the competent service and with members of the Office of the President and we had reached the conclusion that we were not agreed on whether they were admissible .
I have here a letter from the President saying that Amendments Nos 4 and 17 have been deemed inadmissible .
. ( ES ) What the services have told us is that they were admissible and that they would be voted on .
And I wish to say this , in any event , because the services of Parliament in committee accepted both amendments , we voted for both amendments , we approved them , they have been passed on to the plenum and now it turns out they are amendments to the content of the report .
They are amendments with legislative content and there was no reason not to admit them , and I would like it to be noted that I am making a formal protest .
I take note of your formal protest but the amendments remain inadmissible .
After the block vote on the committee amendments :
Mr President , I know you are in a hurry because we must follow our timetable , but we are reforming the common fisheries policy and we have been waiting 20 years for this reform .
Although you are an able President , who presides very well and with great skill , I would ask you for some restraint so that the Members may know what we are voting for .
I would be truly grateful .
Mr President , you told me that Amendment No 4 was inadmissible and then it has been voted on because an agreement had been reached .
In the case of Amendment No 17 , our agreement is even greater since it is within the legislative text : it relates to Article 4 .
The Commission is trying to realise its proposal , which is to withdraw an article , and we have voted to include that article .
This article should be voted on .
Let me read out what the President ruled .
He deemed Amendment No 4 inadmissible in its present form .
If the rapporteur agrees to modify it by deleting the reference to the current Commission proposal - a reference which would not be relevant once the legal instrument is adopted - then Amendment No 4 would be acceptable .
This is what we did .
The only thing the President says in his letter about Amendment No 17 is ' I declare this amendment inadmissible ' .
He is not saying that in any modified form it could be accepted ...
Rapporteur , I owe you an apology .
I have just been told there is a typographical error .
The President meant to say that he now declares this amendment admissible .
I apologise .
Okay , I resign !
( Laughter )
Mr President , I do not want this to be a dispute between a Galician and a Scotsman , nor between two Europeans .
I am rapporteur for these reports , I am a professional lawyer and I am producing a legal and political report .
I have been in contact with the services and they have told us that this amendment is admissible .
Therefore , all I ask is that the vote be taken a little more slowly , please .
Nothing more .
You are absolutely right and I apologise again .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
The vote was suspended at 11.40 a.m. for the formal sitting
.
( ES ) Mr President , fisheries are only the subject of discussion in Parliament once every twenty years .
We are reforming fisheries policy and today Parliament has adopted two very important reports , and I would like to express my gratitude to all the Members who supported me in this task .
I do so , Mr President , as a Galician in particular , because Galicia is currently experiencing a great tragedy .
I shall end by saying that I would like Mr Fischler to be present at this historic moment and he is not here .
I would , however , like the Commissioner to kindly pass on the following : his colleague , Mr Barnier , told him in writing that his reform had neither legal nor moral basis and today , Parliament has taken away the political and budgetary basis and rejected the report .
Mr President , I would like to move , on behalf my group , in accordance with Rule 37 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , that this House should decide whether the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the PPE-DE and PSE groups should be put to the vote before the other resolutions .
My justification for this is as follows . On 14 November we submitted a motion for a resolution to the administration .
I have here the electronic record confirming its transmission .
Therefore our original motion has priority .
In accordance with Rule 37 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , a subsequently tabled joint motion for a resolution replaces the original motion .
That means that the subsequently tabled joint motion is regarded as that submitted first and should be put to the vote first .
In the event that the House does not follow this procedure , I wish to ask the President to pronounce that the amendments tabled by the Liberals , the Greens and the Communists are inadmissible in accordance with Article 140 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , which stipulates that only amendments that have not already been tabled once may be tabled .
As the content of the joint motion for a resolution tabled by these groups is exactly the same as those amendments , only one of the two can be admissible .
It does not make sense for us to follow the voting list , because we would then have to vote on the same content twice .
That is contrary to both the spirit and the letter of the Rules of Procedure .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would specifically like to support this proposal on behalf of my group .
There is every justification for proceeding in this way .
We amended the Minutes this morning , so that this House 's Minutes now say that the PPE-DE Group 's motion was tabled first .
I would , however , urge you , Mr President , to let this House decide .
Mr President , I believe that we are currently playing a game of cat and mouse in this Chamber which is atrocious , utterly atrocious for democracy !
Everyone knows that as soon as ?
Listen , and speak afterwards .
I know that it is sometimes difficult to listen , when you believe you are the strongest , but the strongest has not always proved to be the most intelligent .
Intelligence does not come automatically purely by virtue of size .
( Applause )
No , and you too , Mr Schulz , please calm down , ?
The requests before us are clear .
I see no point in extending the debate .
I looked into the chronological order in which resolutions were received .
My decision with regard to the order in which we should vote is based only and wholly on the chronological order and the precedents that surround that .
I am now informed that the chronological order indicates that we will vote on the joint resolution tabled by the three groups first .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0620 / 2002 ) tabled by Diana Wallis and Astrid Thors on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Statute for Members
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0621 / 2002 ) tabled by Heidi Anneli Hautala and others on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the Statute for Members
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0622 / 2002 ) tabled by Francis Wurtz on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the Statute for Members of the European Parliament
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , we need to change this amendment so that it better reflects the realities of the Treaty of Nice .
I would ask that the last two words be deleted and that you accept that as an oral amendment .
Mr President , I do not wish to reopen a debate which this Parliament has already had but you were elected on a programme for reform of this House .
Powerful elements in the two major groups have blocked that reform and I hope , Mr President , that the Council and the Commission , represented here today , will see the strength of feeling in this House in favour of such reform , greater than it has ever been , and will take that into account .
Mr President , you thought you were right to follow the procedure you adopted .
On behalf of my group , I would like to say that we did not agree with your decision , but I do not want to dwell on that .
I asked to speak because Mr Watson did .
However , I certainly cannot accept that anyone - be it a member of my own group or one of the other groups - should take the moral high ground and accuse others of having unworthy intentions !
( Loud , prolonged applause , heckling )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reaction in this Chamber , the enormous support for what I have just said , is enough .
I do not need to add anything else !
Mr President , my group respects the other groups .
It is up to the Liberal Group to solve its own internal problems , but I put a question to the Council asking it to show its willingness to hold a dialogue and the Council did so .
After the vote , I think we should all join forces , and I am addressing Mr Watson in particular , whom I ask , on behalf of my group , to stop his policy of aggression and unjustified slander of the other political groups and specific nationalities in Parliament .
Now is a time for unity and implementing the Rules of Procedure .
Thank you .
I do not want to take any more contributions .
I want to make one brief comment . We have adopted a resolution today .
The resolution gives what I would call an indicative status to the opinion that Mr Rothley has brought to the Committee on Legal Affairs .
As rapporteur , Mr Rothley said yesterday that he hopes in the course of next year - perhaps by March 2003 - to move it from indicative to definitive .
In that interim period I intend to work with the rapporteur to see to what extent we can try to mobilise a majority in this House in dialogue with the other institutions to bring closure to this issue in a manner which gives us a satisfactory outcome and a dignified result .
Report ( A5-0397 / 2002 ) by Patsy Sörensen , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on a proposal for a Council directive on the short-term residence permit issued to victims of action to facilitate illegal immigration or trafficking in human beings who cooperate with the competent authorities ( COM ( 2002 ) 0071 - C5-0085 / 2002 - 2002 / 0043 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
. ( IT ) I would like to draw attention to the need for the Community legislation on PDO and PGI products to be revised .
Although good , the Fruteau report , on which we are about to vote and which we will support , does not contain major amendments proposed and justified by a number of Italian Members in the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
In the case in point , major amendments have not been included on the possibility of registering PDOs and PGIs in Brussels when products have already been registered which , for a different reason - as in the case of a plant variety - are designated by the same geographical term as that requested , which might be the name of a town , for example .
I am therefore going to send a letter to the Italian Permanent Representation in Brussels to call upon Italy to adopt a clear position on this issue in the Council .
I will send the letter to the Italian Members of Parliament too and invite them to support the initiative .
I would stress that this is not just an Italian question : it concerns the protection of all European typical products .
I therefore call upon the non-Italian Members as well to see this as a question of the legal protection of typical products .
. ( PT ) The rapporteur accepts the basis of the Commission proposal aimed at bringing the current Regulation No 2081 / 92 into line with the agreement under the WTO on trade-related property rights ( TRIPS , 1994 ) .
After supporting the Commission 's position , which it considers to be crucial to a food quality policy and to combat any attempt to sow confusion amongst consumers , when discussing Protected Designations of Origins ( PDOs ) and Protected Geographical Indications ( PGIs ) , the report overlooks some contradictions and tables some amendments that give rise to doubts .
For example , with regard to the procedure for cancelling the Community registration of a PDO or a PGI , the report overlooks the fact that sometimes a PDO or a PGI is not only private property ; it can also be the property of a particular community or region due to the characteristics of its production or of the raw material used .
There should therefore be safeguards to ensure that the voice of local institutional bodies is heard in these situations .
We must also take account of the relationship between the trademark and the PDO , so as to safeguard any possible move by a trademark with regional characteristics , which cannot be produced in another region or country .
In Portugal , this problem has already arisen , in the case of ' Limiano ' cheese .
Hence our abstention from the vote .
.
( NL ) The market is merciless , because whoever produces and sells cheapest always wins - even if this winner is cheap only because of low pay , poor working conditions , animal cruelty , child labour and the absence of measures for the control of environmental pollution .
In an ever larger-scale market , the production of age-old regional food and drink products is at risk .
They can lose out to competition from a place where production costs are lower .
If the free market strikes , cheese , wine , mustard , vinegar and cake will soon no longer come from the region of origin .
It is therefore good , in the midst of the prevailing liberalisation of the economy , that the logic of the market is defeated by protecting these products and their areas of origin from imitation .
Yet we have to be careful that no new injustice arises .
Under this arrangement old EU Member States are at an advantage compared with new ones .
I have recently put questions to the Commission about Bulgarian feta cheese that can no longer be exported now that the name feta is given only to Greek products .
The Bulgarian cheese now has to be sold under an unknown name and is therefore less in demand .
It must therefore always be possible for protected names already assigned to be opened up to prevent the neglect of a traditional agricultural product in other more neglected regions or regions that have acceded later .
. ( PT ) Since 1993 , the EU has had a system in place for Protected Designations of Origin ( PDOs ) and Protected Geographical Indications ( PGIs ) .
This mechanism has helped to make the agri-food sector more dynamic and to preserve traditional production methods , providing consumers with high quality products .
I welcome the Commission proposal to adapt this system , especially as regards continuing to monitor counterfeiting and unlawful imitations , both within the EU and in third countries .
One measure , which we believe to be important , would be to insist that products be packaged in the area in which they are produced , so as to provide a guarantee regarding their origin and quality .
The current inspection mechanism must be effective , and to this end the existing systems and the activities of national and European bodies must be harmonised and the Member States must be given greater responsibility .
I also agree that the owner of a trademark should , in certain circumstances , have the right to register their trademarked product with a PDO or a PGI .
Similarly , the product registration procedure must be simplified and made more accessible , making applications easier to assess by the Member States , limiting the role of the European Commission simply to checking the form .
I have voted against the Report on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2081 / 92 on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs because it approves of the regulation and furthermore does not seek to improve the content or alter the aims of either the former regulation or the Commission proposal .
The overall aim is regionalisation via a uniform Community approach .
A development I cannot support as a sovereignist .
The regulation will put unnecessary restrictions on producers in particular affecting small and medium sized producers of agricultural products .
Furthermore , I firmly believe that the consumers will be able to orient themselves better if the name of the Member State in which the product has been produced is evident .
The consumer should be able to support home production , if this is their wish .
Finally it is unjustifiable that LDCs should live up to EU production standards .
This constitutes a hidden trade barrier .
. This Report was voted on under Rule 110a of the Rules of Procedure which allows for no debate in Parliament and no amendments to the Report .
The British Delegation of the PPE-DE Group has previously sought to amend reports which it did not support .
The new Rule , however , leaves no option but to abstain on certain reports .
Before we extend the competences and financial resources of Europol , the British Conservatives believe that there is a need to establish whether competence should be ceded to them in this field or other fields or whether the total priority should be interstate cooperation , utilising present national resources .
. ( PT ) Just a brief comment in order to express , as the rapporteur has done , the profound hope that now , within a new framework that allows us to envisage a lasting peace in Angola , the fishing industry of that country , specifically through the instruments agreed with the EC , can contribute to the development of the economy of a country that has suffered so much from a long and devastating civil war since its independence in 1975 .
This is the most noteworthy feature that , in political terms , marks the difference between this protocol - which is valid for the period 3 August 2002 to 2 August 2004 - and the eight previous ones , in developing the agreement that , as everyone knows , dates back to 1987 .
Furthermore , this is an important instrument from which Portuguese shipowners also benefit - as well as Spanish , French , Italian , Greek and Irish shipowners - and it is therefore regrettable that the Commission has not respected the allocation key contained in the previous agreement and has penalised Portugal by 20 tonnes .
Lastly , the significant increase in the financial contribution should be emphasised as should , in connection with this , not only the corresponding increase in fishing possibilities , but also the establishment of a partnership with Angola to encourage responsible and sustainable fishing and particularly , the development of scientific research , surveillance , artisanal fisheries , training and aquaculture .
We will need , in future , to monitor the specific effects of these new developments .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report , which highlights the need to streamline and synchronise procedures for coordinating economic , social and employment policies , not forgetting the environmental dimension , in order to gear them towards a medium and long-term perspective .
Our focus must be on implementing measures rather than on drafting guidelines .
This analysis of the implementation of guidelines , which will take the form of a new implementation package , will involve the Member States providing information on a systematic basis , in line with a specific timetable .
The appropriate involvement of all the interested institutions and partners such as the Council , the European Parliament and the social partners , must be ensured .
We must stress the importance of strengthening the democratic legitimacy of this process and of giving Parliament powers of participation and co-decision in the entire cycle of policy coordination .
To this end , we hope that the Convention proposes this improvement for the new Treaty .
Finally , I wish to underline the importance of increasing the role played by the social partners through the creation of a Tripartite Social Summit and a macro-economic social dialogue , as well as the participation of the candidate countries in implementing the Lisbon Strategy .
This report backs the Commission , which defends the idea of greater coordination in implementing the economic policy and the so-called employment policy of the Member States .
The only ' economic policy ' that the European Union and its Member States know , however , consists of constantly favouring the interests of businesses and their owners .
As for their ' employment policy ' , it is , at best - if one can say so - a pretext for distributing aid and subsidies to these same businesses , and primarily to major European industrial and financial groups .
And , at worst , it manifests itself in the ever-increasing number of workers out of a job : today , there are almost 20 million people unemployed in the European Union , and in addition , there are millions of workers who have only precarious employment .
We constantly hear of plans for mass redundancies .
And you dare to speak of ' employment policy ' !
And how can you discuss ' streamlining ' your economic and employment policies , when each day provides further evidence of the irrational nature of your system , and of its fundamental social injustice ?
By voting against this report , we are therefore reaffirming our rejection of your capitalist system .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) The Commission communication which serves as the basis for this report follows up the request made at the Spring Council in Barcelona to streamline the relevant policy coordination processes and to improve the implementation of the ' Lisbon strategy ' .
It is on this issue that the rapporteur attempts to somewhat improve the unacceptable position maintained by the European Commission , which systematically overlooks the social and environmental spheres .
Nevertheless , these improvements are clearly inadequate , since the proposals that we tabled on the need to amend the aims , criteria and bases of the Stability Pact were rejected . We had tabled these proposals according to the principle that the Member States ' budgets must reflect the needs of every people and of every country and not the interests of the financial groups which the European Central Bank is seeking to serve .
Consequently , no guarantees have been made to establish conditions that will ensure that priority is given to employment , to economic and social cohesion and to combating social exclusion , a crucial issue in the fight against the dominance of neo-liberal policies in the European Union .
Therefore , despite the fact that a few individual aspects can be seen as positive , we have voted against this report .
. ( NL ) In 2000 , the European Summit in Lisbon spoke out in favour of a tough liberalisation policy and comprehensive privatisation of public services .
The justification for this , which turned out to be illusory , was that this would prompt even more extensive economic growth , by means of which Europe could beat the US and Japan .
According to this line of thinking , the expected drawbacks concerning labour and the environment are automatically offset by an increase in profits and employment .
The proposal that is being voted on today is a commendable effort on the part of Mr Karas to give a wrong policy choice a friendly twist .
He has managed this to some extent in the area of the environment , at least as far as the good intentions are concerned .
Whether a callous liberal policy really leaves room for a good environment is , in fact , dubious , but I back the attempt to give more attention to environmental policy than the Commission proposes .
In the area of social policy , the main thing about the proposal is that it contains an attempt to make the trade union movement partly responsible for the neoliberal economic policy .
The rapporteur is trying to reconcile the irreconcilable in a somewhat craftier manner .
It is not so much his friendly intentions as the underlying policy that is being condoned in this way .
This has prompted me and my group to vote against this proposal .
. ( EL ) The changes proposed and the idea of coordinating general economic policy and employment policy guidelines could be a step in the right direction , helping to bring about a radical change in economic policy , if only the very acute social problem were a priority which other policies had to fall in line with .
The opposite is happening , however .
The emphasis is still on the Stability Pact and the policy of privatisation , merger and capitalist restructuring , which has resulted - in fact still is resulting - in mass redundancies , falling standards of living and pay , fewer and fewer social services and infringements of workers ' rights , creating justifiable fears that coordination might cause even more problems , with social issues playing second fiddle to the policy of liberalisation and the rampant profit principle .
Of course , coordination leaves out two of the four pillars proclaimed by the ? U , namely environmental protection and social cohesion , but adds the completion of the single internal market .
We believe that the sole objective of this sort of ' coordination ' is to mislead the workers .
We support a policy based on the objective of full , stable employment predicated on man and his needs , with full , protected social rights for all workers , a better standard of living and real social development and prosperity .
. ( NL ) Over the course of time , flying has become ever cheaper , and is , in many cases , also cheap in relation to the distance covered .
This is because the environmental and social costs are not passed on to the passengers .
There is no tax on fuel and the routes taken require no infrastructure outside the airports .
Flight travel is set to put medium to long distance rail travel out of business , despite the investments in high-speed rail links for distances up to 1 000 km and despite the Commission communication ' Air Transport and the Environment ' from 1999 and the 2010 White Paper on transport policy .
The prices at which airline companies sell seats are at a record low , non-European companies carry passengers within the EU virtually for free and price-fighters elbow out old , national airline companies .
Despite the low fares , which cannot compensate for the negative effects on air pollution and noise , there is still a political majority in favour of yet lower fares .
Is it a political priority to reduce the travel expenses of the highest paid ?
The compromise that has been reached between the parliamentary majority and the Council stipulates that the authorities should cover some of the security costs entailed by the fight against terrorism .
This money would be better spent on mass public transport , namely city transport and local transport , which is experiencing cutbacks everywhere .
This is why I reject this compromise .
.
I voted for the Foster report , and congratulate Mr Foster on taking forward a set of proposals which provide timely quality control systems and higher standards in civil aviation security .
Having put forward a thorough report , I would like to add that emphasis on airport security should not preclude measures from EU Member States from providing some form of redress for EU citizens who are unfairly searched , detained or harassed at airports without just cause .
These are at present inadequate statutory forms of redress for such infringement at both ports and airports .
This is often reflected in constituency cases .
In the light of September 11 , the Foster report is a strong contribution to the security of all EU citizens .
Mr President , I just am registering that I abstained on the Thorning-Schmidt report .
My explanation of vote , if anyone can hear me , is that although we achieved a great deal for industry as a whole , and the rapporteur changed her view during the process of the report going through the European Parliament - in other words , she took hearing protection into account and moved towards weekly measurements , which I welcome - the amendment that we voted through in Parliament on its exemption for entertainment and leisure for five years while the Commission did a report on the special nature of the entertainment and leisure business was lost in conciliation .
That was the reason for abstention .
We gained some things for industry but lost some for the music and entertainment business .
Noise at work can cause effects such as fatigue , communication difficulties and total hearing loss .
This report won my vote because it lays down a balanced set of rules aimed at protecting workers against the risks of exposure to noise , and sets out exposure limits .
Implementation of this directive will thus lead to a significant reduction in existing noise levels and , therefore , an improvement in working conditions .
Current problems in this area may in future be greatly reduced or even avoided altogether through the action employers are expected to take to assess and improve the noise levels to which workers are exposed .
Nor must we forget the adoption of preventive measures at all stages , from the design of workstations and workplaces , through improvements in their layouts , to the provision of suitable machinery and equipment .
Lastly , workers must be made aware of the problem and be trained in the right way to use the equipment .
I have agreed with this report , which is the result of the conciliation process that was conducted , because I believe it contributes directly to protecting workers from noise at work , a particularly sensitive area . It is indeed a worrying and all too frequent cause of occupational health problems .
I welcome the preparation of a code of conduct that provides practical guidelines aimed at helping workers and employers in the music and entertainment sectors to fulfil their legal obligations as set out in this directive .
I think the directive under consideration meets our legitimate expectations for improvements in working conditions .
I also agree with the rapporteur in expressing the desire that rules covering the remaining risk factors for health and safety in the workplace - that is , electromagnetic fields and optical radiation - will soon be adopted .
Mr President , on Mr Jové Peres , the EPLP voted differently from the proposed PS line in order to be consistent with the approach taken by the UK Government on fisheries and to reflect our support for the following : to look at fisheries management on the basis that absence of scientific evidence does not mean postponing conservation support for a strong role for regional management councils with decision-making power and access support for extension up to 24 miles , support for 12 miles and support for 50 miles for remote areas , for effective measures to reduce fishing capacity and for a continuation of relative stability .
Mr President , the SNP Members here , Neil MacCormick and myself , have taken a constructive approach to the issue of Common Fisheries Policy reform because we agree that there is dire need for Common Fisheries Policy reform .
For that reason , we voted today in favour of improving Mr Jové Peres 's text in various ways .
Nevertheless , in the end we voted against the overall package because we do not believe that it goes far enough in strengthening guarantees on relative stability , for example , on continuing access restrictions to certain waters and on enforcement issues .
Scotland 's fishing communities will be demanding that a new Common Fisheries Policy actually does what it is supposed to do , namely that it actually addresses the real management issues in a way which will be effective in terms of conservation and sustainability .
Mr President , I just want to endorse what my friend and colleague , Mr Hudghton , has said and indeed to endorse many of the things which Catherine Stihler said as well .
In this area a great deal of the discussion among us remains bedevilled by different understandings of the legal background , in particular , of the continuing effects of the Spanish and Portuguese Treaty of Accession of 1985 .
That does need testing in a legal way and not just by political debate in the Parliament .
I would like to take some steps to push that forward .
As I mentioned yesterday , it does show one of the kinds of areas in which it would be very fruitful if it were the case that regions with legislative power had the right to seize the Court of Justice of questions because , after all , a parliament like the Scottish Parliament , which has legislative responsibility for these matters , should be able to test out the question of the legal basis and so should the Parliament of Galicia , might I add .
This is not a particularly one-country point .
It is to do with the thought that these are issues of law as well as of politics and we should be thinking of good ways of getting the law finally determined by a judicial authority .
According to the Commission , the implementation of a new framework regulation as a replacement for those of 1976 and 1992 is justified by ' a general threat to all fisheries resources ' .
It appears however , according to professionals and scientists , that only certain species need to be protected .
This shows that the reform should therefore focus on more specific management organised according to the different species and fishing areas , in order to deal properly with the realities of the situation .
Furthermore , I wish to reiterate the express demand of the ' Friends of Fishing Group ' to see strict controls applied to industrial fishing .
How can the Commission seek to implement sustainable fishing whilst also encouraging this type of fishing , excluding it from its proposal , when it has a particularly damaging effect on ecosystems ?
As regards abolishing State aid for building new boats and reallocating previously granted funds to alternative activities , I stress the absolute need to see structural aid maintained and even increased since it only represents 0.84 % of the Community budget , in order to modernise and make the fleet safer , particularly the small-scale fishing fleet .
To sum up , I shall say that , once again , I am surprised by the European logic which prevails in the area of common policy .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The distinct identity of the outermost regions , as manifested in a specific set of problems requiring special treatment by the European Union , has once again been recognised by the European Parliament .
This time it is in the context of the common fisheries policy - an area in which the specific nature of the outermost regions is particularly evident - when Parliament decided in favour of the need to extend the exclusive fishing zone for regional fishing vessels from 12 to 50 miles .
This measure makes very good sense for two main reasons :
First , since the opportunities open to fishermen in these regions have shrunk , it is vital to expand them by increasing the exclusive fishing area to 50 miles .
Secondly , this is also a way of ensuring the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fish stocks in the seas of the outermost regions .
In addition , the fishing capacity of the regional fleets is limited , and the fishing methods used in these regions are environment-friendly , in that they are fully compatible with the overriding need to guarantee the conservation of fish stocks .
I therefore welcome Parliament 's adoption of this important measure for the outermost regions and also the PPE-DE 's vote in its favour , which was decisive in its success .
. ( NL ) The dwindling fish stocks at sea as a result of environmental pollution and overfishing are alarming .
Catch quotas and even catch bans are becoming inevitable .
This , however , does create a major problem for areas where a large proportion of the population depends on fishing for their jobs and income , and where the consumption of fish is proportionately high .
This mainly applies to Spain and Portugal .
These countries are also indignant about Danish fishing for the fish meal industry and about the much bigger Dutch ships , even if these are only active on a restricted number of fishing days .
Despite the dangers at sea , many fishermen would ideally like to carry on , and even for those who would like a change , no replacement employment is being organised .
Their interests often lead to the problem being denied , or continued scientific research .
The main purpose of this research is to do nothing for the time being and delay the finding of a solution .
My colleague , Mr Jové Peres has tried to take these conflicting interests into consideration and to bring them into line with each other .
He has largely succeeded in this .
There is one point in his approach to which I object .
He is trying to shift the decision about catch quotas from the Commission to the Council .
This is beneficial for an obstructive Member State but makes necessary radical interventions more difficult .
. ( PT ) The Commission seems to envisage a common fisheries policy that focuses more on the short-term interests of the Member States than on the interests of the fishermen .
The time has come for the CFP to try to keep fishing-dependent regions alive and not to turn this issue into a battleground for the Member States .
Fishermen share common interests ; they all need the fish stocks to pursue their professional activities .
The decisions and objectives of the recovery plans must not underestimate the consequences they may have .
The recovery plans must seek a balance between the recovery or conservation of fish stocks and measures to limit the impact on the fishing industry .
Certain amendments that were adopted - including some tabled by my own group , the Union for Europe of the Nations , particularly the maintenance of the 12-mile exclusive zone , which is essential for Portugal - led me to vote for the report .
Mr President , regarding the Varela report on structural assistance , we rejected the report because it aims to keep the current structure of CFP subsidies .
The subsidies system has led to a contradictory situation where subsidies are spent on the one hand on scrapping vessels to reduce capacity , and on the other hand on financing the building of new vessels and modernisation of others .
The subsidies system has helped to drive over-capacity of the EU fleet .
It has mainly supported the large boat-owners at the expense of smaller operators and local fishing communities , and this subsidy system has financed the export of our over-capacity to other parts of the world .
This is unacceptable and that is why we rejected the Varela structural assistance report .
This report , like many others in the last few months , raises some serious questions about the ' sustainable development ' of fishing , about depleted fish stocks and bans on the fishing of this or that species in Community waters , about catch quotas or minimum fish sizes which have to be adhered to by fishermen in order to protect young fish , about fish populations etc .
Yet there is one question which nobody is asking .
How many of the fish that you claim to be saving will die in the next ' Prestige ' oil-tanker disaster ?
How many others , day after day , are dying as a result of illegal emissions from the unseaworthy old tubs chartered by the big oil companies ?
Of course the authorities announce major decisions , such as prohibiting the use of single-hull vessels ... and then they give the oil companies ten years to comply ! They have ten years in which to carry on causing devastation along the coasts of Spain , France and elsewhere , and causing the deaths of an untold number of species of marine wildlife .
In order to save those species , and not forgetting those who earn their livelihood from fishing , the small-scale fishermen that you constantly harass when you are not driving them to ruin ( by seeking to destroy part of the European fishing fleet , for example ) , why not start by putting your own rules into practice , such as the rules introduced after the ' Erika ' disaster ?
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
.
( EL ) It is perfectly clear from the vote in favour of more and more obstacles to fisheries that all the ? U wants is to establish a restrictive fisheries policy .
Policies so far have managed to reduce the number of vessels , especially coastal fishing vessels , hitting small family businesses hard and driving people out of this profession .
On the pretext of maintaining fish stocks , the aim is to end subsidies and limit funding for fleet renewal , thereby accelerating the demise of small and medium-sized enterprises in countries such as Greece , where fisheries are traditionally of both social and economic importance .
The objective is to shift fisheries into the hands of large companies .
This will destroy the social aspect of fisheries , which will become the exclusive preserve of a few fishermen employed by fisheries companies , who will be cut off in their work from their social roots .
At the same time , the aim is to develop the fish farming sector during the course of overall increases in the production of all types of aquaculture products .
What we need is a change in general orientation and approach , which is not in the nature of the capitalist ? U , together with an overall policy based on its interests , the interests of small and medium-sized farming and fishing enterprises , not the interests of big business .
By changing the legislation on structural assistance in the fisheries sector , the Commission is trying , purely and simply , to put an end to public aid for the building of new vessels .
It is crucial that public aid for the renewal of the fleet should be maintained .
I therefore want to give the rapporteur my unequivocal support .
I consider that addressing the shortage of fish stocks is not just a question of scrapping vessels .
Funds for modernising the existing fleet cannot simply be redirected to scrapping vessels , thus bringing into question already adopted budgetary measures that will be in force until 2006 .
Reducing the fleet is perfectly compatible with maintaining public aid .
We cannot , however , hide our heads in the sand .
Regulatory measures are needed to prevent public aid from leading to an increase in fleet capacity .
I therefore support the creation of a single register of vessels ( classed by segment , capacity and power ) , the purpose of which will be precisely to control the growth of the fleets .
I am in favour of tighter control with dissuasive penalties , namely the loss of public aid for fleet renewal , against those Member States that do not comply with the reduction in capacity laid down in the multiannual guidance programme .
As the rapporteur has pointed out , one of the aims of any fisheries policy is to control the fleet and ensure it is suited to the available stocks , thus achieving a balance between fleet and stocks and avoiding overcapacity and overexploitation .
This balance , however , must be based on a fair assessment of all the elements involved .
Faced with the recurrent failure of Member States to comply with the reduction in their fishing effort , the European Commission adopted a policy of not penalising the prevaricators , a policy that the European Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries has always criticised . It is therefore absolutely unacceptable that it should now attempt to blindly implement an across-the-board reduction in assistance for fleet restructuring and renewal .
This would cause enormous damage - as well as penalising the States that have complied most - and would have unforeseeable effects that would jeopardise the survival of an entire social group and an indispensable way of life , especially in heavily dependent regions with marked seafaring and fishing traditions .
I have therefore agreed in general with the rapporteur 's positions , which are consistent with the views that I , as a Portuguese and a European , uphold : maintaining aid for fleet renewal and modernisation ; setting global reference levels for fleet capacity corresponding to the sum of the targets set in the multiannual guidance programme ( MAGP , for 31 December 2002 ) for all segments ; a system for managing fleet additions and deletions to prevent these reference levels from being exceeded ; penalties for Member States that do not achieve the MGP targets ; maintenance of premiums for permanent cessation of fishing activities , other than scrapping ; maintenance of aid for joint enterprises ; and maintenance of aid for temporary stoppage .
.
I support Mr. Varela 's highly critical analysis of the Commission 's proposals . These proposals are flawed and will not achieve the aim of sustainable development .
This view is shared by a majority of the Member States .
No studies , analyses or reports of any kind have been provided on the economic and social impact of the drastic changes that the Commission would like to make to the structural policy on fisheries .
The Commission also makes a calculation of the budgetary estimates for the financing of these proposals which lacks any logic .
The Commission 's estimates are based on pure suppositions , with no solid foundation .
The Commission itself acknowledges that they are only probable working hypotheses .
This is a totally unacceptable way of dealing with this extremely important issue .
For all of these reasons , and more importantly because these proposals would mean a 40 % reduction in the Irish white fish fleet and a loss of approximately 2000 jobs , I will be supporting the Varela report .
The Varela report is highly critical of the Commission 's proposal .
The only data that the Commission presents in this proposal for a regulation establishing an emergency measure for scrapping fishing vessels are just rough figures .
These data on the fishing fleet have been considered unrealistic and , in many cases , wrong by most of the Member States .
No study , analysis or report has been presented , either , on the social and economic impact that will result from the drastic changes to the structural fisheries policy that the Commission wants to introduce .
Furthermore , the Commission then calculates the budgetary requirements needed to finance these proposals in a way that is totally devoid of logic , since it is based on mere assumptions without any basis in reality , as the Commission itself recognises when it points out that these are just likely working hypotheses .
The Member States have already earmarked these funds for other purposes , and so they are unlikely to be willing to accept this reallocation .
Serious funding difficulties are therefore likely to arise in the context of such an unrealistic programme as this .
A report as clear as this one certainly deserves my vote .
I broadly welcome the positive work done by the rapporteur , and the way I voted reflects my complete solidarity with the Portuguese positions on this subject .
In fact , it is beyond comprehension that the new measures should penalise most those Member States that have already made a large cut-back in their capacity ( as is the case of Portugal , which has , in fact , far exceeded the targets set ) , rather than directly affecting the fleets of those countries that have not achieved the reduction targets set in the operational plan for fisheries ( MAGP ) , which should be the ones to have to bear the necessary cuts .
It is vital that the European Commission should understand once and for all that the system it has proposed - encouraging the scrapping of vessels by increasing the scrapping premium , but selecting only vessels from the Member States that have fulfilled the MAGP targets - will ultimately run seriously counter to the stated aim of the measure .
Furthermore , it is worth emphasising that it is highly unfair to try to subject Portugal , for instance , to a policy in which the money for these measures would be taken from funds now allocated to aid for fleet renewal . On the contrary , it is quite clear that programmes of aid for the renewal and modernisation of the fleet - particularly the Portuguese fleet - should continue to exist , and that Community structural assistance should not be confined to the scrapping of vessels .
. ( NL ) Rich Europe has Africa , the poorest continent , on its doorstep .
This continent , with its many fatal diseases , poorly-developed industry , desertification and battle for minerals , is selling its agricultural products and mining products to the rich world .
In the past , during colonial supremacy , this was done under duress .
Nowadays , it appears to be done voluntarily , although they are hardly given any alternatives .
Politically speaking , colonialism has died out , but economically speaking , it is still thriving .
This also applies to fishing , and increasingly so .
The European Union leases fishing areas in the territorial waters and economic coastal zones of African countries on behalf of its own fishing fleets , particularly those from Spain and Portugal .
For the poor countries , this is one way of making a fast buck , but offers no solutions in the long run .
If the seas in those areas soon run out of fish stocks , as the North Sea is doing , those countries will be left with an insoluble problem .
They , in fact , desperately need food from the sea for their own undernourished population , and they could export any surpluses .
Instead of this , they confine themselves to primitive coastal fishing and sell their fishing rights to others .
This situation should end without delay .
This is the reason why I am increasingly averse to endorsing the extension of agreements such as those for Senegal and Angola today .
Mr President , with regard to this particular resolution , let me say I am appalled at the opportunist hypocrisy of certain groups and certain individuals in this House .
I totally agree with the comments of my colleague , Mr Poettering , when he criticised them for setting themselves up as the custodians of morality in this House .
All MEPs want a fair statute because it is an albatross around our neck and when they play this opportunist politics , it will be seized upon by the press , in my own country and other countries , to lambast Parliament .
Unfortunately , the press ignores the real work of this Parliament , the serious work that it undertakes , be it on foreign policy , be it on the promotion of human rights and democracy and , indeed , on other issues , and they will concentrate on these sorts of issues .
But the other reason I resent the opportunist hypocrisy is this : those Members that complain about the current system are not obliged to take travel expenses .
They can go to the cash office and get reimbursement of travel expenses .
If they think it is a wrong system they should practise what they are preach .
To their credit , some Members , especially Dutch Members , only take the reimbursement of the tickets .
Those that think that the system is wrong should practise what they preach and should only present their tickets for reimbursement and should not avail themselves of the other expenses and continue with this sort of hypocrisy .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of an alliance of opportunists and hypocrites .
On behalf of the European Parliamentary Labour Party , I wish to say that we are strong supporters of a Member Statute being introduced before the 2004 European Parliamentary elections .
Because of that , the British Labour delegation voted for the ELDR / Green / GUE / NGL resolution .
It bests reflects the entire delegation 's desire for transparency and the renumeration of MEPs ' salaries and expenses , as did the separate motions by those groups for which we also voted .
The PPE-DE / PSE resolution supports the existing text from the Legal Affairs Committee and that involves contentious primary legislation which is not acceptable to Council and therefore almost certain to fail .
The text does not make clear the requirement for there to be complete and transparent reform of all Members ' expenses .
This is not a position , in all friendship to our colleagues in the PSE , which we are able to accept .
The PPE-DE / PSE resolution also calls on the Commission to give an opinion on the text of the Legal Affairs Committee before it has been discussed by us in plenary .
This seems to the British Labour delegation a recipe for further delay .
It will be fundamentally our problem and our responsibility .
- ( DA ) During the vote on the Statute , we voted in favour of transparency and comparability and against hidden income , as well as in favour of abolishing the system for reimbursing travel expenses and replacing it with a system through which actual expenditure is reimbursed .
We have opted for this , even though we are in principle opposed to uniform remuneration , for we believe that MEPs must be remunerated like their colleagues in the Member States .
. It is Parliament 's responsibility to draw up a statute for its Members , ( relating to issues of pay , pensions , social and health insurance , taxation and immunities ) .
The Commission is consulted and the Council must agree to the statute .
The Parliament 's draft statute ( rapporteur : Rothley ) , has been approved by resolutions of the European Parliament and President Cox was given a mandate by the Council of Presidents in June to undertake exploratory contacts with the Member State Governments and to report back to the Conference of Presidents in the context of the opinion on the Rothley report .
I voted for a fair statute for all Members which must go hand in hand with a fair , honest and open expenses regime .
The Council needs to state what problems , if any , it has with the Rothley Opinion and , as we face enlargement , the need to bring this issue to a conclusion is pressing , so that the pay and conditions for Members of the next Parliament are clearly laid down in advance .
We voted against this resolution in order to reaffirm our complete disagreement with the creation of a monthly ' parliamentary allowance ' , the same for all Members regardless of the States they represent , because we believe that MEPs ' salaries should be based on the salaries of the members of the national parliaments in the countries where they were elected , where social realities differ .

If the proposal contained in the draft report drawn up by Mr Rothley on the ' draft Statute of Members of the European Parliament ' were adopted , we insist that it would be highly immoral to have a ' parliamentary allowance ' of EUR 8 500 ( roughly 1 700 000 Portuguese escudos ) a month , particularly in the case of Portuguese MEPs , when we compare it to the wages earned by workers in Portugal .
Moreover , MEPs are elected in national contexts .
Therefore , they are , and should continue to be , linked to these national contexts .
The proposal supporting a single parliamentary allowance also fits in with a federalist concept of the MEP 's mandate , seeking to transform the current ' national Member of the European Parliament ' into a future ' European Member of Parliament ' , which is something we disagree with .
.
( NL ) My party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , is in favour of a scheme whereby all MEPs would receive the same monthly income of , for example , EUR 2 000 , only the essential expenses they actually incurred would be reimbursed , MEPs would pay taxes in their countries of residence , as is normal , and they would not enjoy any legal privileges denied to other citizens .
Members of any parliament are not elected to give undue preference to themselves , but to represent the electorate .
In response to the criticism of preferential treatment , a statute for MEPs was discussed in 1998 and in 2002 .
Such a statute is a good thing if it puts an end to privileges and excessive incomes , and ends all opportunities to pad out these incomes by taking advantage of the system to reimburse expenses .
Unfortunately , some MEPs speak in favour of such a statute in order to validate and enhance their benefits .
A few years ago , I was astounded to hear Mr Rothley and many Members say , during an exploratory debate in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , that it is beneath their dignity not to have a maximum income .
Today , the two largest groups are trying to force this very contentious report through without any discussion or amendment , and to end the exploration of any better alternatives , maybe even in the hope that the Council will turn down such a statute .
This report closely follows the proposal for a directive presented by Commissioner António Vitorino , which aims at combating the smuggling of immigrants and the trafficking in human beings , without making a clear distinction between the two types of trafficking , which are very different . It is more interested , in fact , in combating illegal immigration than in protecting the victims .
The rapporteur tries to make some distinction , but only partially and without drawing all the conclusions from this .
While supporting the idea of providing assistance to the victims of the trafficking in immigrants , we cannot accept the way in which the Commission tries to do this , since it treats victims of trafficking in human beings for the purpose of prostitution in the same way as it treats illegal immigrants who seek work in the European Union and only turn to illegality because of the unacceptable positions upheld by the Community institutions , which try to turn the European Union into a ' fortress Europe ' instead of increasing support for cooperation with their countries of origin and supporting their integration .
The State should not resort to the threat of expulsion to pressurise victims into cooperating with the police and the authorities in charge of the investigation .
On the contrary , the cloak of protection given to victims should , from the start , guarantee a residence permit as well as access to asylum procedures and medical and social services , irrespective of whether the victims collaborate in combating the trafficking .
We therefore voted against the report .
. Whilst the British Conservative Delegation is in favour of prosecuting those who smuggle human beings , this measure is not an effective way of dealing with such criminals .
By allowing illegal immigrants to stay in a Member State , although ostensibly for prosecution purposes , the directive would leave the asylum system open to abuse .
If this legislation were to be implemented , the problems would be exacerbated .
Instead , we need to tackle these matters as individual states and take tougher measures to discourage traffickers and bogus asylum seekers .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the Sörensen report ( A5-0397 / 2002 ) .
We agree that there are advantages in the EU 's adopting rules on short-term residence permits with a view to combating organised illegal immigration or trafficking in human beings .
We are nonetheless alert to the fact that the proposal relates to an area which is covered by Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community and which does not therefore apply to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's Position .
. ( NL ) In tracking and punishing crime , we should not tackle the victims but the perpetrators .
These include drugs dealers , traffickers in human beings and people taking advantage of other people in the sex industry , rather than drug addicts , refugees and misled women put to work as prostitutes against their will .
Not only the health , housing and income of those victims deserve support , but also their opportunity to witness in a legal court against punishable offences and to claim damages from those who made money from them .
I have knowledge of the rapporteur 's long-term commitment to women who find themselves in dire straits in the world of prostitution in Antwerp , and this was initially the reason why I awaited her proposals with sympathy .
It is unfortunate that those proposals - at any rate , the compromises she is defending - still appear inadequate .
This is probably why a broad majority of this Parliament , which in most cases has little consideration for the position of people relegated to the margin of society , has voted in favour during the discussion in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
The opportunities for the victims to extend their residence permits are so limited that the discussions in my group have led to the conclusion that , in this case , it would be better to vote against after all .
We do not want to carry any of the responsibility for a scheme that raises people 's hopes but offers inadequate protection .
I have agreed with this report because I believe it puts into practice a large number of declarations of intent on the protection that should be given to many of those who every day are defenceless victims and then see themselves summarily expelled from the countries where they thought they could have a worthwhile future .
In addition , the establishment of this special measure is conditional upon real cooperation of the victim with the national authorities , with a view to dismantling illegal immigration networks . This will certainly avoid the use of other means to obtain rights that would otherwise be inaccessible .
This may , in fact , be a way of persuading victims to denounce the perpetrators of the crimes and , under the legal protection of the Member State , setting them free from the network of dependence that is erected around them and often forms a prison from which they cannot escape .
On a different level , I think the period of thirty days ' for reflection ' and the way of granting a short-term residence permit are appropriate , since such a short term will avoid unnecessarily raising unfounded expectations .
I regret , however , that the short-term residence permit will not be renewed if a court decision terminates the prosecution of the traffickers , because I think the victim 's cooperation with the authorities should be better rewarded regardless of the outcome of the action taken against the traffickers .
Mr President , the December Council of fisheries ministers will have a hefty agenda in terms of agreeing the first package of CFP reform proposals .
The Commission says that it wants from that a new way of doing things , a better way of doing things , involving stakeholders more , using a multi-annual , multi-species ecosystem approach to management .
And yet , at the very same time , the Commission seems hell-bent on pushing through its current proposals on cod and hake recovery , which , I believe , are so different from previous versions that they ought to be put out to further consultation .
I also think that to press ahead and agree that package with its wide-ranging consequences will , in fact , torpedo the CFP reform package and prevent any perception forthcoming from the Council that the EU actually means what it says when it states that it wants to do things in a better way .
I think that the Council should concentrate on the reform , get it right and then implement it urgently , setting up a regional advisory body to allow the stakeholders to be part of the solution to the cod and hake crisis and not just to be seen as the problem .
. ( NL ) Last week , the Commission tabled drastic quota proposals .
These proposals were more inspired by practical political considerations than by justified concern for poor cod levels .
Instead of a ban on cod fishing and industrial fishing , the Commission would like to restrict minimal additional cod fishing by the Dutch flatfish fleet .
We would regard an approach of this kind as fighting a losing battle .
Fish stock management and the corresponding quota rely on the catches being registered effectively .
After a debacle in the 1980s , this registration is virtually watertight in the Netherlands .
Of the fish supplied , 99 % is registered and traded via fish auctions .
What about the other Member States ?
How can one of the larger Member States export twice as many fish as supplied by the fishermen according to the registrations ?
The Jové Peres report is right to call for effective control and harmonised sanctions .
It is high time we did something about this .
Member States that fish within the quotas not only on paper but also in reality are now being hit hardest .
. ( NL ) For centuries , it has been a matter of course that people should not only eat animals , but also use them in all other areas where they expect to benefit .
This has resulted in such outrages as fighting with dogs , cocks and bulls , the use of sleigh dogs , the large-scale breeding of animals for their furs , hunting and animal testing .
Meanwhile , a younger generation of - in many cases - better-educated people is giving increasing attention to the welfare of pets , farm animals and animals in their natural habitats , and animal testing is also becoming less of an obvious choice .
Tests are carried out on animals for military purposes and in the production of cosmetics and medicines .
According to the rapporteur , seven Member States , including the Netherlands , fail to implement the existing directive on the protection of animals for experiments and other scientific purposes .
She is therefore right to call for a proposal to step up this directive before the end of 2003 , aimed at better control , a compulsory ethical evaluation procedure , a ban on experiments on primates caught in the wild and also a ban on animal abuse for the development of chemical weapons and cosmetics .
Unfortunately , this is not yet legislation in the true sense of the word , but an attempt to invite the Commission to take an initiative .
Unfortunately , unlike other parliaments , this Parliament cannot reach a decision without cooperation .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
I declare adjourned the session of the European Parliament
Colleagues , I have great pleasure today on behalf of the European Parliament to welcome Mr Alejandro Toledo , President of the Republic of Peru .
We met at the protocol entrance and it is bitterly cold outside this morning .
I assured the President that the welcome for him in this Parliament is very warm indeed .
Mr President , your election on 3 June 2001 marked a new departure in the political life of your country and a step towards democratic consolidation .
Your priorities for your administration - quality employment opportunity , the fight against poverty , strengthening democracy and the rule of law - are the values that this House espouses , believes in and promotes .
I know that even before you took office you expressed a keen interest in strengthening the existing ties between Peru and the European Union .
So we are especially pleased that you are here today and indeed this week .
This in our Parliament and in the life of our old continent and of our European Union is a very important moment .
We are approaching the closing moment in a lengthy process of enlarging our union to take in many more Member States .
At this time , as you may imagine , we are consumed by this activity ; it is so complex and so demanding .
Your presence here today recalls to us the duty to think beyond introspection and to touch the wider world .
By being here today , you recall to us , even as we take our step forward towards a great and new wave of European integration , that we carry wider global political responsibility .
Thank you even for that in terms of that reminder .
We are supportive of the European Union agreement with the Andean Community and look forward to deepening that , as indeed was indicated in Madrid this year in the summit meeting with Latin American and Caribbean states .
I am also aware of your interest in international humanitarian funds to try to mitigate the impact of poverty and the declaration of Guayacil of July 2002 .
We share so many perspectives and I look forward now to hearing you and invite you please to address the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr Cox , President of the European Parliament , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is truly an honour to be here , in a place that sets the standard for democracy in the world .
It comprises three hundred and seventy-four million Europeans who have decided to join hands to build together a far more integrated world , which goes beyond business and trade .
I come here today as the constitutional President of Peru , having visited you in Strasbourg last time as a President-elect .
Nevertheless , Mr President , my belief in being a rebel for the cause of democracy and freedom , human rights and the environment has not changed .
Europe plays a vital role in the world and I wish today to speak frankly to you .
There is no room for selective globalisation in the world ; globalisation cannot be confined solely to investment , trade or finance .
If globalisation makes sense in any area it is in the field of democracy , freedom , human rights and the environment , because democracy transcends nationality , just as human rights transcend colour .
Equally , because it is our responsibility to bequeath to future generations an inhabitable world where our children and our children 's children can enjoy not only democracy but also a healthy environment , where the factories that produce wealth cannot destroy the cleanliness of the environment that future generations will inherit from us .
We certainly need to achieve economic and financial integration .
Latin America certainly , now more than ever , needs to diversify its financial and trade relations .
The time has come , however , to pursue integration without losing our national identity .
The time has come to accept globalisation and competitiveness on the basis that our diversity is our strength .
Globalisation is not intended to create a uniform culture all over the world - it would be terrible if Kentucky Fried Chicken or McDonalds were part of world culture .
I rebel .
( Applause )
Being global and competitive does not mean tearing ourselves away from our national culture , and being competitive does not mean taking away the human essence of the men and women of the world .
Being part of the new CNN culture or the Internet culture that enables us to navigate the world cannot separate us from our languages , our food or our cultural characteristics .
I would ask Parliament , for which I have the greatest respect , to join me in making every possible effort , Mr President , to begin to give globalisation a human face if we want it to be sustainable in the long term .
We cannot talk about globalisation and competitiveness when there are billions of men and women in the world who will go to sleep tonight not knowing whether they will have anything to eat tomorrow .
If globalisation is to be sustainable in the long term , it must be inclusive , it must have a human face and it must include those who are currently marginalised .
In Latin America , 44 % of the population lives below the poverty line , and 21 % of the population lives below the most extreme poverty line , on less than one dollar a day .
If you do not have a social conscience , I would ask you to think in terms of trade .
Look at the waste of a labour force that could be part of the production process to enable the economy to grow in a sustainable manner .
Look at the waste of a potential market comprising these 44 % of Latin Americans , who could consume more bread , more milk , more shirts and more shoes .
If you do not want to consider the matter in terms of social fairness , look at it in terms of a business opportunity .
I have come here today to share with you a concern that is latent in the heart of Latin America .
I have raised this matter at the Guayaquil Conference of Presidents and at the General Assembly of the United Nations .
Today , with great affection , but at the same time , with great frankness , I would like to speak my mind on a subject on which much still remains to be done , but I am raising it as an idea .
The developing world , and Latin America in particular , is facing a huge challenge : the challenge of harmonising the responsible handling of economic policies .
We have undergone 30 years of structural change , 30 years in which we have been asked to put our house in order economically ; we have been trying , some more than others , with varying degrees of rigour .
After 30 years of structural change , however , we have been unable to engage , we have been unable to connect structural change with a new period of sustained economic growth that generates jobs worthy of employees , that generates income and that increases internal consumption and consequently improves the quality of life of the people .
Ladies and gentlemen of Parliament , Latin America is silently becoming disillusioned with democracy .
We now find ourselves with a dilemma which North Americans would define by saying we need to reconcile Wall Street with Main Street .
We cannot close our eyes and ears to the pots and pans that demonstrators are pounding in Argentina , Venezuela , Ecuador , Colombia and Uruguay .
We cannot turn a blind eye to this situation .
People are starting to wonder why there is so little work and so much poverty when they have all this democracy .
The industrialised countries tell us that the way forward is to strengthen democratic institutions and that we should climb aboard the train of globalisation and competitiveness , while the man in the street is wondering how to meet his family 's most basic needs .
I know that I am deliberately simplifying the argument , to show that there is a great dilemma when it comes to reconciling the responsible handling of economic policies .
Thirty years of unsuccessful change must not lead us to act irresponsibly .
We must not advocate a return to populism .
Something , however , must be done .
The men and women of Latin America are starting to take to the streets to protest , and in doing so they are directly or indirectly beginning to complain about democracy .
That is dangerous .
I am telling you this as a fervent supporter of freedom , democracy , human rights and the environment .
I cannot , however , turn a blind eye to what I am seeing and hearing .
In Peru , 54 % of men and women are condemned to living below the poverty level , and 23 % are condemned to living below the extreme poverty level .
What do we tell them ?
We believe in democracy .
Furthermore , some are now saying that under Fujimori 's dictatorship they were better off .
Something is happening in the region .
I know that you are involved in meeting the great challenge of integrating Europe and perhaps I am distracting you by sharing my concern .
If I am , however , I make no apologies .
I would simply like to tell you that there is a continent that is prepared to buy and sell , that is prepared to live in harmony with democratic beliefs , with the defence of human rights and environmental protection .
I hope that the process of European integration , which I admire , will not lead you to ignore what is happening in a continent which has great potential .
In April or May the Member countries of the Rio Group will meet in Lima , and I have deliberately asked for the main topic to be finding the financial means to fund governability and democracy in Latin America .
Democracy costs money - it is like a plant that needs to be watered after planting and we cannot take it for granted .
Our hearts bleed when we see a sister nation such as Argentina .
We are sad to see a possible chain reaction in the region and , however responsible we are in handling economic policy , nothing can shield us from the chain reaction due to which the region is once again swinging between new authoritarian regimes with different faces .
We must be careful .
Democracies cannot be overthrown by traditional military coups , but democracy can be weakened by a lack of tangible results for the poor .
We have asked two international bodies to help us find financial mechanisms to nourish governability and democracy , beyond the agreements with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , which set levels of debt for us , so that we can make commitments on fiscal deficit levels .
I am in favour of this .
We cannot allow ourselves to fall into populism , because the consequence is hyperinflation and hyperinflation makes the poor even poorer .
What , however , is good about not having inflation ?
Why should we faithfully comply with the recipe of the International Monetary Fund ?
My government has just signed an agreement with the Fund , but what is the good of this if it does not produce the results that the poor expect , and they begin to lose faith in democracy ?
The time has come to sit down together to consider creatively how to find financial mechanisms that go beyond levels of external debt and , without breaking fiscal and monetary discipline , allow us a greater degree of financial freedom to invest in public works that generate work and prevent governability and democracy in the region from being threatened .
Ladies and gentlemen of Parliament , two weeks ago in my country there was a regional and municipal election and my party did not achieve good results .
I could have used money , I could have offered gifts , I could have used populism and , probably , the electoral results would have been better for my party .
I was not elected to govern on behalf of my party , however , I was elected to govern on behalf of all Peruvians and I have firmly decided not to adopt government decisions with the next elections in mind .
I have decided to take State decisions with future generations in mind , and that is why I have paid a very high price .
( Applause )
Managing the economy irresponsibly would have meant bread today and hunger tomorrow .
I was born in a small town 4000 metres above sea level , in the Peruvian Andes , up in the clouds .
I had the opportunity to get where I am today and I have arrived here , with the privilege of addressing the European Parliament , thanks to a single factor : education .
( Applause )
I know that many might find my presence here strange .
Some European parliamentarians have worked with me in the fight against dictatorship and corruption .
I know that my presence could seem strange to many , because after 500 years , thanks to teachers and education , Peru has a President with my ethnic background who , as a result of a statistical error , has become President of the Republic .
From now on , I undertake to do all I can to ensure that men and women like me might be Presidents of Peru .
( Applause )
This comment concerns a State policy decision .
I have come to ask you , my European friends , not to sell us weapons .
Please , I beg you , do not sell us planes , boats or tanks .
Let us change the priorities of our precarious public budget .
When I took on the Presidency last year , I promised my people not to disappoint them .
This year , 2002 , I have decided to reduce military spending by 20 % to redirect it to health and education for the poor in Peru .
I am going to do so for the next five years .
( Applause )
I know you are patient and are going to listen to me .
Do not give us milk .
Do not give us your agricultural products , please ?
( Applause )
... because your giving us milk and wheat represents unfair competition for Peruvian farmers .
( Applause )
With the affection and admiration I have for this House , allow me to tell you quite frankly that the time has come to build a two-lane highway for trade .
Do what you are asking us to do : open up your markets .
( Applause )
You tell us we should operate an open economy . Yes , I agree .
You tell us we should not subsidise our agriculture , and I agree .
Do not , then , however , subsidise your agriculture .
Open up your markets .
( Applause )
The reason , dear friends , is simple , and I hope that you will take this in the spirit in which it is meant , from someone who admires the process of European integration : trade means work .
If we cannot market our products we will have more unemployed men and women .
If you ask us to do something that you are not prepared to do yourselves then you are not going to help us : let us do it together .
If we believe that globalisation should be inclusive , we must join hands to include the poor in globalisation and one way of doing that is to build a two-lane trade highway .
I like equality .
I know you are doing this out of kindness .
I know that you are providing food aid with humanitarian intent , but allow me to say , equally kindly , that the poor in Latin America may be poor but they have dignity .
They do not want to be offered crumbs .
All they ask is that you open up your markets on which we can sell our products , competing on quality and price .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , it has fallen to me to govern a country following ten years of cruel dictatorship , associated with corruption and trafficking in drugs and arms .
We were handed a country with justifiably high social expectations .
We were handed a country that had been in recession for four years .
We were handed a de-institutionalised country .
We were handed a country that has lost faith in its politicians .
Can you imagine in Europe having a prime minister or a president who would leave the Houses of Parliament by the back door to hide behind another nationality in Japan , and who would resign by fax ?
This can only be imagined in the most surreal political situation .
This event struck the very core of the men and women of Peru , who cannot believe it .
We have the responsibility to restore faith and confidence .
Three days after taking over the Presidency , groups were already demonstrating outside the Houses of Parliament giving vent to their expectations .
I have not come here to boast of victories or triumphs , but I can tell you that the Peruvian economy has begun to experience growth , that inflation is under 1 % , that international reserves are at their highest level , and that unemployment rates are slowly beginning to fall , although not as quickly as we would like .
I now face the challenge of making these macroeconomic achievements felt in people 's pockets .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am 56 years old and my journey has been long and difficult , but I have learnt that what does not kill you makes you stronger .
I have come here today to share my personal conviction with you and tell you that the best investment that a family , or a society such as Peru , can make is to invest in its people 's minds .
This means , quite simply , investing in health , education and justice for the poor .
Investment in health and education , as you know even better than I , is an investment with a high rate of return .
The business of knowledge is low-risk , long-term and extremely mobile .
Populist governments may take power but they will not be able to nationalise our people 's knowledge .
Governments in favour of excessive privatisation may take power but they will not be able to privatise what has been invested in people 's minds .
Today , Mr President , in conclusion , I would just like to tell you that the time has come to work together to ensure that freedom , democracy , respect for human rights and environmental protection are not just the concern of Latin America .
Today I would like to share with you the thought that world economic health depends on the strength of the democratic institutions and global security .
The Atlantic has become less of an obstacle .
Globalisation and competitiveness , using technology , must have a human face and be more inclusive .
We must achieve this by investing in health and education .
Mr President , I wanted to share these individual thoughts with you , with all of you , ladies and gentlemen , because next April , in Peru , the Member countries of the Rio Group will meet specifically to examine a proposal to find mechanisms to finance governability and democracy in Latin America , in order to prevent the poor from starting to lose hope in democracy .
We have come to learn from the experience of the European integration process .
Latin America is trying to achieve its own integration .
The Andean countries are trying to learn from the process you are undergoing .
We want an integrated Andean Community , a stronger Latin America that would be able to engage in dialogue with the European Union , and I hope that at the Rio meeting we will be able to have observers from the European Union so that , with their experience , they can guide us in this process .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you have been kind enough to give me the opportunity to speak , I would say that the millions of men and women in the world who are currently living on one dollar a day would like the European Union and other industrialised countries to make an effort to include the poor in the benefits of globalisation , giving it a human face , which woul