Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 14 March 1997 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of Friday , 14 March have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , before the sitting begins I should like to mention here a political incident which does not appear to me to be very pleasant in so far as it concerns the Honourable Member , Mr Martens , who stated in Lisbon that the party with which I cooperate is a party of the extreme right .
In an interview published on 29 March Mr Martens accused the CDS-Partido Popular , with which I work as an independent and of which my colleagues , Mr Girão Pereira and Mrs Celeste Cardona are stalwart members , of being an extreme right-wing party .
And why ?
The answer is simple : because we dared to support a referendum in Portugal on the Maastricht Treaty .
Not a serious crime .
This party was then expelled from the PPE and it was Mr Martens who came to Lisbon to do this dirty job , making uncharitable threats and by differences of opinion ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Rosado Fernandes , that is neither a point of order nor a personal statement , since it is something which took place outside the Parliament .
Rule 108 covers the rebuttal of personal remarks made within the Parliament , but not the discussion of a political row which took place outside the Parliament .
I am sorry , but I cannot allow you to make such a speech now .
It is my duty to cut this speech short , since it is bound to give rise to other personal remarks on topics which are neither on the agenda nor have any bearing on the Rules of Procedure .
I am sorry , but it must be so .
... ( without microphone ) directly personal to us all .
I think I have always avoided making personal attacks ; it is not my custom to do so and I should like ...
I think that personal attacks are typical of the decadence of our democracy , are typical of those who want to conceal the fact , for example , that the Social Democrat Group has gone over to the PPE ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I am sorry , Mr Rosado Fernandes , this is not a personal attack .
These are political opinions , but this is not the time for them according to the Rules of Procedure .
I regret that I cannot allow you to speak .
Mr President , can I simply point out to Members that the signing-in sheets are now back inside the Chamber .
I hope Members will draw that to the attention of their colleagues who may be wandering around outside looking for them .
Thank you , Mr Balfe .
You know that this was at the initiative of the Quaestors , who tried to find the least inconvenient way possible .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , on the subject of the agenda and the work of the Conference of Presidents under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure , unfortunately Parliament has still not set up a monitoring committee in order to ensure that the requirements of the Committee of Inquiry on BSE are met .
Despite many letters , following the decision by the Committee on Agriculture , you have still not replied to them .
Since 1 April of this year , a regulation now has to be implemented , in accordance with which the animal carcase units would have to work in accordance with specific quality criteria .
But they are not doing so !
This Parliament ought to be raising the issue of this requirement , which was one of the main requirements , with the Commission .
This is not possible , however , because the committee has not yet started to operate .
I have the impression that the setting up of this committee will continue to be postponed , by one political group which is being guided by electoral considerations .
We cannot make the reputation of this Parliament take second place behind the electoral considerations of one Member State .
Therefore I should like to ask you to press ahead with the setting up of this committee , so that this Parliament can do its work properly .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , you cited Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure , but Rule 28 envisages written questions , not oral questions , concerning the work of the Bureau .
The Bureau has already taken note of the question you mention and will be taking a decision at the appropriate time .
The question was submitted during the Bureau 's last meeting since it was not possible previously .
The Bureau has many matters to deal with .
It will take a decision on Thursday if the time is right , otherwise as soon as possible .
Mr President , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has just made certain comments .
He did not have the courage to say what he meant ; he talked about one particular country .
As a British Member of this House , and leader of the Socialist Group , can I make it entirely clear that I wrote within days of the BSE Temporary Committee reporting asking that we should deal with the follow-up committee immediately .
If he is referring to my group , there has been no attempt whatsoever to keep it off the agenda .
Mrs Green , no reference was made either to you or to your Group , so that explanation was not called for .
Mr President , I would assume that , according to the announcement of what was decided by the Conference of Presidents , a decision on this ad hoc committee will be taken at its next meeting .
That is my intention .
It will depend upon you , the Chairmen of the Groups , whether it is taken or not .
Order of Business
We shall continue with settling the order of business .
The final draft of the agenda drawn up pursuant to Article 95 of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents has been distributed ; the following amendments have been proposed for inclusion :
Mr President , I should like to point out that the Committee on Budgetary Control approved these reports quite properly in accordance with the rules , and I very much regret the fact that the Council did not take the opportunity to give its opinion on them within the proper time limit , thereby forcing us to separate these two reports from discharge in general , and postpone them to the April II sitting .
Moreover , that is the last date on which we are conducting this approval debate and on which a decision can be given , because according to the budgetary rules we are obliged to give approval by the end of April , or to give our opinion on approval in the part-session .
I want to make this point quite clear here , and I very much regret the fact that we have now had to take this step .
Thank you very much , Mrs Theato .
I hope the Council will take note of that observation .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left has asked for a statement by the Council and the Commission on the closure of the Renault factory at Vilvoorde to be included on the agenda .
The Council has said that for its part it will not be issuing any statement , since it does not regard the matter as falling within its ambit .
The Commission would be willing to do so on Wednesday , although Wednesday would be fairly problematical as regards the agenda which is already quite full .
But of course the decision rests with the Honourable Members .
Mrs Moreau of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left has the floor to explain the request .
Mr President , the decision to close the Renault factory at Vilvoorde , which is an indication of the current construction of Europe , based on putting employees into competition with one another , has raised a legitimate wave of protest .
This House has echoed this by adopting , at its March part-session , a resolution which requires of the Council and the Commission , I quote , ' That they do everything possible to have the decision by the management of Renault revoked ' .
One month later , where do we stand ?
The management of Renault , which has put forward no concrete proposal , stands by its decision .
The workers are continuing their actions and the occupation of the site , and they enjoy the solidarity of the employees of the Renault factories in other countries .
Two court decisions , one Belgian and the other French , have blamed the management of Renault .
The Nanterre tribunal has forbidden the closure of the Vilvoorde factory to be proceeded with .
This House cannot be content with having adopted a resolution and not be concerned about the follow-up this receives .
What is at stake is too serious .
For this reason , in conformity with Article 96 , paragraph 1 , of the Rules of Procedure , my group proposes an amendment to the order of business , with the tabling for the Wednesday sitting of the statements from the Council and the Commission reporting on the measures taken in the spirit of and out of respect for the European Parliament 's resolution of 12th March last .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this is the moment when social Europe is beginning to grow , thanks to the struggles of the people concerned .
The initial court proceedings have shown that there is also a real chance of further development , and at this historic moment this Parliament should start to play its role as the sounding-board of the European public , and should look after the interests of the people concerned .
Therefore we should give ourselves time to deal with this issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , pull yourselves together and do it !
Millions of unemployed people , millions of marginalized people are looking to you for action .
If you refuse them , then you will be showing them that you are pursuing a vision of European construction that has nothing , absolutely nothing to do with the interests of the people involved .
It is for this reason that no one in this House can vote against this request .
Mr Martens has the floor to oppose the request .
Mr President , last week , the workers at the Renault factory at Vilvoorde gained an important victory .
The sudden closure of the plant was declared unlawful by a tribunal in Brussels , and also by a court in Rennes .
A completely new situation has emerged .
I heard this morning in my country 's media that the trade unions have accepted the principle of resuming work , because the closure of the plant is now unlawful and an entirely new procedure is beginning .
They are going to hold a ballot on this on Thursday morning , in which all the workers at Vilvoorde will take part .
The situation has completely changed .
In these circumstances , I think that an opportunity exists , and that it is legitimate for the normal methods and procedures for consultation in the event of collective redundancies to be applied .
I have also heard that the Social Affairs Council will be meeting on 15 April .
In these circumstances , since legality has been restored by two courts and a new procedure is under way , I think we must give every chance to the discussions which are being called for by the workers and their trade unions , and it does not seem appropriate for us to hold another political debate on the matter .
We still strongly support the interests of these workers , and it is in their interest that I would ask for this new procedure to be given a chance .
I put the request of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Thursday and Friday :
( No proposed amendments submitted ) .
Mr President , I just wanted to raise a point with regard to the statement from the Commission and Council following Mr Alavanos ' report on the Middle East and ask whether the deadlines could be adjusted .
As I understand it , the deadline for the resolution is set for this Thursday and it is to be voted on at the April II partsession . It seems to me that if we are going to vote on such a sensitive issue as the Middle East at the April II partsession in Brussels , then it really is more appropriate to set the deadline nearer to that part-session .
It is a very sensitive political issue .
I am sure much will happen in the interval and we should allow ourselves to do something more up-to-date at the time rather than establish a deadline this week .
Mrs Green , the next Conference of Presidents will set the time-limit for tabling resolutions .
It is better like that as we can take any points into consideration .
Mr. President , my point concerns the agenda for this week .
We are intending to discuss Ms Terrón i Curí 's report on the European Information System on Wednesday .
There have been some problems while discussing this report in committee as the papers are not available in Swedish .
At our last meeting we discussed this matter very thoroughly indeed .
Finally , Mr. Cederschiöld and I , since we were both present , decided that we would not , so to speak , hinder the committee further .
Instead we abstained from participating in the vote in the hope that Swedish texts would be available prior to this session .
Currently only the section covering motivation is available in Swedish , nothing else .
Neither the Council document nor the report itself is available in Swedish .
As we all know , this is a very important report covering an important issue .
But from our point of view the situation is totally unacceptable , and not having access to texts in one 's mother tongue is not in line with good working practice .
I refer you to and request that this report is postponed until the documents are available in Swedish .
Mr. President , this point concerns the same issue raised just now by Mrs Lindholm .
I would like to emphasise one aspect of all this , namely that we did discuss whether to proceed with the debate but not the voting , despite the fact that there was no translation .
I think this would be wrong .
I do not think we should proceed with either the debate or the voting until the documents are available in Swedish .
I think , therefore , that the whole subject should be removed from the agenda until the translations are available .
Mrs Cedersschiöld , that is what the Rules of Procedure say and , if , therefore , the text is not available in Swedish and Finnish , we shall not vote .
Mr. President , I am pleased that the President has shown an understanding of this matter .
But if we are now intending to set the translators working day and night so that these texts will turn up the day before the vote , how on earth will we have time to read them and form an opinion on them ?
Surely this is not what is meant by working on equal terms .
We must have the same opportunity as other nationalities to read , discuss and work .
I find this totally unacceptable and move that the subject is postponed , perhaps even until the next session , by which time we may have the Swedish translation .
Very well , Mrs Lindholm .
I put to the vote the proposal to withdraw from the agenda the report which is not available in all language versions .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Mr President , you have now removed from the agenda both of Mr Kellett-Bowman 's reports on discharge .
In that case , however , we ought to make provision for dealing with them during April II .
They are not on the agenda now , but we must , as a matter of form , fit them in .
I do not know when they will actually be dealt with , but whatever happens these reports must remain on the April agenda .
Mr President , I too am very anxious to obtain clarification with regard to the agenda for April II , because the Commission has stated that on the Wednesday morning it will be deciding which countries , in its opinion , meet the deficit criteria and which do not .
That decision will , therefore , be an extremely important one .
For a long time , we have been asking the Commission always to notify Parliament first when such decisions have been taken , and only then to notify the press .
Commissioner de Silguy has said that he is prepared to clarify this point at 3 p.m. , and that the press conference will not be held until afterwards .
I believe that this represents substantial progress in our relations with the Commission , and I therefore think that it is very important that this statement - and , as I understand it , this has already been agreed - really can take place at 3 p.m. , in other words , right at the beginning of the April II sitting .
Mr von Wogau , in the final draft of the agenda for Wednesday , 23 April there are two Commission communications : one on equality of opportunity between men and women and the other on the broad economic policy guidelines and excessive deficits .
Each will be allocated 45 minutes for questions and answers .
As regards what Mrs Theato quite rightly said , I think that the appropriate time to consider the day for including the information mentioned still pending before the Council would be at the meeting of the Conference of Presidents this Thursday .
We do not need to fix the date and time now ; we hope to have more details by Thursday to consider the inclusion .
( Parliament approved the Order of Business thus amended )
Animal experiments in the field of cosmetic products
The next item on the agenda is the debate on the report by Mrs Roth-Behrendt on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission report on the development , validation and legal acceptance of alternative methods to animal experiments in the field of cosmetic products - 1995 ( COM ( 96 ) 0365 - C4-0662 / 96 ) ( A4-0017 / 97 ) .
Mr President , allow me first of all to say something that will come as no surprise to anyone , in fact , basically , I am just repeating something I have said before . For eight years I and many other members have been campaigning in favour of a total ban on animal experiments in the field of cosmetic products .
This campaign , however , has met with only very limited success .
If , in my speech here today , I am somewhat milder than I have been in the past , it is only because I do not want the Commissioner who is present here today , Mrs Bonino , or her officials , to be punished for the crimes that have been committed by her predecessors , because unfortunately that is what has happened .
In 1993 , this House decided , quite clearly , that there should be no more animal experiments in the field of cosmetics , on the grounds that there are already 8 , 000 ingredients that have been tested on animals .
Any other new ingredient to be used for cosmetic products would have to be tested using alternative methods , i.e. in vitro , and not on animals .
We asked the Commission to report to us , on an annual basis , regarding the progress that had been made .
Unfortunately , almost no progress has been made at all .
The fact that I am speaking on the subject today , somewhat belatedly , is due to the fact that the report that I prepared for the Commission 's annual report was removed from the agenda at the last sitting .
In the meantime , the Commission , in its haste , allowed the committee to meet in order to approve technical amendments , and that committee took certain decisions that , by its own standards , were relatively mild .
In spite of this , I am now asking the Commission to accept the report that I have prepared for Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and to take on board the wisdom that it contains , because this technical committee has done nothing about it .
Let me just refer to two of the three points I have in mind , and then ask Mrs Bonino two questions .
First of all , in 1993 we decided , for reasons of common sense , that if , by 1998 , no alternative methods had been developed and validated , then we would have to allow a one-off postponement of the ban on animal experiments , for a period of not more than two years .
I would now like to ask Mrs Bonino whether she agrees with us that the year 2000 has to be the final cut-off point for animal experiments in the field of cosmetic products , and that there can be no further extension .
Unfortunately , the decision taken by the technical committee on 20 March is not so clear-cut .
I would then like the Commission to establish beyond doubt that now - contrary to what has occurred in the past - it is being made quite clear that none of the animal experiments that are used has ever been validated .
A requirement that we expect , and indeed demand , that alternative methods should meet , is not being met by these animal experiments at all !
Therefore , will you , Mrs Bonino , establish beyond doubt that , when it comes to validations , you will not set any requirements that are higher than those set for animal experiments ?
And will you also take note of the fact that most animal experiments have never been validated , which means that they have never really been put to the test , and that therefore they are of only very limited relevance ?
If we are to abide by international agreements , and apparently the OECD is an authority as far as the Commission is concerned , then will you also establish beyond doubt that the OECD is trying to eliminate and abolish as many animal experiments as possible by validating alternatives ?
Will you also establish beyond doubt that the OECD has received a satisfactory number of applications for the approval of alternative methods ?
And finally , Mrs Bonino , will there be a seventh amendment to the cosmetics directive in the near future ?
I know that always in the past the technical committee and its staff have kindly given advance notice ; at the time , the sixth amendment , together with my 1993 report , led for the first time to our demanding a ban on animal experiments in the European Union .
As you can imagine , Commissioner , a seventh amendment would take more account of Parliament 's wishes , and you would therefore receive the measure of support that you would no doubt like to have .
I should therefore like to hear your answer . Will you , in the near future , be proposing a seventh amendment to the cosmetics directive ?
And will this seventh amendment finally make it quite clear that no more finished products will be tested on animals ?
I was convinced that the sixth amendment had already made this sufficiently clear , but apparently that was not the case .
Therefore I expect the seventh amendment to have that effect .
I should very much like to hear you tell us when you will be giving Parliament its chance , within the legislative process , to make its position known and to support the millions of people in the European Union who are demanding that there should be no more animal experiments in the field of cosmetic products .
Mr President , I find Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's generosity quite amazing .
She has been very kind to the Commission and I understand why .
This is not the Commission which failed so abysmally in the past , it is a new Commission .
Nevertheless , I contend , the responsibilities of the old Commission transfer to the new one and I am deeply disturbed that this Commission is as subject to the influence of the lobby as was the old one .
It is only a parliament and parliamentarians which can respond to the many thousands of letters which we collectively receive on this subject .
I must also say that I find it very upsetting that we have missed the boat .
If this were a situation where co-decision applied , we would have had a much greater power and influence over the Commission .
Just as on the last occasion , cooperation has meant that we have been overruled .
I wonder if the possibility has occurred to the Commission that we as a parliament might look at measures which are not directly related to this issue and possibly threaten to hold them up in order to get our way on this subject .
We have never tried this tactic before .
It seems to me that our only alternative would be a motion of censure for failure on the part of the Commission to do what it promised .
We tried that only a month ago and of course in those circumstances we were obliged to support the Commission - and rightly so .
However , we cannot be constantly rebuffed by the Commission as if we had no democratic accountability to our constituents .
When she responds to the debate , I would ask the Commissioner to deal with some of the following specific questions , arising from the resolution before the House .
Firstly , may we know what draft measures are to be proposed to us ? ' Draft measures ' could mean anything .
Secondly , could we have some indication as to what has happened so far ?
No clear explanation was given in committee .
We are told that there are no detailed statistics available .
Why not ?
Who collects the statistics ?
Where do they come from ?
What has the Commission done to chase up these matters ?
If the Commissioner does not know then who does ?
This has all very much been lost sight of .
Once again the lobby has been more effective than anyone else .
That is a totally unsatisfactory situation .
The Commission and Parliament should take joint responsibility and ensure that animals are no longer abused in the way they have been in the name of commerce .
Mr President , the EPP Group will be supporting Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's report and would like to congratulate her on it .
We have taken a keen interest in this issue and recognize that the European cosmetics market is very important .
It accounts for about 40 % of the world cosmetics market .
Even though the actual number of animals involved in testing for cosmetics is relatively small , our aim , like that of the rapporteur , would be to reduce it to zero .
We draw attention to the fact that it is not actually known how many tests for cosmetics within the European Union involve the use of animals since most Member States are failing to comply with the obligation to collect those statistics , including Germany .
I hope Mrs Roth-Behrendt will take that message home .
Secondly , it distresses me to agree with Mr White in the context of the British general election , but it seems to me that the only people approaching this issue with any urgency at all are Members of the European Parliament and members of outside pressure groups .
This is curious since the European Union has a framework for a ban available in the 1993 Directive .
It is also curious because the European Union has some claims to be a democratic body .
I would like to call on the Commissioner , when she speaks , to give us a timetable for the early banning of any requirement to test finished products on animals .
It is also very important that we show greater clarity and urgency in developing and validating alternatives .
I , together with Mrs Roth-Behrendt and some other Members of the European Parliament visited the European Centre for Validation of Alternative Methods of Testing for Cosmetics at Ispra in northern Italy .
We found it in a pine forest .
It was , I believe , previously the Italian Centre for Nuclear Energy .
I have referred to my notes .
I note that Dr Balls , the director of the centre said to us in December 1995 that he believed that it would be possible to ban , from 1998 , all the following tests on animals for cosmetics : finished products , skin penetration , photo-toxicity , skin irritation , mutagenicity , eye irritation and sensitization .
There is something very curious going on here where the director of the centre said in 1995 that this would be possible by 1998 and yet the Commission has not come up with any proposals .
I wonder whether this has anything to do with the troubles that the Commissioner can see ahead relating to the World Trade Organization , and the fact that it may not be possible to bring this legislation in as originally envisaged in view of our obligations under certain GATT rules .
If that is the case , then I , and I suspect , Mrs Roth-Behrendt as well , would be prepared to be very combative on this .
What is the point of having a European Union position on this issue , which is very important to many people in Europe , if we cannot do anything about it because of international rules ?
Surely we should test those rules to the ultimate .
Mr President , the ban on the marketing of cosmetic products and ingredients which have been tested on animals is due to enter into force on 1 January 1998 .
Unfortunately , however , as other speakers have already pointed out , the Commission takes the view that this ban should be postponed for two years .
I should like to be somewhat stricter than the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
The resolution says that no part of the ban should be postponed for more than two years .
I would like to have this two-year period taken as a maximum , and I would ask the Commissioner if she sees any prospect of reducing it .
Because a maximum is just that , and it also means that you can go for less .
I think this whole affair is very unfortunate , and we shall also be voting against the two amendments tabled by the UPE Group , because they are simply trying to weaken the resolution drawn up by the rapporteur .
It seems to me quite senseless that animals should have to suffer so that yet more cosmetics can be produced .
And I also feel that the Commission does not have sufficient grounds for proposing a postponement .
If you look at the Commission 's annual report , it shows that there has been a casual approach , a lack of effort to secure the implementation of a ban on animal testing in 1998 .
It is a great pity that the Commission has made so little progress and is now taking refuge behind such things as the WTO and risks to health .
And if we look at paragraph 3 of the resolution , we see that the Commission has failed in not even being able to provide detailed statistics on cosmetic testing in the Union .
I would ask Mrs Bonino to look at paragraph 3 and to respond by telling us how things can be improved , so that at least some better statistics can be obtained .
The Commission would have appeared in a better light if it had gone to more trouble over the international recognition of alternative testing methods .
We must also not forget that there are already some 8000 ingredients which have been tested .
The Commission would have done better to oblige the cosmetics industry to use these existing ingredients and finally introduce a ban on further animal testing .
Mr White says that one response might be to dismiss the Commission .
I hope that the Commissioner 's reply will be such that we shall be rather more generously disposed than when we started this debate .
Mr. President , first , I would like to say that Mrs Roth-Behrendt has written a good report .
But , a new situation has arisen since the decision taken by the technical committee on 20th March which changes the basic circumstances .
It must be said that this was a very negative decision ; settling this issue has once again been postponed to some very indefinite future time .
The decision is negative for several reasons .
Firstly , of course , because of the subject matter : This is an ethical question and it is totally indefensible to use animal testing in the production of cosmetics .
Secondly , the format of the decision is totally unreasonable , i.e. that we have a technical committee which is , in practice , creating legislation .
This is not the way a democratic country , for example , would operate .
It is also disturbing that the technical committee will once again postpone the decision in two years time if it has not found sufficient alternatives by that time .
We cannot possibly accept this way of working .
The Commission must also take some criticism for remaining passive on this issue and for once again taking the initiative of postponing the ban .
Of course alternatives are slow to appear when it can be seen that the ban is continually postponed ; we are contributing to this slow pace as there is no clear date by which testing must stop .
And now a new argument has appeared on the scene : it is said that the World Trade Organisation will prevent the introduction of a ban on sales .
This is a very dubious argument , particularly as it is really impossible to know whether or not the organisation will approve such a ruling until we have tried to introduce it .
If the World Trade Organisation does not approve it , we can refuse to accept the decision without first attempting to fight for the introduction of such a ban on sales of this type .
We support the report and would like to see a ban as soon as possible both on sales and on testing themselves .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we look at this affair by the light of day , we can see that the Commission has perfected the art of evading directives or regulations that have already been adopted .
It really is a scandal that the prohibition on animal experiments , which was due to come into force on 1 January 1998 - and which in any case has been known about for four years and repeatedly postponed - is now to be postponed yet again , until the year 2000 .
It is neither technically nor ethically justifiable for millions of animals to have to die , in the nastiest possible way , merely so that the cosmetics industry can produce a few more pots of cream , when there are already millions of little pots of cream and such like products .
The majority of the population of the EU rejects the idea , as proved by the millions of signatures that we have received .
Parliament is against the idea as well .
Nor is it acceptable that there should be arrangements to allow exceptions to the rule .
If it is not possible to prove in vitro that a new ingredient is harmless from the toxicological point of view , then we must simply do without it .
We already have enough of them anyway .
In any case , it is time we decided , once and for all , whether we should always carry out research into everything using animal experiments .
Something that has been proved harmless in animal experiments may nevertheless cause serious reactions in human beings .
This has already been proved on innumerable occasions .
It cannot and should not be possible to keep on and on postponing something !
Remember the leghold traps !
Something that this House decided on a long time ago is being postponed , by bringing up all sorts of odd arguments , statistics , the WTO and whatever else happens to occur to us .
Then you either say that we do not want such laws at all , and what Parliament has decided is all very well and good , but in principle we shall do as we like - at least that is what it has looked like recently .
But I reject this viewpoint , and I also reject animal experiments .
I like to use cosmetics , but not like this .
It is high time that we stuck to the decisions taken by this House .
That is why we were elected , and that is what the public expects of us .
Mr President , at first sight , the ban on animal experiments to test cosmetics or the substances of which they are composed should be a matter of consensus , as each of us is naturally opposed to any act of cruelty to animals .
An important observation becomes necessary , however , when one examines the matter .
A favourable decision on this ban could well be fatal for the European cosmetics industry , which is the world leader .
Most third countries , in fact , require this type of experimentation and our most aggressive competitors - the Americans and Japanese - will have no hesitation in continuing tests on animals in order to place on the market products which they will sell throughout the world , including in our countries .
Moreover , is it really cruel to test a product by applying it behind a rabbit 's ear or , at worst , by instilling it onto a rat 's cornea , to check that it does not develop conjunctivitis ?
Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's report wants to authorize alternative methods only .
But what are they ?
I know of only one which is scientifically reliable , and that is experiments on human beings .
As a plastic surgeon , I am very well informed on this subject and I can tell you that the Americans are past masters in these techniques .
In California , in particular , it is common to recruit in prisons volunteers who , for a fistful of dollars and a reduction in their sentence , agree to expose themselves to the sun for ten hours at a stretch with a mixture of sun lotions on their backs .
These prisoners - volunteers for science - always come from a socially disadvantaged background and most of the time they are immigrants .
Are we - in Belgium , in France or elsewhere in the European Union - going to appeal to North African delinquents in our prisons in order to subject them to experiments ?
As a humanist all my life , I cannot reconcile myself to this and the writer of this report will be hard pressed to explain to me in the name of what moral principles protecting a rabbit 's ears and a rat 's conjunctiva takes priority over the health of immigrants , even if they are delinquents .
Mr President , every time we have this debate here in Parliament we have to clarify many concepts if we want to avoid a dialogue between deaf men .
One indisputable fact is that scientists the world over are in favour of alternatives to animal experiments , where they exist , because they are easier .
No-one prefers to use animals since , amongst other things , the work is more difficult and very much more costly .
The debate is not therefore whether we are in favour of or opposed to the alternative methods .
The real debate lies in determining whether people 's right to health can be protected with the alternative methods which now exist .
That must be this Parliament 's chief concern .
What sometimes happens in the field of rights is that there are conflicting forms of good .
Where the promotion of animal welfare which conflicts with the good of protecting people 's health , we must opt for the second form of good which is a higher form .
Moreover , in this Parliament we often have great political voluntarism .
There are occasions unfortunately when we cannot overtake science .
Mention has been made of the Research Centre at Ispra and it has been said that they cannot do much ; here too there is confusion between the faculties and the capacity of the Ispra Centre .
Alternative methods will arise from international research and not from any specialist voluntarist centre .
We can encourage , we can act , we can spend money , but it will be international research which finally comes up with these alternative methods .
Mr President , I would like to make it clear that I fully support one of the previous speakers in the view that what we are considering here is human health .
It also has to do with human vanity , and this is quite a different matter .
So I would like to thank the rapporteur for an outstanding report , though in fact it was a little more biased - as others have pointed out - than it should have been , which was of course quite natural .
But the issue it brings to our attention , and I hope the Commissioner will understand this , is that it is in fact quite unacceptable that we should postpone the ban so that it does not come into effect in 1998 .
There is absolutely no justification for doing this .
There is an abundance of cosmetics on the market .
We can make do with those that are available .
We have ample opportunities .
There is no reason for researching further products unless this can be done using alternative methods .
As others have pointed out , it is wholly unacceptable that these decisions be taken by technical people .
This is a question of policy , so it is logical that the decisions should be taken by politicians , not be technical personnel .
Unfortunately this decision making process demonstrates all too clearly how strong the cosmetics lobby is in the European Community .
There is no defence for this when we consider the fact that 40 % of the market in this area is located in Europe , but it is precisely for that reason that we should give a lead in preventing animal experimentation .
It is lamentable that the Commission should succumb to the lobbyists ' activities .
It would be sending the wrong signal if we once again postponed the ban .
If we do so , the industry will simply think that we will do the same again next time and may in fact become indifferent .
Mr President , Commissioner , the purpose of the Roth-Behrendt report is to summarize the progress achieved by the Union in the development , validation and legal acceptance of methods which could replace animal experiments in the cosmetics sector .
It also refers to the 1994 report of the Commission , which confirmed the lack of valid alternative methods to replace animal experiments and confirmed the Commission 's commitment to at least reducing the number of animals used .
I must stress that with regard to certain tests , specifically those for eye irritation , skin absorption , phototoxicity and photo-irritation , and those basic tests relating to mutagenicity , the Commission report did evince a degree of optimism regarding the possibility of testing valid alternative methods .
Our view is that the differences of opinion between the European Parliament and the Commission are still unresolved , because we are concerned here with a conflict between the principles of free trade and the assertion of non-commercial values in animal experiments in the field of cosmetic products .
The European legislator can legislate in respect of any product in circulation within the Union , but he must follow the dictates of international law , because when European enterprises export to third countries which require animal experimentation for European products , these must conform to the laws of those countries .
Furthermore , the rules endorsed by the European Union at the GATT negotiations do not allow us to prohibit the circulation within Europe of foreign products that have been tested on animals .
To summarize , imposing stricter rules on European producers than on their foreign competitors could sound like discrimination against the former .
To eliminate any such possibility , at least for the time being , the Commission should delay for a few more years the directive prohibiting the marketing of cosmetics that have been tested on animals .
Mr President , I think it is quite incomprehensible that the Commission once again feels that it has to postpone the issue for two years , and I should like to take this opportunity to say to those ladies and gentlemen who believe that there are no alternative methods that that view is totally incorrect .
It is not true , for example , to say that there is no alternative to the eye irritation test .
This fact is now established knowledge at international level .
If that is what you maintain , sir , then you do not know what you are talking about .
It is also complete nonsense , in this context , to quote a few poor prisoners on whom some kind of tests are being carried out .
Every woman and also every man who would like to use perfumes would do without them if they knew that , in order to manufacture these products , somebody has to be tortured .
I too can quote a statistic , from the Federal Republic of Germany , where the provisions in force are particularly stringent .
This statistic was published in 1997 .
It refers to thousands of dogs and cats .
There are millions of animals tortured year after year .
And all of you , ladies and gentlemen , who perhaps have a dog at home , and who think about what else you can do to make its life better , should just try to imagine how you would feel if it was your dog that somebody was going to test a cosmetic product on .
I believe that enough research has been done , and that there are enough alternative methods .
We all know why this issue is really being postponed : it is exclusively for reasons of trade policy .
It has nothing to do with a lack of alternative methods .
Mr President , having heard what Mrs Flemming has to say , it is obvious that both the Commission and the Member States accord very little importance to the concept of animal protection .
The Commission 's annual report for 1995 makes it quite clear , at any rate , that the Commission is totally lacking in commitment when it comes to implementing the restrictions and halting animal experiments in the cosmetics industry .
Although the cosmetics industry itself has carried out a certain amount of research that is worth mentioning , the Commission has to a large extent limited its own action to merely coordinating certain validation programmes .
It is a fact , unfortunately , - and scientists are by and large agreed on this - that research methods not involving animal experiments are still not sufficiently well developed in some areas .
I should therefore also like to give my support , in particular , to the rapporteur 's demand that research and development work aimed at discovering alternative methods for tests in the cosmetics field should be included in the fifth R & D Framework Programme .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner Bonino .
The rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , has asked to speak .
Mrs Bonino , please allow me to ask you a few questions , so that I can be certain that I have understood you correctly .
I am normally quite mild in my dealings with those sections of the Commission that you represent , but if I had heard your speech earlier , I might not have been in quite such a mild mood .
I am not happy about much of what you have said .
It is superfluous to argue about what percentage of animal experiments are used for cosmetics , because you know , and I know , that there are very many animal experiments carried out to test ingredients that are also used in the cosmetics industry , which do not appear in any of the statistics .
Nor is it a question of whether there is enough money for Ispra .
As far as I am concerned , the matter at issue is the conclusion , and the conclusion is that there are no validated alternatives .
Have I understood you correctly , in that you said that with effect from 1 January 1998 there will be no more animal tests for finished products ?
That is what I understood you to have said , and we are agreed on that point .
That would be one contentious issue fewer .
For those members who have not been following the issue for quite such a long time , let me begin by saying that this Parliament first requested this in 1993 .
We have for a long time been in agreement with the scientific representatives that this ought to be possible and that it is self-evident .
If compounds and ingredients have been tested on animals , then the final product no longer needs to be tested .
Do you take this view as well ?
Then 1 January 1998 is the appropriate deadline !
Have I understood you correctly in thinking that you said you would be submitting a seventh amendment to the cosmetics directive under the co-decision procedure ? If so , when will this happen ?
My last question refers to a point that has been annoying me for some time now , namely GATT .
I understand all too well what you are saying .
But do you share my view , that your two proposals , firstly to make an exception for the territory of the European Union and then for products that are imported into the Union , cannot be justified , either on ethical grounds or in the interests of European competitors ?
Do you also share my view that the Commission would do better to take as a basis Article 20 of the GATT agreement , which clearly states that other laws are justified on ethical grounds ?
Have you tried to use the rules as your basis , and have you also perhaps tried to fight a little ?
Mrs Bonino , you are normally so full of fighting spirit .
In this case you have me on your side , but if I were in your position I hope I should have rather more courage .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The voting will take place tomorrow at noon .
Maize and genetically modified organisms
Mr President , the Commission has agreed to the authorization of genetically modified maize , although it has not been possible to dispel the doubts that exist with regard to health and the environment .
It has bowed to pressure from industry , and has sacrificed the consumer and health protection .
The majority of Member States were against the marketing of this product because of the risks attached to triple gene manipulation .
The results are ineffectual antibiotics , increasing allergies and chemical-contaminated soil .
Transgenic maize is a time bomb as far as consumers and environmental protection are concerned .
For example , there is a real fear that the built-in antibiotic resistance will cross over into human disease pathogens .
This could mean that ampicillin will be forever lost as a treatment for disease .
The Commission is thus accepting the fact that human beings will have to be exposed to disease pathogens without any protection .
In the meantime , there is now absolutely no dispute , scientifically , about the fact that foreign genetic material can pass into the gastro-intestinal tract via food , without being fully decomposed .
It has even proved possible to detect foreign DNA later in the cells of the body .
The question arises as to why these risks are being ignored , and why consumers are thus being used as guinea pigs by the genetic engineering industry .
The approval for the marketing of transgenic maize is a slap in the face for consumers , and you , Commissioner Bjerregaard , have ignored not only the health and ecological reservations , but also the provision of transparency and the consumer 's wish that genetically modified products should be labelled as such .
Genetically modified maize is being palmed off on consumers , and keeping everything secret like this is contrary to consumers ' interests .
This is almost like a kind of forced feeding .
By giving approval for the marketing of this product , you have irresponsibly turned yourself into the lackey of the genetic engineering industry .
Commissioner , we expect some answers to our questions today !
Why , for months on end , have you tolerated the illegal importation of transgenic maize ?
Is the information correct , i.e. that you have given the USA an undertaking not to intervene ?
Although the Commission is responsible for foreign trade , did you deliberately fail to take action when these illegal imports became known ?
Are the accusations made by your colleague , Mrs Bonino , true , i.e. that in approving transgenic maize , economic interests took precedence over consumers ' interests ?
And how , Commissioner , do you propose to cope with the ban on imports that exists in Austria and Luxembourg ?
Are the rumours true , when they say that the Commission will try to withdraw only as far as the formal aspects are concerned ?
Why do the ten genetically modified plants for which marketing licences have been applied for not fall within the scope of the novel food regulation , and why do you want to leave it to the genetic engineering industry itself to decide what type of labelling should be used ?
We expect the marketing of transgenic maize to be abandoned until all reservations have been taken into consideration .
The principle of taking precautions , and the protection of the environment and of consumers , must take precedence over economic interests , and we therefore want to hear your position with regard to the accusations regarding the marketing approval and the question of how to proceed further .
Mr President , on 18 December last the Commission took a decision which we consider disastrous , authorizing the placing on the European market , for all uses and without specific labelling , of thousands of tons of genetically modified maize together with cereal substitutes derived from this maize , which originated in the United States and were then stocked in our ports .
Essentially , this decision seems to us very serious on two accounts .
First of all , we do not know for certain the ultimate consequences of dispersing genetically modified organisms into the environment or into the food chain .
By transferring genes , one is in fact transgressing the species barrier and upsetting the equilibrium of the genome , without knowing how nature is going to react .
It seems to us that , in granting this authorization , the Commission has shamelessly broken the rule of prudence which it had , however , sworn to us , after the mad cow affair , that it would respect from then on .
Our concern is further increased when we see the great haste and lack of thought which prevailed at the decision of 18 December .
The opinions of the scientific committees , on which the Commission claims to have relied , are vague and laconic - in this case a few lines each , we are told - whereas the risks of transgenic maize are of the utmost seriousness : dispersal of pollen into the environment ; the risk of seeing weeds become resistant to herbicides and the necessity for new , more expensive products to fight them ; the risk , in human beings , of resistance or allergy to certain antibiotics ; endangering the lives of bees , as the toxin contained in transgenic maize , and which is designed to kill the European core borer parasite , is a poison which the plant will continue to produce permanently ; etc .
It is clear that , in this affair , the population of the countries of Europe is once again being launched into the unknown , blindfolded .
This is all the truer as the Commission 's decision was not even subordinated to specific labelling .
No doubt we will be told shortly that this labelling is going to come , but it is not there and we reply at once that we do not believe in it , as it will never be possible to label everything unambiguously , particularly by-products .
Moreover , we are already being told that it will not be possible to apply this labelling to the transgenic products which have already been authorized , or for which the authorization procedure is under way .
Finally , and in any case , neither Member States nor the Commission have the moral right to let a product which poses such risks be distributed on the market , even if it is labelled .
Faced with this European deficiency , some Member States have taken decisions , either to ban cultivation or to ban importation .
We say that you cannot have one without the other : banning cultivation but not importation would not , in fact , lift the threat hanging over human or animal health and would , moreover , put our maize producers in an untenable position in the face of foreign competition .
We therefore solemnly ask the Commission to revoke its decision of 18 December , even if this means causing a dispute at the World Trade Organization .
In any event , some day we will have to know where we stand and whether we do or do not have the right to defend ourselves .
Ladies and gentlemen , the market for products obtained through genetic engineering , which is developing very rapidly at a world level , presents two major problems .
First , that of the safety of these products ; secondly , that of the competitiveness of the Union 's Member States in relation to third countries .
The problem of safety , first of all , which is a dual one : food security and environmental security .
Food security consists in making sure that the new , genetically modified products are not harmful to our health and that of our descendants , in other words , that of the human race .
We must therefore arrange for all the necessary tests and experts ' studies to be conducted , by authorities which are independent of all commercial and political pressure .
As for the safety of the environment , we must be sure that the modified plants are not a source of pollution by creating in their surroundings - for example through hybridization or pollination with neighbouring plants - new , dangerous species which are resistant to all methods of destruction and are thus a threat to our plant and animal environments .
Personally , as a scientist as well as a political representative , I think that purely and simply banning these new products raises the second major question - the competitiveness of the States of the European Union in relation to the competitiveness of third countries .
We must not conceal from ourselves that at world level these new production techniques will gradually replace the traditional techniques for plant selection which are used at present , and that they will replace them not only in the field of plant selection but also , most probably , in that of animal selection .
The world market will thus rely to a great extent on the products resulting from this technology .
The United States are already exporting their transgenic maize , Japan is exporting its genetically modified soya , and banning these products in the European Union would very likely put its Member States in an inferior position where trade and health are concerned .
Because of the dual problem of competitiveness and safety , it is thus important , first of all , to suspend the authorization to import genetically modified products into the European Union , because the national authorities of Member States are not all in agreement and a large majority is even opposed to this .
Moreover consumers , who have not yet been reassured about these products , are mistrustful , which is understandable , after the bovine spongiform encephalitis affair .
Finally , the regulation on labelling , which would enable consumers to make an informed choice between products which are genetically modified and those which are not , has not yet come into force .
On the other hand , to enable the Member States of the Union to remain competitive in relation to world competition , the marketing within the European Union of seeds for producing widely cultivated plants should be authorized , as some Member States , such as France , in particular , have a lead which they could easily lose at the expense of the development of the European Union .
Some Member States , indeed , such as the United Kingdom , are already placing on the market products derived from genetically modified organisms , surrounding them , of course , by all the necessary guarantees - as we have said - as regards nutritional and environmental safety , in order to protect European citizens by guaranteeing them the quality of products derived from perfectly monitored European production .
If this is not done , we shall be at the mercy of foreign produce from third countries , which we will not be able to monitor with all the necessary safety .
In conclusion , I would earnestly ask the Commission , on the one hand - I repeat - to ban the importation of genetically modified products and , on the other , to authorize the placing on the market of a certain number of products generated within the European Union with all the necessary guarantees , so as not , finally , to put us in a drastically inferior position compared with third countries .
Mr President , we are not so concerned about the economy - which Mr Cabrol spoke about - as about the health of European consumers .
And in this case we are not merely mouthpieces for voicing the concern of consumers , particularly of Spanish consumers .
Over 100 cargoes of genetically modified maize have arrived in Spanish ports .
This has given rise to great concern and we have even received letters from trades ' unions on the matter .
As spokesmen , we think that the European Commission was too hasty in December in authorizing the marketing of these genetically modified products .
It seems to us that more attention was paid to economic factors , such as pressure from the United States and the multi-nationals , than to the health and safety of Europeans .
We believe there should be a moratorium on the marketing of these products .
I live in a region which goes by the name of Asturias which has come into the international limelight recently with the signing there of an agreement on human rights and bio-medicine .
To put it briefly , that agreement stressed that human rights must take precedence even over scientific interests , research must be carried out in a responsible way and care and caution must be exercised when scientific discoveries are implemented .
I think the same rules must be followed in agriculture as in bio-medicine : care , caution and a constant awareness that health and human rights take precedence over any other consideration , especially any economic consideration .
We therefore , Madam Commissioner , in our motion for a resolution , request a moratorium on these foodstuffs and we think this is the way the Commission must take until rigorous scientific testing shows that there is no problem for human health and the environment .
We do not think there is any guarantee of that at the moment .
Mr President , after what we have just experienced with BSE , one might have hoped that the Commission would change its method of taking decisions .
I am afraid I have to disillusion you : the introduction of genetically modified maize shows us that the reverse is true .
In December 1996 , the Commission , contrary to the opinion of thirteen Member States , authorized the introduction of transgenic maize .
To justify its position , the Commission hid behind the opinions of the scientific committees which , moreover , still leave room for doubts , as the commissioner responsible for consumer affairs had remarked .
Of course , there is the threat of the World Trade Organization , which is being brandished about as the big policeman of the world of trade , ready to deal severely with us if the European Union does not accept transgenic maize .
But , in doing this , the Commission is taking decisions with no regard for European producers , public health or the protection of consumers because it provides for no labelling of this maize .
To get to the nub of the matter , in agriculture , animals and plants have always been selected : first of all , by conserving the finest specimens and , next , by crossing them to obtain the most vigorous hybrids .
It is nature itself which puts up barriers to impossible or monstrous crossing .
The new technology for gene transfer , however , overturn all natural bioregulations .
There are no more scientific or technical obstacles to the creation of genetic mosaics and , responding only to the profit motive , man plays the sorcerer 's apprentice .
In agriculture , what are the objectives of the producers of GMOs ?
Resistance to diseases , to parasites , to herbicides , aesthetic and conservational criteria , but also , let us not forget , unlimited productivity .
Yet risks to agriculture and the environment remain .
Thus modified soya has led to allergies in animals and modified maize has three genes , one of which , being toxic for the European corn borer , could quite possibly lead this insect to develop greater resistance one day and to proliferate .
The second gene , which is resistant to a powerful herbicide , could lead to an increase in soil pollution and the third , finally , which is resistant to an antibiotic , could be transmitted to bacteria , or to animals , or even to mankind .
And yet GMOs are not the panacea of agricultural development !
Rural development , the technological mastery of fields and of the environment , the gradual increasing of yields , the fight against diseases - all are possibilities to be exploited with methods which are modern and more natural and , above all , easier to control .
And what of consumers in all this ?
Will they always accept the artificialization of their food , and no transparency about its contents and mode of production ?
And if European consumers started to refuse GMOs in their food , what would become of this market ?
Some major agri-food groups are in fact already thinking , strategically , about a ' guaranteed GMO-free ' label .
Let us be clear about things .
We must not get the discussions mixed up here .
We must make it quite clear that biotechnology for treating genetic diseases constitutes a different problem , because of its limited distribution under medical control , unlike agriculture , where distribution is widespread in nature , and not under control .
What I , personally , refuse , at the present state of our knowledge , is to cross an ethical and philosophical limit in order to produce more , and always more , the pipe-dreams of the future .
Finally , however it may be , whatever one may think , to get back to GMOs in agriculture - the subject that concerns us today - the minimum is to inform the consumer and , therefore , clear labelling .
The minimum is also a wideranging public debate which precedes political decisions and , why not , which leads , concretely , following Austria 's example , to the application of a moratorium on the placing on the market of genetically modified organisms .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of my group to express our concern at the recent decision by the Commission to endorse the placing on the market of genetically-modified maize modified by Ciba-Gigy , now known as Novartis .
During the time leading up to the Commission decision , considerable public concern was expressed about the safety of genetically-modified products and the new risks to public health and the environment that they might pose .
On this particular application from Novartis for the maize , especially strong objections were raised in Member States and within the European Parliament .
In the UK an independent body of experts which advises the Government expressed serious concern about the presence of a bacterial gene in the modified maize which is coded for resistance to the antibiotic ampicillin .
This gene inactivates a number of antibiotics which are extremely important in clinical and veterinary medicine .
It could immediately be functional if it was transferred from genetically-modified maize into a bacterium , for example in an animal 's stomach .
Though this risk is considered remote , the committee thought the risk was unacceptable and recommended that the gene be excised before the maize could be used as animal feed .
Despite this advice being publicly available , and despite the opposition of most Member States , the Commission took the decision to place the genetically-modified maize on the market without restriction on its use .
In addition , extremely worrying and as yet unquantifiable concerns exist about the possible creation of new forms of allergy in foods caused by the transfer of genetic information from other species into species commonly used as foods .
This needs to be thoroughly researched and quantified before potentially fatal accidents take place .
The decision is even more incomprehensible when we consider that there was no deadline by which the Commision had to reach a conclusion to its consideration of the application , and that the novel foods directive which might have permitted labelling , was due to come into effect shortly afterwards .
All this gives the impression that economic and commercial pressures were put before consideration of public health and protection of the environment .
The Commission must therefore justify its decision in far greater detail than it has previously done and give good explanations for its motivation and thinking in arriving at that decision when it did .
Finally , does the Commission not agree that this series of events demonstrates serious defects in the approval process laid down in Directive 90 / 220 controlling the deliberate release into the environment of genetically-modified organisms , and will it please tell us what steps it is bringing forward to ensure an urgent review of that directive .
Mr President , we are here , in this Parliament , normally , to defend the consumer , the European citizen , whom we are supposed to represent .
Yet I often have the impression that we forget the European citizen and , in this affair , we have been able to see that the European Commission had , yet again , proceeded with a great deal of haste , without referring to that transparency which we all wish for and which is absolutely vital when what is involved is actually a problem as essential as that of food safety .
Today , we are discussing transgenic maize .
I fear that we will often have issues of this type to discuss , within our Parliament .
It is thus important for us to make our positions clear and for us to situate what we must do as regards the protection of the consumer , who absolutely has to know whether he can be sure what he is eating on his plate every day , sure of the quality of the product he is eating .
We have in fact been able to reproach the European Commission with having taken this decision to place American transgenic maize on the European market , a decision which was taken in far too much of a hurry , while a certain number of questions were being raised in the countries of the European Union , and some countries were actually banning the introduction of this American transgenic maize , for the moment , while other countries , like France , were refusing to allow the production of this transgenic maize on their own territory .
These are thus so many questions which , quite rightly , represent so many causes for anxiety to the European consumer , concerning this transgenic maize 's resistance to pesticides .
Will we one day stop using more and more pesticides , which are particularly harmful to the environment , to nature and also to health ?
And will the questions which are being asked on this maize 's resistance to antibiotics be answered ? Will this be transmissible to human beings ?
These are all the questions that we are asking ourselves .
Still others could be listed , and other speakers have already spoken about them sufficiently .
It is because of all these questions , it is because of all this distress , that we absolutely must , today , respond with the greatest possible precision and , while awaiting responses , we absolutely must make it our duty to suspend any authorization for this transgenic maize on European territory .
I believe , finally , that it would be , for us , the European Parliament , the way to show the citizens of Europe that this Parliament , worthy of the name , is here precisely in order to support them and to make provision for the future of the generations to come .
That is what I wanted to say on the subject of the introduction of this transgenic maize .
I believe that it is absolutely essential to be particularly vigilant and prudent , and to think too of our farmers , who are in fact asking us to have a little more confidence in them .
This debate is not confined specifically to the release of genetically modified maize onto the market but concerns the whole issue of genetic modification .
It might have been thought after the BSE crisis that the matter of food safety and consumer interests would be placed very high on the agenda , but obviously this matter is not placed high enough on the Commission 's agenda .
In this case we know , as many of us have already pointed out , that there is also a gene which is resistant to antibiotics , which may pose a risk .
We ought to be particularly careful therefore with this particular type of genetically modified maize .
But of course commercial interests , i.e. financial interests , have been allowed to take precedence over food safety and I think there are grounds for reiterating our reproach of the Commission for this fact .
It is in fact irresponsible of a company to release a product over which there are still some question marks and which is not totally controlled .
But it is also irresponsible of the Commission to allow the spread of such a product until the outstanding questions have been answered .
I am not saying that we should be dogmatic and negative towards genetic modification and gene technology .
I believe that the technology in itself may benefit mankind in many ways but so far we have not built up the necessary safety mechanisms to be able to use the technology to the extent which we are using it .
My question to the Commission is : How can we put this right ?
How can we improve the controls ?
How can we guarantee the integrity of labels and are we going to prevent the spread of genetically manipulated maize until these measures have been introduced ?
Before I ask Madam Commissioner Bjerregaard to reply , I should like to mention that I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
I call upon Madam Commissioner Bjerregaard .
Mr President , honourable members , I am pleased that the Commission has the opportunity to explain what it has done and the role it has played with regard to geneticallymodified maize .
Before I go into the details of the decision-making process concerning GMO maize , I would like to make a few more general comments on the matter we are discussing today .
As we all know , the GMO area is a very complex one , as well as being an important and sensitive issue for European citizens .
The GMO area is fraught with intrinsic conflicts .
It involves considerable interests , so it is not easy to please everyone .
But whatever views you or I may have about GMOs and the formula adopted - perhaps before you came to Parliament and before I was Commissioner - for the EU 's policy in this area , the fact is that we now have GMO products which have to be assessed in accordance with the existing EU regulations , namely directive 90 / 220 / EEC in the version in which it was originally adopted .
This is as procedural directive which is designed to ensure a risk assessment of GMO products so that only certain products are allowed onto the market in the EU .
The thinking behind the directive was the wish to encourage , not to hinder , but to encourage a certain development of the GMO industry .
It does not therefore get us anywhere today if , when considering the actual administration of directive 90 / 220 / EEC , we confuse this with a discussion of the extent to which we subscribe in principle of the use of GMOs in our products .
In view of the purpose of directive 90 / 220 / EEC , and the framework within which we are working , this would , in my view , be a somewhat meaningless debate .
Having said that , I would like to add that I see it as my primary task to set priorities and work so as to ensure that concerns about health and the environment are taken seriously .
I will therefore start my report today with the latest developments relating to GMOs , namely the Commission 's decision on Wednesday .
In the thorough debate which followed the approval of maize in December , the question of labelling has been by far the most dominant issue , and one which unites both those who are completely against GMOs and those who see it as a great technological advance .
What it comes down to is that consumers should know what it is they are getting .
This is a view I share , which is why I have worked to ensure that we in the Commission take the same decision .
Thus on 2 April the Commission adopted a further amendment of directive 90 / 220 / EEC regarding technical information .
This amendment was aimed at tightening the requirements to provide information in annex 3 , so that in the future applications would have to provide the following information in their applications : There must be special labelling of the GMOs they wish to market , in addition to certain molecular data which will be entered into future registrations .
This last point has not been the subject of the same degree of attention , but it is very important if developments are to be monitored .
When , as is to be hoped , the Commission 's draft takes a positive lead from the Committee for directive 90 / 220 / EEC , in the future applicants will have to attach to their applications details of the proposed labelling which will include the technology used to make the product .
In cases where the product is sold in combination with non genetically-modified products , the label , or other accompanying document , will contain information on the possible presence of GMOs .
Thus labelling would always be required .
With a little willingness to co-operate on the part of the Committee for directive 90 / 220 / EEC , it could very soon - one would hope within the next month or two - become a binding legal requirement that GMO products permitted under directive 90 / 220 / EEC should be labelled .
We are not therefore talking of guidelines , but of compulsory labelling , and these rules would of course apply in all Member States .
The new annex 3 cannot of course be applied retrospectively to previous applications or to applications which have been forwarded to the Commission in connection with the rules contained in directive 90 / 220 / EEC .
However I have been encouraging applicants to meet the new requirements and use the new labelling voluntarily .
This has been done in the form of letters to the companies involved .
It should be noted here that Europabio , in a letter to the President of the Commission , Jacques Santer , dated 25 March 1997 , reported that its members would be prepared to introduce more detailed labelling and information to their products under directive 90 / 220 / EEC .
In the case of maize from Ciba-Geigy Novartis it is worth pointing out that this company is a member of Europabio .
It is my understanding that the Commission , through Commissioner Bangemann , is to adopt measures , under all circumstances , and in the context of directive 79 / 112 / EEC , for the labelling and forms of presentation of foodstuffs , which will mean that maize and soya , in terms of their use as foodstuffs , fulfil the same labelling requirements as the requirements in statutory instrument 97 / 258 on new foodstuffs , or the Novel Food regulations , as they are usually known .
It is also my understanding that Commissioner Fischler is working on a proposal for novel feed .
I believe the Commission 's acceptance of my proposal for amendment of annex 3 to directive 90 / 220 / EEC is an important first step and also a very important political signal to Parliament ; but first and foremost , of course , it is a signal to consumers and others who have long sought an improvement in the level of information and transparency in this area of GMO products .
I call this a first step because the question of labelling will of course be one part of the complete revision of directive 90 / 220 / EEC , so that Parliament can bring full political influence to bear on this important issue .
We hope that , as planned , the Commission 's proposal to amend directive 90 / 220 / EEC will be available before the summer recess .
This also represents a first step in as much as on 2 April 1997 the Commission also decided that a communication should be produced on a consistent labelling policy for the whole of the GMO area .
This communication will naturally be submitted both to Parliament and to the Council .
Thus the debate here today will be of value for this further work .
I hope , therefore , that we can work together so that the Commission is able to engage in a productive and constructive debate on the best possible basis with respect to the communication on the common labelling policy in the whole GMO area .
Now a little about the maize question itself .
I believe we have done what we could , under the existing regulations , with regard to the Ciba-Geigy maize , and I would like to say a little about this .
Directive 90 / 220 / EEC contains a carefully defined procedure for the marketing of products that contain genetically-modified organisms .
In practical terms this procedure is based on an assessment of the possible risks to health and to the environment if the GMOs in question were to be introduced .
In the formal sense the procedure , as laid down in the directive , is a committee produced procedure from a type 3A committee .
As Parliament will know , this framework lays down certain restrictions on the Commission 's scope for action .
On 15 March 1995 the Commission received the CibaGeigy maize application .
The application was forwarded by the competent authorities in France with a positive report , in accordance with the directive procedure .
Having carefully examined and assessed all the information submitted by Ciba-Geigy and the Member States , on 11 April 1996 , the Commission , fulfilling its obligation under the procedures laid down in the directive , provided the Committee for directive 90 / 220 / EEC with a draft resolution to permit the marketing of the maize in question as though it were any other conventional type of maize .
The proposed decision did not meet with the necessary majority vote , i.e. a qualified majority in the Committee , as a result of which the Commission , in accordance with the procedure laid down in the directive , was obliged to forward the proposal to the Council for its decision .
The Council ( Environment ) was unable to reach a decision on the matter on 25 June 1996 , i.e. it could neither reject nor accept the proposal .
It was France which had recommended approval , and despite the lack of support , France would not withdraw the application .
In view of the fact that Austria had provided further information in support of its opposition to the product , I recommended that the Commission obtain the necessary scientific backing so that the proposed application could be re-assessed .
For this purpose the Commission consciously chose to provide assurances in terms of health and protection of the environment which were higher than what was required for strict fulfilment of our official obligations under the directive .
In other words it was a case of a new creation as far as the assessment of the product 's safety was concerned .
The Commission therefore gave the scientific committees for foodstuffs , feed and pesticides , three committees in all , all the information that had been provided by Ciba-Geigy and the Member States , as well as the information from Austria of course .
We encouraged them to express their views on those aspects which gave cause for concern .
The committees were also given the information which Great Britain was to submit at a later date .
As already mentioned , although , with respect to the procedure contained in the directive , the Commission should have taken a decision on marketing of the maize in question speedily , the Commission waited , because of the absence of a response from the Council and in spite of commercial pressure which was exerted on the Commission , until it received the reports from the three scientific committees before it took its decision on the matter .
The reports , which were submitted on 9 and 13 December , confirmed the earlier view , namely that there were no grounds for believing that the genetically-modified Ciba-Geigy maize would result in harmful effects for health and the environment .
It was on the basis of these reports , and not for financial or other reasons , that the Commission took the decision to allow marketing of the maize in question .
The reports did not therefore give the Commission a scientific basis or justification for not permitting marketing of the GMO maize .
Regarding the question of the possible harmful effects from the gene for ampicillin resistance , the Commission can report that this matter was examined thoroughly by the scientific committees for foodstuffs and feed .
To supplement their own findings , these committees engaged in consultation with external experts on the matter on 6 December 1996 , during which they concentrated in particular on the possibility of the gene being transferred to humans and animals , and the effects on health which such a transfer might have for humans and animals .
After this consultation the committees concluded that there were no grounds for believing that the gene for ampicillin resistance in maize could be detrimental to the health of humans or animals .
Some of the honourable members have stated that there are documents on the long-term risks for health and the environment in connection with the genes that are found in this maize .
However , none of the scientific committees which examined the application and all the information made available was able to find any scientific basis for such effects .
Since the Commission took the decision to permit the Ciba-Geigy GMO maize , it also decided to publish the reports from the three scientific committees .
The Commission 's secretariat therefore made arrangements for an official submission to the European Parliament .
Thus on 18 December the Commission took its decision on the basis of the reports produced by the three scientific committees which , as we already know , were unanimous .
This decision came into effect on 23 January 1997 and , following announcement of the necessary consent by the French authorities at the beginning of February , the product was cleared in terms of any adverse effects on health or the environment .
The maize may therefore be used like any other type of maize , but the decision does not of course exclude the application of other EU legislation .
With regard to France 's attitude , the Commission can only inform Parliament that on 5 February 1997 France , in accordance with the directive , granted Ciba-Geigy consent to market the Bt maize for use as any other traditional type of maize .
In order that this maize may be cultivated in Member States , however , it is first necessary that it be incorporated into the common lists of plant types , in accordance with Council directive 70 / 457 which once again has been modified by directive 90 / 654 .
This directive does not deal with the health or environment aspects .
It lays down the requirements which plant types must fulfil in order to be regarded as new types .
Member States may reject applications for the registration of plant sorts if they are of the opinion that they do not fulfil the necessary requirements .
According to the Commission 's latest information , the maize has not yet been included in any plant type catalogue , which means that the maize cannot yet be cultivated in any EU country .
On 14 February 1997 - and this is the last aspect I will deal with here - the Austrian authorities informed the Commission that marketing of the Ciba-Geigy maize had been banned in Austria on the basis of a ruling that came into effect on that same date .
This position had also been arrived at in accordance with the directive , namely article 16 .
In addition Austria submitted a scientific justification for its use of article 16 .
The information submitted by Austria was naturally presented to the three scientific committees which had dealt with the original application , for their comments , and the Commission has not yet received the committees ' assessment of the information .
Against this background Luxembourg has taken similar action , and Italy has done the same .
I hope that , following my explanation - which I must acknowledge has been rather detailed - Parliament will recognise the role the Commission has played in this matter and that it will concur with our reasons for approving the Ciba-Geigy maize in line with the directive .
I also hope that I have been able to demonstrate that the Commission has displayed the greatest care and taken advantage of all the courses of action available to it , in accordance with current legislation , in order to take as cautious a decision as possible .
We did not take our decision until we were sure that all the safety aspects had been thoroughly examined .
By means of our last decision on the labelling of all GMOs within the area of application of directive 90 / 220 , we have ensured that consumers know what they are getting .
Mr President , we asked for this debate so that we could discuss with the Commissioner the question of what happens next , now that Luxembourg and Austria have declared a ban on imports .
I understood the Commissioner to have said that she is not prepared to examine in depth the new scientific evidence that these two countries have submitted , and that she is also not prepared to examine Parliament 's proposal - which I hope we shall be voting on tomorrow - to the effect that any decision should be postponed until all reservations have been removed , including , for example , the reservation - which has not been examined at all - that this foreign genetic material can be absorbed by the gastro-intestinal tract .
We are faced with a major problem involving democracy and consumer policy .
I should like to ask the Commissioner how she feels about postponing the decision until investigations have been carried out .
I should very much like to know how she assesses the studies and findings that Austria has submitted , and I should also like to know - and I have already asked this question - why this product is not covered by the novel food regulation .
I cannot understand what all the fuss is about .
We are here to conduct a debate , and if the Commissioner has not answered these questions , then it is our job to raise them again .
Mr President , would you please ask the Commissioner to deal with these specific questions , which have not yet received an answer .
Mr Bowe , I cannot give you the floor while another Member is speaking .
I have not yet given you the floor , and in any case you cannot raise a point of order while another Member is speaking .
It is for the President to call the speakers !
Mr President , on a point of order .
I am somewhat confused .
I thought we must have started Question Time to the Commission although it is only Monday .
I was absolutely astonished because I thought the Commissioner was going to reply to the debate and that we were going to hear other people speak .
I was astonished to hear Mrs Breyer speaking again and asking questions .
Can you assure us , Mr President , that in future we will follow the list of speakers and not allow Members to intervene with long questions out of turn ?
Thank you , Mr Bowe , but under the Rules of Procedure I could give the floor to Mrs Breyer , and I did so .
Normally no Member can speak twice on the same subject , but when a Member is a rapporteur , as in the present case , the President can give her the floor a second time .
Mr President , I have listened attentively , Commissioner , to what you have said , and I gather from your very correct and very comprehensive remarks that you , as a person , have taken a great deal of trouble to ensure that the consumers of the European Union are protected and informed .
Most of us , here in the European Parliament , have never doubted that anyway .
Unfortunately , as the Commissioner who spoke before you has already indicated , the Commission always takes its decisions as a collective body .
We can remember perfectly well which Commissioner , in the past , was in favour of labelling or consumer information .
As you can well imagine , I very much welcome your remarks about amending the annex to the directive controlling release into the environment with regard to the labelling of all genetically modified products - all of them , please note , which goes farther than the novel food directive .
This Parliament has been campaigning for a very long time to ensure that seeds , genetically modified foodstuffs , and other products too , are labelled .
Until now , the majority of Commission members did not agree with us but , even when progress moves at snail 's pace , sooner or later it will reach even the Commission .
I am not quite so much in agreement with your comments on the approval of genetically modified maize .
The main reason for our oral questions was not labelling , but first and foremost the conviction that many of us hold , that the approval of this genetically modified maize has happened too soon , and perhaps should not even have happened at all .
At all events , it comes at a time when doubts about safety have not been completely removed .
And I have to admit , Commissioner , that your remarks have done nothing to remove by own doubts .
However , your comments have once again made it clear that not only is the comitology procedure that is used in the European Union unsatisfactory , but it also , quite obviously , leads to blatantly wrong decisions .
It is not acceptable that there should be scientific committees , which are not subject to any democratic control , and which take decisions on behalf of all of us .
Therefore , Mrs Bjerregaard , I should like to ask you for clarification on this point .
You supplied the scientific committees with all the information , but did you ask them any specific questions ?
Did you specifically ask the scientific committees , for example , what ampicillin resistance means , or perhaps how an antibiotic gene can act as a marker gene ?
Or did you , for example , take a close look at the conclusions of the hearings on this subject ?
Did you ask why this genetically modified maize is not permitted in all the US Federal States ?
And do you share my opinion , and the opinion of my group , that the comitology procedure cannot be in the interests of consumer safety , and that we will therefore have to change it at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , we must thank the Commissioner for the information she has provided .
But we are not much reassured , since we have here two fundamental aspects : one the maize as an end product , a foodstuff , which might very well be fully in line with the approved standards such as the latest regulation on new foodstuffs .
We must check whether these scientific committees have in fact , with the criteria approved in this regulation , been able to give what we might call their seal of approval to this report .
We cannot allow it to be said that this regulation was adopted shortly afterwards because this is not merely an administrative procedure .
It is a question of reassuring all our citizens that the new foodstuff is safe and not harmful to health or the environment .
The second aspect is the seed as a vegetable variety , which is also , from what we have heard , giving rise to many problems .
These are two radically distinct matters .
Finally , we the Members of the European Parliament , have been rather guilty of placing greater emphasis on labelling than on real guarantees that products are safe .
And you and the Commission are now going to solve everything by labelling everything .
Madam Commissioner , consumers demand labelling , but it does not solve the problem of safety .
We would therefore ask for greater emphasis to be placed on safety aspects since , although many of my colleagues have dwelt upon labelling in recent years , labelling is an ancillary and not a fundamental matter .
Mr President , as always happens when we tackle such complex matters , both Parliament and public opinion end up split down the middle because they are motivated by obviously divergent and often conflicting interests .
The consumer , frankly , has been given little information hitherto but has been made wary by unpleasant past experiences such as the mad cow crisis and the hormone business . He tends to curl up into a ball and reject any kind of innovation , and in the light of what we have heard so far I am bound to say that I think he is right !
It has been said that consumers are to be protected as European citizens ; but even farmers are European citizens , too , and so they too have the right to consideration and - why not ? - protection .
Apart from anything else , it is precisely this group , the country people , a weak group under-represented in this Parliament as it is elsewhere , which is in danger of having to foot the bill for the lack of transparency in European and national legislation , the lack of hard facts from the European scientists who have been conducting the research into this subject , and above all the contradictions between Commission and Council and everything that revolves around those institutions .
And so what we have is fear , disorientation and worry .
Fear , partly prompted by the speed with which Luxembourg and Austria closed their borders to the trade in transgenic maize .
No problem for them , because this kind of product is not of major importance to them .
It is amazing that France , having said yes , suddenly said no , on grounds that are frankly not very convincing .
In Italy , too , we said no , not on the basis of reliable scientific information but because of widespread emotive reactions .
You 'll never be wrong if you say no , we thought .
Health is the first consideration , the protection of public health , and the second consideration is the protection and security of the markets .
Why not try to defend both these objectives a little more coherently ?
Let us avoid repeating the disastrous mad cow episode , when we were forced to pay - and we still are paying - for errors that could have been avoided !
After all , in favour of transgenic maize it seems that there are certificates issued unilaterally by the United States ; but the issuing bodies should be above suspicion : first the Environmental Protection Agency , then the Ministry for Agriculture , and finally the Food and Drugs Administration , although in this latter case the situation may be less clear in that the institution concerned has just recently been the subject of inquiries and reviews .
Precisely in order to avoid what happened in the case of mad cow disease , when in six months this House suddenly had to attend to a mass of facts and scientific information , we wonder why , in order not to waste time , the American research reports were not obtained and compared with the European ones .
That would enable us to avoid a situation where , perhaps in a few months ' time , we find that the fears of the consumers were justified .
On the other hand , it would be equally embarrassing and unfair to discover the reverse - to discover that unjustified measures were taken and that the European market had been brought to its knees to the benefit of the American market .
I should say this would be a classic case of locking the stable door , as they say , after the horse has bolted .
In any event , I believe that both this debate and the statements made by the Commissioner reveal a clear intent to adopt a consistent course of action : either transgenic maize can be produced in Europe , too , or we are not going to allow it to be imported .
It seems such an easy solution , so simple . The only question is why it was not adopted earlier .
Mr President , far from learning the lessons of the mad cow crisis , in other words , of a disaster of which we cannot yet measure all the consequences , the Commission is pressing doggedly on and authorizing the importation , without any restrictions , and the placing on the market of transgenic maize .
This decision was taken by the Commission despite the negative opinion of thirteen of the Member States and the negative opinion of the European Parliament .
It was taken under pressure from the American exporters and the chemical multinationals .
The compromise resolution signed by our group condemns the irresponsibility shown by the Commission and highlights the fact that economic and commercial pressure took precedence over considerations relating to public health and environmental protection .
To the letter , these are the conclusions of the commission of enquiry into BSE .
The Commission has thus learnt nothing .
After beef , it is prepared to let European consumers run new risks by giving the market and free competition priority over public health .
Our group reaffirms that food safety must be the absolutely priority concern in any decision regarding food products .
Transparency must be guaranteed , and the opinion of scientists must be taken into consideration .
No one can be sure that there is no danger to human health , no risk for the environment .
The conclusions of your scientific committees , Commissioner , do not convince me .
Who could have proved , before the mad cow crisis , that the prion was transmissible to man ?
And yet , ordinary common sense might have suggested that ingesting infected flour could not be without danger .
Life has proved that , but , alas , it was too late .
Does this disastrous experience need to be repeated ?
It is not true that we have all the safety necessary .
That is why we are asking the Commission to go back on its decision and to promulgate a moratorium on the importation and the placing on the market of genetically modified products , until scientific guarantees have been obtained .
The Commission must respect the opinion of Parliament , most of whose speakers have expressed keen anxiety .
We also propose that , given the complexity of the problems raised , an ethical committee should be set up , at European level , on issues affecting food , public health and the environment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that the serious aspects of this transgenic maize business include the Commission 's decision and the institutional aspects it involves .
It is an obscure decision which , as many Members have emphasized , clearly shows how the Commission , at that time at least , had learned nothing from the more serious affair of BSE .
It is a decision , then , which we are once again called upon to contest today , as we have already done previously , and as a large majority of Member States has also done previously ; but the Commission has apparently showed an arrogant disregard for those protests , perhaps persuaded by market interests which have little in common with the interests of the consumer and of public health .
So I turn to the Commissioner for the Environment and ask her what the Commission has done in the meantime , perhaps because of Parliament 's action .
I know that a Scientific Committee on Genetically Modified Organisms is to be set up , and I know about the proposals made on 2 April and have duly noted them ; but I do want to ask Commissioner Bjerregaard specifically : what does the Commission intend to do in view of the decision taken by Austria and Luxembourg to invoke Article 16 of European Union Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , which allows a Member State to suspend the marketing of genetically modified organisms for reasons of public health or environmental protection ?
Faced with a decision that has been adopted in opposition to your own approach , but on the basis of very serious scientific documentation - because if those two States have taken a decision like this there must be a reason for it - does the Commission not , possibly , intend to suspend or withdraw that authorization , as the European Parliament wishes ?
Mr President , we have now heard the Commission 's very thorough report and it would now seem possible that there is not in fact anything for which the Commission is to be reproached , but at the same time I feel that this debate - and Mrs Roth-Behrendt has also touched on this - shows that we need to take the procedure contained in 3A into account and that we must ask ourselves what criteria must be taken as a basis for permitting modified plants in general .
It is clearly absurd that 13 Member States should wish to ban a postponement , and that two Member States , who later regretted their positions , should be able to push this through .
It must also be recognised that it is equally absurd to develop plants which are resistant to a fairly specific herbicide when we know at the same time that the waste seed from the sowing process , which contains the resistant gene , cannot be eradicated , so growers are forced to use yet another spraying medium .
It is quite simply wholly unacceptable to grant permission for any use of modified plants of this type .
I therefore believe that , if people wish to engage in this modification exercise , they must establish whether it is possible to do so in such a way that it is viable , that it is seen as socially responsible , and not in such a way that the big firms , which make their living by selling herbicides , end up wasting more money than they have in the past .
Furthermore I have heard - and this is a question to Ritt Bjerregaard - that the Commission stated last week that it intends to propose various amendments to directive 90 / 220 / EEC , at the same time as the Parliament is considering the proposals that have already been submitted to it .
Is it right that we should be considering new proposed amendments to the directive ?
Mr President , Austria , like Luxembourg , has imposed a ban on exports of genetically modified maize , on the basis of both ecological and health reservations .
In addition , the people of Austria instinctively reject the idea of genetically modified maize .
I believe that we have a duty to take into account the instincts of the people that we represent here .
In Austria at the moment there is a petition for a referendum against genetic manipulation , and we are expecting a record level of participation .
If you argue that scientists have found that there are no reservations about genetically modified plants , that says nothing about the real dangers : it merely says something about the way science works .
And in this area in particular we all have reason to be sceptical , because we know that a substantial proportion of scientific research has for a long time now been contract research carried out for multinational companies which , for economic reasons , are interested only in their own specialized sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , as a collective body , is obliged , under Article 130 ( r ) of the Treaty on European Union , to enforce and implement the principles of precaution and prevention in order to protect the environment and health .
These principles of precaution and prevention did not enter into the debate when the decision to allow genetically modified maize was taken on 18 December , as we can see if we read the Commission minutes , as published in a French newspaper .
Only a few members of the Commission represented the viewpoint of the citizens of Europe , and spoke out in favour of taking health and the environment into account .
Much greater in number were those who felt that relations with the USA were more important .
That is to be regretted .
The scientific committees have given their expert opinions , and a hearing has also taken place .
It would be interesting , however , to know - and this question has still not been answered - why the British Advisory Committee on Novel Foods , which Mr Bowe has already mentioned , was not invited and involved .
It was , after all , this committee that expressed , very specifically , the reservation about the possible development of resistance to antibiotics .
Nor has it been explained why scientists from the USA were not invited . They would not only have been able to confirm what Mrs Roth-Behrendt has told us , namely that the genetically modified maize is not permitted in all US Federal States , and specifically not in those where genetically modified cotton is already permitted , but they would also have been able to tell us that the IPE has also prohibited the use of genetically modified maize for the production of popcorn and sweetcorn .
What does it mean , then , for European farmers and for European consumers , when the Commission provides only very incomplete information ?
I believe that this is particularly important because we know nothing as yet about the long-term effects , such as whether other plants could develop resistance to this crop protection product , or whether there is resistance to antibiotics , because we have not yet had this genetically modified maize for long enough to have carried out a study that might have provided evidence of the long-term effects on human beings , on animals and on the environment .
I think that on the basis of all these facts it would have been more sensible not to take a decision so quickly , but to find out , first of all , what is happening in other countries and other continents , and although it is a good thing , and an important one , that you , Commissioner , are now proposing an amendment with regard to labelling , in the context of the approval procedure for genetically modified products in the European Union , for this particular labelling it has come too late .
We are talking here about shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted .
Mr President , the biotechnology industry has long been identified as a key to the future success of European enterprise .
It is one of the areas expected to grow substantially in economic importance over the next 20 years .
I hope it will be the source of many badly needed jobs in all our Member States .
However , to date very little has been done to encourage investment in the research industry in Europe .
Even in this Parliament our discussions often degenerate into unsubstantiated and negative comments which confuse public opinion .
The legal basis on which new foods or food ingredients developed by the biotech industry can be cleared for marketing throughout the European Union is , to say the least , a lot less than clear .
We urgently need a clear and full set of rules on genetic manipulation , indicating the safety tests which must be undertaken before new products are placed on the market .
I would like to welcome here the Commissioner 's comments this evening .
In the absence of a full legal basis , biotechnology firms are investing in Japan and the USA , where there is much greater legal certainty about the marketing of new inventions .
So far , we in Europe are unable to ensure the safety of these new products , unwilling to accept evidence from Japan or the USA and , at the same time , we have failed to develop a comprehensive legal basis to deal with consumer safety .
Three separate scientific committees consulted by the Commission before it authorized the marketing of genetically modified maize reported that there was no basis to prohibit , on safety grounds , the marketing of such maize in Europe .
We can reject this advice .
We can say that the scientific committees were unrepresentative .
However , if we are unhappy with the scientific committee system , we must establish another system .
I strongly favour the system established in the USA , which has proven its worth over many years .
The Food and Drugs Administration has a good track record in food safety .
I agree completely , as indicated in the resolution before us , that public health and food safety must be placed at the top of our agenda .
As well as ensuring safety , we must also establish a system for monitoring genetically modified organisms before they are allowed into the environment .
In conclusion , trade in food and food ingredients is global in nature and governed by GATT / WTO agreements .
If our industry and agriculture are to thrive , they must be fully supported by clear and comprehensive consumer protection rules , otherwise they will have to face unfair competition , mainly from the United States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is important to mention that we have nothing against research into and use of bio-technology in agriculture and I must underscore and stress that this is a field in which safety , the risk to foodstuffs , the protection of public health and environmental protection simply must come first in the decisions to be taken .
It is therefore clear to me that the Commission 's unilateral authorization of imports of genetically modified maize once again shows that a decision had been taken placing the economic interests of the big multinationals and large-scale importers above those fundamental criteria and priorities .
As we might have expected and did expect - this is nothing new to me - and I have no personal axe to grind with Madam Commissioner Bonino - the Commission has learned nothing from the mad cow crisis which came under its aegis .
The Commission should therefore immediately review that authorization and take measures , jointly with the Member States to see that before any decision is taken on genetically modified products there should first , and I repeat first , be thorough and independent scientific tests plus a detailed public information campaign on the types of manufacture and respective composition .
That is the only way to help to restore consumer confidence and to effectively safeguard public health .
Mr President , the Commission 's new proposal for the labelling of genetically engineered products is in itself in order , because it will be able to shed light on one of the grey areas remaining in the novel food provisions .
One might wonder about the fact that the sound reasons expressed by the majority in Parliament did not at the time have any impact on the Commission , after which it is now suddenly bowing to the media storm that has broken out .
In fact the Commission has not come to terms with the compromise reached on novel food .
Even if the Member of the Commission tells us that we are not to consider genetic engineering in general , this does not alter the fact that we face the risk that agriculture in the EU is being pushed in the wrong direction .
We are risking monocultures which are dependent on specific sprayed substances , and precisely because of the monopoly they have and their great expansion , this increases the risk of natural disasters which may even result in a shortage of foodstuffs .
And where is the biological diversity we committed ourselves to promoting ?
The Commission is not only under obligation to comply with directive 220 .
The Commission must respond appropriately to the whole of the acquis , and it is clear that people on all sides in Parliament are expressing the view that insufficient respect is being shown for the principle of caution and perhaps also in connection with other issues that have already been raised .
For example , a number of speakers have expressed their concern about ampicillin and their agreement in this area that risk assessment is called for , even if the committees have been questioned again .
With regard to the decision-making process it is difficult to argue that a procedure in which the Commission and one Member State can prevail over 13 other Member States is in any sense part of a democratic system .
Such a procedure needs to be changed , and I would like to ask what initiatives the Commission has taken in this connection .
I would also like to ask the Commission Member what procedure would be followed when it comes to inclusion on the list of types .
If a single Member State is against inclusion on the list of types , which EU procedure will come into effect , and which criteria will be used as a basis ?
Will the type in question be rejected , or will the individual Member State only be able to accept a decision at an EU level ?
Mr President , the people of Europe must be completely confused .
Here we have a decision by the European authorities on the labelling of genetically modified foodstuffs , and at the same time , while this decision is being reported on , the Commission allows the importing of maize and soya which are intended , amongst other things , for food production , without making any provision for labelling .
Who is responsible for this confusion , which on the one hand discredits genetic engineering , but on the other hand also weakens people 's confidence in the European decision-making process ?
It is quite clear that the European Commission is responsible .
The Commission has blocked the novel food regulation , which we in the European Parliament decided on in the spring of last year .
And if Mr Bangemann and the whole Commission had taken on board Parliament 's amendments , then by the summer of 1996 we would have had a valid labelling regulation .
The Commission has also left it too late to amend Directive 220 / 90 / EEC , because it is illogical that we should want to label foodstuffs but not their raw materials .
How is the food manufacturer supposed to label his products ?
However , I also believe that the fundamentalists are jointly responsible for confusing the public .
They are stirring up fears that any foodstuff that has anything to do with genetic engineering poses an enormous risk to the consumer .
Mrs Breyer talks about a full-scale attack on our health .
I would be more inclined to agree with her fellow-member of the German Bundestag , who says that there are no horror plants growing in the fields .
Even ampicillin resistance , in my opinion , is not a risk .
I would also say , however , with equal vehemence , that it is also unnecessary , because what can be done by means of ampicillin resistance can also be achieved by other means , and that must happen as soon as possible .
We want to have genetic engineering , but it should not be introduced secretly , and we must put an end to this confusion once and for all .
Mrs Bjerregaard and the European Commission as a whole have the power to end this confusion .
Before 15 May , in other words before the novel food regulation comes into force , they have to call a meeting of the Scientific Committee on Food , and it must be made clear that provision is being made for comprehensive labelling for all products , so that this mess can finally be cleared up .
Mr President , the Commissioner went into a lot of detail in his defence of genetically modified maize but he was not very convincing .
I had the feeling that I was listening again to what we were told about mad cow disease . We were told something along the same lines in that case , and everyone knows how it ended up .
I maintain that this decision has all the makings of a crime against the health of Europe 's people .
The Commission should recognize that it has been caught yet again perpetrating a crime against the citizens of Europe .
It must stop serving Mammon - Ciba-Geigy , that is to say , and Monsanto , because it , too , is promoting this type of product and seeking a licence - and start to serve the interests of the people of Europe and to look after their health .
Mr President , we made a mistake when we did not proceed with the decision that we took in a previous part-session in connection with the motion of censure against the Commission over the mad cow business . It seems that that encouraged the Commission to continue with such crimes on a systematic basis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group does not assume that it has a monopoly on the truth , nor are we so anxious to brand the Commission as irresponsible .
In any case , what the Commissioner has said , recalling the decisions made on 2 April , shows that there is awareness and that efforts are being made , even if a little late in the day , to remedy a situation of lasting legal uncertainty .
The resolution contains two important points , one of which is relevant here as relating to aspects which interact with environmentally compatible agriculture .
Mention has been made here of the collegiate nature of the Commission ; yet one does get the feeling that it works rather too much in separate compartments .
A conference was held in Cork on agriculture , the rural world and environmentally compatible agriculture , and at that conference it was said that agrienvironmental measures should become central to the new CAP , and yet here we are moving towards decisions which will endorse a massive increase in the dosage of a particular toxin - a toxin which involves the risk of developing a new generation of insects that will be resistant to an environment-friendly insecticide . Or we are in danger of making extensive use of a herbicide , with the consequences that can entail for the water in which that herbicide is soluble .
This is another area in which a more circumspect attitude would have been appropriate , profiting from the BSE experience .
We have no prejudice against biotechnology .
It was actually in the Commission 's communication of June 1994 on the future of biotechnology that it was stressed how the future of the sector would be governed by a policy of risk control , creating a new feeling of confidence among the public .
That is what we must get back to today , to prevent the citizen wondering just what kind of Europe this is going to be , and whether it is a Europe that is genetically incapable of responding to his fears and anxieties .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am in favour of making the debate about the use of genetic technology more objective .
I believe that genetic engineering is an intellectual technology , a technology of the future , with special significance for medicine .
Biotechnological medicines are already being used today in the treatment of cancer , diabetes , heart attack and multiple sclerosis .
Objectivity , however , has two sides , and therefore , Commissioner , it is still , objectively , incomprehensible to me why the Commission has authorized the importing of this maize , despite the fact that thirteen out of fifteen Member States were against it .
I also find it objectively incomprehensible that the warnings of the Scientific Committee on Food have been ignored .
Did not something similar happen in connection with BSE as well ?
And , we are told , any effects on health are possible but negligible .
Have we not heard those words somewhere before , and not too long ago either ?
As always , ladies and gentlemen , Austria has provisionally banned the marketing of the product in question , following new scientific findings .
But the fact is that because , on the basis of the new scientific findings , there are two issues in particular that have not yet been finally cleared up , namely the question of the possible transmission of resistance to antibiotics and also the problem of the possible development of resistance to the BT toxin , and because further scientific investigations will be necessary in order to come to a definite conclusion regarding these risks , Austria has imposed this ban .
I would ask you , ladies and gentlemen , but especially you , Commissioner , to agree that the approval of such a controversial product should be made , once again , the subject of a thorough , objective investigation !
Mr President , I speak in this debate as someone who is both a politician and a scientist .
Science and technology , I am afraid , generally lack the hard certainty of mathematics .
Two plus two will always equal four .
Science and technology are less certain .
They are rarely absolute .
Science is about judgements , about weighing the evidence and drawing the appropriate conclusions .
On the basis of the evidence I have seen and read , my judgement is that the genetically-modified maize is safe for consumers .
But - and it is an important but - I and the scientists ( the experts ) may well be wrong .
They may not have yet seen enough .
There are many examples of scientists and technologists being in error .
The Tacoma Narrows Bridge collapsed despite the engineers .
The Challenger blew up despite the technologists .
BSE seems to be transmissible to human beings despite the views of the scientists and the experts .
Therefore , as a politician , I believe it is necessary to give consumers the tools to make different choices from mine or those of the experts , on the basis of their own informed judgement .
This means that labelling is clearly needed for those products that contain genetically-modified organisms - some would say , for those products contaminated by genetically-modified organisms .
I therefore welcome the decision by the Commission on 2 April .
However , what I do not understand is why they talk about retrospective legislation for genetically-modified maize and the other organisms in respect of which permission has already been applied for .
On that basis one would not be able to put health labels on cigarettes because they are already in existence , or to demand that cars that already have been bought by consumers should abide by new speed limits .
I do not want retrospective banning .
What I want and what I now demand , is that in future labelling will occur for all genetically-modified organisms used in food products .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to raise four questions which I regard as fundamental in this debate :
First : I think that the composition of genetically modified products ought to be stated in more detail , as medicines are today , as are the foodstuffs we all know and eat as a matter of course .
However , as one of the previous speakers mentioned , we need to set up clear procedures , safety dossiers , testing , certification , placing on the market which are more akin to the current procedures for medicines than to those for foodstuffs .
I am not yet convinced that Europe has consistent mechanisms for analysing these dossiers , including the impact on the environment , the effect on cultivated areas and possible interaction with other types of crops or animals .
None of this has been done .
There should however be a complete review of the licensing systems .
Secondly : the question of labelling .
I shall simply say that I entirely support what my colleague , Mr Ford , said on the matter .
Thirdly : the question of GATT .
Madam Commissioner , do not be swayed by what Sir Leon Brittan said .
There is no established GATT philosophy on this . GATT settles such questions on the basis of the SPS , the sanitary and phyto-sanitary code , which is a scientific code .
In the absence of any precepts it finds what it can in the ISO standards or the Codex alimentarius .
These standards are very often inadequate because they are not based on the lowest common denominator .
When there is no established scientific basis , as in the case of hormones , the GATT has a problem - a difficulty .
As rapporteur on GATT and the environment I know a little about the relevant legislation and I do not see how it is possible to simply say that GATT is preventing us from taking the precautionary the measures required in this matter .
I should like to end , Mr President , with a final point about agricultural policy which Mrs Jensen raised . This is the fundamental question .
Quite apart from protecting ourselves with all manner of certificates , we must ensure that there is a place for alternative agricultural products with distribution networks through to the hypermarkets and supermarkets : an alternative not based on such genetically modified products or intensive chemical treatment , otherwise the consumer will have no real choice .
Mr President , Commissioner , to my mind , traceability and labelling are , clearly , and more than ever , common knowledge and , in any case , topical .
The simplest traceability method , where plants are concerned , would obviously be to colour genetically modified products red or blue , with plant-based colouring which is not harmful to health .
In this way , at least , it would no longer be possible to cheat society and its citizens .
I would not like people to be able to misinterpret my words here , and say : ' These MEPs are against modernity and against research ' .
No , quite the opposite .
But there is research and research .
Where agriculture and food are concerned , there are enough products available to the consumer , at least for those who have the means of paying for them since , as is well known , those who do not have the means of paying for them are not taken into consideration , isn 't that so ?
We need science , but science must help humanity and not make it eat products which contain death .
Competitiveness , which was put forward as a reason a while ago , carries some weight , and also has its price where human health is concerned .
Now , competitiveness plus competition , monetarism plus finances - this has nothing to do with health .
And , for me , economy is health , as there would be no point in feeding people cheaply if we must spend lavishly on health .
Commissioner , I am not with you when you offer guarantees on the unknown : you act as if you were in possession of the infallible truth .
The speeches by our colleagues give rather an image of the Commission as a political decision-making authority which is irresponsible , if not incompetent .
The Commission has not understood a thing , some will say .
Myself , I think on the contrary that it has understood well that the European Parliament is a House which lacks courage so much that one can impose on it , or even make it take political actions which are all the more important as there is a discrepancy between them and its speeches .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by saying that in February , on censorship , the European Parliament was afraid .
Today , it is weeping over its inconsistency .
So , let the Commission continue to take advantage of it , for the day our Parliament finds the path of courage and pride , playtime will be over !
Mr President , Commissioner , a lot of things have been said , so let me first of all ask a question .
In my opinion , it makes absolutely no sense at all , on the one hand to prohibit the production of GMOs in the EU , and on the other hand to import products made from genetically modified maize , such as popcorn , into the EU , in certain circumstances - and that is my question to you , Mrs Bjerregaard - because to do so is to render meaningless the votes of those countries who are totally against these products , and as far as the consumers are concerned it is just a load of eyewash .

It has not yet proved possible to kindle a deeper public understanding of green genetic engineering , in other words the development and breeding of genetically modified plants .
PR campaigns are not enough to bring about a better understanding .
Science and the economy need to make themselves more understandable .
This means taking into account the questions and concerns of the average consumer , the man in the street .
The possible risks of green genetic engineering have been overestimated , in my country for example , according to the opinion of the Technology Council .
The risk of undesirable developments arising from the breeding of herbicide-resistant plants is less than in conventional breeding , because only one gene is being transferred , under controlled conditions , rather than a large number of different genes .
However , things are not made any easier , for those in favour of the prejudice-free treatment of genetic engineering , when the new breeding possibilities are used , for example , to make plants that are adapted to pesticides , rather than the other way round .
This whole debate , including the issue of transgenic maize , cries out for more objectivity .
Transgenic maize , yes or no : to my mind that is not an agricultural question , but rather a question of competition .
Genetic engineering is not the solution to all our breeding problems , and nor is it the loathsome work of the devil which , once out of control , threatens our very existence .
Finally , let me just make the following contribution to this debate . It is a great mistake to believe that , if we did not allow anything new , everything would carry on in as it was before .
Mr President , unfortunately time will not permit me to go into detail on the many questions that have been raised .
This is somewhat frustrating , since it is an important debate and there are many issues which deserve to be commented on .
I would like to start with a more general comment .
There has been a consistent theme to the many contributions we have heard today , and reference has been made to the general political concerns and to the concerns that are being clearly expressed by the populations of Europe .
I see my own task , and also yours as members of Parliament , when such concerns are perceived to exist , as one of finding out what possibilities there are , and what framework we have , for responding to those concerns .
This means that we must ascertain what scope we have for providing assurances in response to the concerns raised .
This is what we have attempted to do , both in connection with the maize and in connection with labelling .
This is the area of difficulty which many other speakers have addressed , and in connection with which neither you as members of Parliament nor I , as the Commissioner , are able to draw on the necessary scientific background for the all issues on which we must take decisions .
What we must do , under such circumstances , is ask people who are competent .
This does not mean that we ourselves have no responsibility .
Nor does it mean that we do not end up with a political decision , because we do in fact .
That is what you do in Parliament , and what we do in the Commission , but we do have an obligation to give the best possible assurances .
I believe this is what we have done .
Therefore I do not think that a number of you have been completely accurate today when you state that we did not take account of the fact that many Member States were against the recommendation to approve this maize .
We did take account of them .
Not only did we follow the procedures correctly in accordance with directive 90 / 220 / EEC when we approved the case .
We also sought the views of three scientific committees , which was not a requirement under directive 90 / 220 / EEC .
We wanted to obtain further assurances .
These three scientific committees then considered the matter and set up a meeting at which they also called on experts from the USA , amongst others , for the precise purpose of seeking assurances , not least in connection with ampicillin .
We may therefore say that we have to this extent sought to make maximum use of the possibilities open to us under the existing legislation , wherever there was any chance to do so .
This of course raises questions about committee procedures , which Mrs Roth-Behrendt and several other speakers have addressed .
Naturally I agree that this is an IGC issue , but it also has to do with the revision of directive 90 / 220 / EEC .
There must not be any doubt whatsoever about the fact that I do not think the committee procedure on which the current directive 90 / 220 / EEC is based is suitable , and it is my view that it must be reworked as part of the revision process ; in this way we hope to have a proposal to put to Parliament here before the summer recess .
There is another aspect which affects the substance of the matter we are discussing , and that is the question of marker genes .
It is important here that we produce some guidelines for the future .
I agree with the views which several of the speakers have expressed here today .
I therefore feel it would be right to say that we have done quite a lot to protect ourselves as much as we possibly can .
Equally I agree with Mr Ford , namely that we can do no more than take action against the background which science provides us today .
We have no alternative , and we must take political decisions against the background that present circumstances make available to us .
I am very grateful for the good advice which I will be able to carry across for dealing with the legal aspects of other areas in which decisions are to be made ; so I have reason to hope it will have some influence .
I believe it is most important in this debate that we have sought to obtain as many assurances as we can .
As several people have indicated , we have sought to give consumers the best guidance we could by guaranteeing labelling , and we are endeavouring to make up for the shortcomings of labelling , recognising that there are companies which have already sought approval , so I am able to say , on the basis of the reports we have already received , that I am extremely hopeful .
Finally it has been mentioned in various contributions , particularly from the Austrian members of the Parliament , that we should look at the new scientific results that have been produced in Austria .
I agree with this view .
We must of course do this , which is why we have arranged for the material received from Austria to be forwarded to the scientific committees so that they can make an independent assessment of it .
I therefore hope that this debate has served to clarify various uncertainties and I would add that it is my own view that the debate has been useful and that it will prove helpful and of particular value for communications in this whole area , a view which several other members of the Parliament have expressed here today .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Protection of workers against carcinogens
The next item is the recommendation for the second reading ( A4-0072 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a Council Directive amending for the first time Directive 90 / 394 / EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens at work ( C4-0637 / 96-95 / 229 ( SYN ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Ojala ) .
Mr President , it is estimated that every year in the European Union some 10 million workers contract an occupational disease or are victims of an occupational accident .
This represents a considerable amount of human suffering and gives rise to substantial economic losses .
In 1992 the cost of this phenomenon was put at ECU 27 billion .
Article 118 a of the Treaty establishing the European Community stipulates that the Member States must pay particular attention to encouraging improvements in the working environment in order to protect the health and safety of workers .
This represents a major challenge for the European Union .
Citizens feel themselves to be at some remove from the European Union 's activities , see no clear evidence of their impact on and benefits in to everyday life .
The measures which the European Union takes to improve the working environment must be credible .
Measures of this kind will help the European Union secure - if it ever does - legitimacy and public acceptance .
People must be made to believe that measures to promote health and safety at the workplace are not simply declarations of intent , but that they reflect genuine concern for workers and their health .
The proposal amending the directive on the protection of workers against carcinogens , currently at second reading , is of fundamental importance .
Its aim is to prevent and reduce the exposure of workers to carcinogens .
Overall , occupational cancer still represents a huge challenge and , in human terms , each case of occupational cancer is one case too many .
For the first time , the proposal for a directive lays down limit values for a benzene carcinogen .
At the same time , the scope of the directive is substantially extended to cover , for example , the pharmaceuticals and cosmetics industry , foodstuffs , etc .
Experts now generally agree that some 4 % of cancer-related deaths probably result from occupational factors .
In a country such as Finland , with 5 million inhabitants , 18 000 fresh cases of cancer are recorded each year .
If it is estimated that some 4 % of those are linked to working conditions , this signifies that some 700 workers contract an occupational cancer each year in Finland .
At European Union level that would represent tens of thousands of cases of occupational cancer every year .
When the proposal to modify the directive was considered at first reading , Parliament expressed its determination and its sense of responsibility with regard to the protection of the health of workers exposed to carcinogens .
It wished to endorse the approach to the improvement of the working environment adopted by the Commission in its proposal .
Parliament tabled 16 amendments to the original Commission proposal , most of which were taken into account by the Commission in its amended proposal .
However , the Council took over only five , a decision which I find less than satisfactory .
In drawing up its amendments , Parliament showed great responsibility , taking into account both the need for better protection of workers and the technological limits to that protection , so as not to pose too great a threat to the economic and production activities of the SMUs .
Although the Council 's decision to fix a limit value of 1 ppm for benzene is welcome in itself , it is regrettable that that limit value will become binding only six years after the adoption of the directive .
Benzene is in fact a substance for which no safe limit value can be fixed .
It always poses a risk .
Exposure to a 1 ppm concentration of benzene over a complete working life causes up to 6.5 additional cases of leukaemia per thousand workers .
In my view , it is also regrettable that the Council 's position makes no mention of biological limit values and measuring methods .
In the case of benzene , the fixing of a biological limit value would be particularly important , since recent studies have shown that the absorption of benzene through the skin , for example in car repair workshops , represents the main form of exposure to that substance .
The proposal amending the directive on the protection of workers against carcinogens nevertheless constitutes a step forward as regards the protection of the health of workers .
As rapporteur , therefore , I recommend that the common position be approved .
However , in view of the arguments I outlined above , I regard it as my duty to retable the amendments which Parliament adopted at first reading and which the Committee on the Environment adopted unanimously .
I will deal with the amendment tabled by the Greens tomorrow .
However , the final result would have been better for workers if the directive had been considered under the codecision procedure .
Unfortunately , this has not been the case .
In conclusion , I should like to express my warm thanks to the Members of the Commission for the constructive dialogue and their cooperation with Parliament during the consideration of this issue .
I sincerely hope that this directive will finally be adopted during the Dutch Presidency .
Mr President , the Danish Social Democrats are positive about the rapporteur 's recommendation regarding the protection of employees in terms of the risk of exposure to carcinogenic substances during their work .
However , in this connection I would like to mention some of the views of the Danish Laboratory Technicians Association in this very area , and I agree that what is needed here is tighter legislation .
I too am not in favour of the establishment of limits for carcinogenic substances since it has been international recognised that it is not possible to set safe lower limits below which carcinogenic substances no longer cause cancer in humans .
As the Danish Laboratory Technicians Association recommends , we must strive for minimal use , and perhaps even for no use at all , so that zero risk can be established in the working environment .
When limits are set for carcinogenic substances at a given level , the daily struggle to comply with those levels , in order to protect workers , is made all the more difficult .
This of course is tied up with the fact that it is difficult to produce a convincing argument against the logical and technical consequences of the knowledge we have about the possible risks as long as one is thinking in terms of limits for carcinogenic substances .
The people from the Danish Laboratory Technicians Association who have advised me , know where the shoes pinch .
This is their daily work and we should listen carefully to what they say .
Political attitudes and feelings in general are seldom a match for expert qualifications .
Mr President , I should first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
I think it is her first - although I am not absolutely sure of that - but in any event she has been able to bring this difficult and complex technical report to a successful conclusion .
I also hope - and I say this too on behalf of my group - that the amendments which have been tabled by the rapporteur and the Social Affairs Committee can be accepted by the Commission .
Because the point at issue here this evening is of course what the Commission accepts and what it does not .
If the Commission does not accept anything in the cooperation procedure , then that is always rather sad in terms of our work .
So I am waiting to hear this with great interest .
We are dealing with an extremely serious problem here .
Cancer , as the rapporteur has already described , is one of the most serious diseases in the European Union .
We know that substances of this kind can be a major cause of cancer , and so this is a very important matter .
That also means , to my mind , that the whole question of adopting directives under Article 118a is very important .
These often do not involve issues that attract particular attention , but ones where some years later , people see that if the directives have been contravened , very serious damage has occurred .
Fortunately , even those who cause the damage sometimes come to realize this , because they have to pay out huge sums in the courts .
That is the whole point of this article .
It is also why the article has to stay .
However , I also entirely agree with what the rapporteur has said , that this article must naturally be a codecision article in the future , not one of the kind it is at present .
I think that the Council itself , as often happens in this kind of case , has done some quite good work .
It is also sometimes a good thing to praise the Council , but I would repeat that the amendments , particularly those aimed at securing closer definitions and removing the transitional period , must remain intact .
They are in fact the crucial point .
There are of course always some amendments which are easy to accept , but which do not actually add a great deal , but that is not the case with those in question here .
I think the whole House is reasonably agreed on this .
So the only thing we still have to wait for is whether the Commission agrees with our opinion , and I look forward to hearing the Commissioner on this point .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this directive marks a step forward , especially because for the first time , a limit value is being set for benzene .
Our group supports the rapporteur and shares her view that we need to retable the ten amendments from first reading , in particular the amendment removing the transitional period and those which Mr Pronk has also just highlighted on definitions .
However , this directive is aimed only at achieving prevention by setting limit values for carcinogens .
I see it as my duty here tonight to draw attention to other diseases brought about by other solvents such as toluene , a major cause of the disease organic-psychic syndrome .
This organic-psychic syndrome affects the nervous system and can result in serious forms of brain damage .
The disease is caused by occupational exposure to chemical solvents , and can lead to memory loss and sometimes paralysis .
Surely we cannot take various measures in respect of one disease , but not another ?
Because of differences in the Member States as regards the use of solvents in dyes and adhesives , worker protection is not the same in all our countries .
Certain requirements for these harmful substances have long been established in the United States and the Scandinavian countries , for example .
I think that we must provide equality for workers throughout our countries at European level , not just for carcinogens , but for all the harmful substances to which people are exposed .
I hope , Mr President - and I have also obtained some information on this in my own country from the Council - that you will be able to take the initiative on this matter , and that we shall not be left with just this one directive .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive which is being submitted today for second reading meets , in principle , two objectives .
The first is to broaden the scope of the initial directive of 1990 , in such a way as to include all the carcinogens present at the workplace and to take into consideration all possible forms of exposure .
I think I can say that this objective has been attained .
All my colleagues are certainly satisfied .
The second objective consists in setting limit values for occupational exposure to a well-known carcinogen - benzene .
And here , I claim that the objective has not at all been attained .
Benzene has , in fact , been known for a very long time as a powerful carcinogen .
There are no more scientific controversies on this subject .
And we know that there is no threshold for harmlessness .
Consequently , it is vital that a limit value should be set to limit the damage .
Many experts think that a limit value of 0.1 PPM should be set .
It matters little whether one talks of PPM or something else - what is important is to compare the limits .
The Commission has proposed 1 PPM , in other words , ten times more .
Today , it appears that , in the majority of work situations , occupational exposure does not exceed 1 PPM .
The Commission is therefore merely ratifying an existing situation .
But where things start to get more serious is where , in the initial proposal , it proposed a derogation of 3 PPM for the oil sector .
This was already unacceptable in itself and , at first reading , we rejected this derogation , although we accepted the 1 PPM .
What is happening today ?
We find ourselves , at second reading , faced with a common position of the Council which I call scandalous , as it extends the derogation of 3 PPM to all sectors of activity and , moreoever , changes the maximum period for transposing the directive by two years .
It would thus take six years for the 1 PPM limit to be respected .
Consequently , this measure gives the illusion of protecting workers , whereas it does no such thing , and in reality we are , from a distance , following the claims and requirements of the industrial sectors .
So we absolutely have to adopt the amendments and I hope that the Commissioner is going to reassure us by saying that she herself will support them .
Mr President , this Directive concerns our working lives and the regulations which will apply to them .
There are already countries , Denmark and Sweden , for example , which have stricter requirements than the proposal put forward by the Commission .
This shows that it is possible to make tough demands on industry and that these requirements can be met .
All limits must be such that the principle of caution can be applied , i.e. there must be a considerable margin in the limit before the level becomes dangerous .
It is precisely this which is so difficult to determine as there are so many different types of inhalation and many different environmental problems .
This is why , for example , the Commission 's limit of 1ppm for benzene cannot be accepted .
Similarly , it is impossible to accept the deadlines quoted which can stretch to six years . These are far too long .
But the Directive is a step in the right direction , which is a good thing as it concerns the level of health and safety we want in our workplaces .
But I do think that any country which wants to go further in this should of course be able to do so .
Mr President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ojala , for the good work she has done on this proposal and for continuing to support the Commission in its endeavours to combat work-related illnesses .
Both the Commission and Commissioner Flynn and myself appreciate this contribution .
Let met first draw your attention to the political significance of the Council 's common position .
This is a clear and fundamental expression of how important effective health and safety provisions are in Community thinking .
The most important aim of the Commission 's proposal has been fulfilled .
It is based primarily on extending the area of application of the directive so that it also covers a long list of preparations which were not previously included , and then for the first time it aims to establish limits for industrial exposure to a well known carcinogen , namely benzene .
With your help , the directive could be adopted in the very near future .
The Commission would clearly have preferred a shorter transition period before the directive could be fully implemented in the national legal system .
But the different sectors of activity need provisional arrangements so that they can fulfil the directive 's requirements .
In consideration of the fact that the current values in most Member States are much higher than 3 ppm , the time allowed is not so unreasonable .
On the basis of what I have said above , I am sorry to have to report that none of the amendments proposed by Parliament can be accepted at this point .
They clearly overlook the fact that the Commission incorporated six of the proposed amendments : 1 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 8 and 10 in the amendment proposal , and these are now before Parliament .
However the Council rejected these for reasons which the Commission is able , in part , to understand .
Even if I am today opposing the amended text of the joint position , I can assure the rapporteur and the other members of Parliament that in practice the Commission will consciously take account of several of the proposed amendments , even if at the present time we cannot incorporate them into the legislation .
I am thinking here of proposed amendments 3 , 4 , 5 , 8 and 10 in particular .
With regard to the proposed amendments , I would like to remind you that , in connection with adoption of a joint position , the Commission reserves the right , at a later stage , when the amended recommendation is adopted , to come back with specific detailed proposals in light of the scientific results , particularly with regard to biomonitoring and measurement methods .
Regarding biological limits , and here I am referring to proposed amendments 4 and 8 , the Commission intends to produce further proposals to establish limits for certain levels in the case of specific carcinogens , where the necessary data is available .
Similarly the Commission will produce clear proposals for uniform measurement procedures .
This is proposed amendment 10 , and I also intend to make the Commission 's intentions quite clear to the Council when this proposed amendment comes up for discussion .
The Commission is also in favour of the idea of an updated priority list for the limits - this is proposed amendment 3 - in view of the fact that there is no scientific data for all carcinogens at the present moment .
This list does not form part of the legislation , but when the existing data points to the need for a legislative initiative , the Commission will not hesitate to take the necessary action .
I would like to take this opportunity of assuring the rapporteur that the appearance of arsenic and arsenic compounds on the list will be dealt with as a matter of urgency - this is proposed amendment 5 .
I hope I have thus been able to convince Parliament of the Commission 's desire in practice to follow Parliament 's recommendations , and let me repeat , in closing , that the text , in its present form , marks an important step forward , and Parliament has played an important part in this result .
Mr President , do I understand correctly that the Commissioner is not accepting any amendment which has been proposed by Parliament ?
She wants to study them and so on but she does not want to accept any of the twelve amendments put forward by Parliament ?
Have I understood her correctly ?
I understood her differently , Mr Pronk , but in any case it is not for me to answer .
, rapporteur - ( FI ) Mr President , I too listened with great interest to the answer given by the Commissioner and I must say that it is not entirely satisfactory .
The Commission promises to take many things into account in the future , but now , when a solution is required to the problem under discussion , it cannot seem to summon up the will to put pressure on the Council .
Even the Commission 's original proposal , which , in my opinion , took proper account of industry and its needs , goes too far for the Council 's taste .
This is highly regrettable , since it shows quite clearly that the Council wishes to hedge on this issue .
I know that a further directive is already being prepared , which does give some grounds for hope .
I have heard , for example , that a proposal is likely to be submitted in the very near future on arsenic , as referred to by the Commissioner .
However , I am deeply disappointed that this matter should have been dealt with under the cooperation procedure .
We are rather perplexed , because we have the impression that you , Madam Commissioner , and the Commission in general pay more attention to the Council than Parliament , and as long as such matters are dealt with under the cooperation procedure this will remain the case .
This is precisely the reason why it should be dealt with under the codecision procedure .
Mr President , I shall make this short since I can inform both Mr Pronk and Mrs Ojala that the message is that the Commission is unable to accept the amendments proposed , but with the rider that the Commission agreed with the content of several of them and wished to do more work on the matter .
Mr President , that answer seems so unclear to me that I think Members need to discuss whether to refer this report back to the Social Affairs Committee , so as to achieve more clarity on the matter .
We cannot hold a vote tomorrow on this basis .
Mr President , I must say that , while I quite understand that the rapporteur and Mr Pronk were not particularly pleased with the answer I have been able to give here today , I do not believe anyone can say that it lacks anything in clarity .
I believe that the message about what the Commission is able to accept has been clear , so it is my view that , in light of these considerations , it must be acknowledged that there has not been any lack of clarity .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.41 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I would just like to say something , and I will speak in French so as to be more quickly understood by everyone .
Yesterday I raised a question which our ' Superior ' - because I consider you a monk of this monastery - judged to be a personal matter .
I must obey him and I do so with pleasure , in view of the liking I have for him .
However it was not a personal matter , it was a political question .
Indeed , when I speak as a politician , in a political context , I am no longer dealing with a personal matter which I can resolve in the corridors , but a political question which I cannot resolve with my fists in the corridors .
Madam , that is what generally happens .
I wanted to defend the honour of my party .
I know very well that honour is not a fashionable thing , but all the same I wanted to defend it , and I did not want lies to be spread about my party , that is all .
I thereby close the subject , in obedience to the Superior of the monastery and as the monk obedient to and respectful of democracy I am pleased to continue to be .
Mr Rosado Fernandez , I admit that I have trouble deciding whether your speech was for a personal matter , a motion of procedure or a comment on the Minutes , but you have made it so politely that I am very willing to take note of it .
Madam President , yesterday the President read out the ratification of the appointments of various Members , following verification of their credentials by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
However , I see that we obviously have a new colleague in the House whom the President did not mention .
Since yesterday , a young man has been sitting next to Mrs Green .
I should like to know which group he belongs to , and I should also like to know what the PSE Group has done with Mr Hänsch !
Mr Rack , I will reassure you doubly .
We have not omitted to announce the arrival of a new colleague , because the person is not a new colleague .
Secondly , Mr Klaus Hänsch has not disappeared from our Parliament .
Madam President , I wish to inform the House that yesterday I tried to obtain a copy of the Ford report , which is on today 's agenda , so that I could table amendments before the deadline of 7 p.m.

At 6 p.m. the Ford report was still not available in all the official languages , which clearly made it impossible for Members to prepare amendments in good time .
I would ask you , Madam President , whether this is in keeping with our Rules of Procedure .
Surely it is now impossible to vote on the Ford report today , given that amendments could not be submitted in time .
Mr Caccavale , I do believe you when you say that you could not find this report .
We are going to check whether it was available in all languages and if not , it will obviously not be possible to vote on it .
We are going to check , I can assure you .
Are there any other comments on the Minutes ?
It might also be noted that the three observations which have just been made were not about the Minutes .
Madam President , I want to draw to your attention and that of the House the fact that Jimmy Goldsmith 's Referendum Party in Britain has provided £ 150 , 000 to the Ulster Unionist Party .
I wonder if £ 150 , 000 is the prop that keeps the Referendum Party represented in a group in this Parliament by Mr Nicholson ?
Is that the price to be paid for jingoism of this kind ?
The Ulster Unionist Party has received so much support from this House time and time again , and at the same time , in the European Parliament , we have the Referendum Party propping up a single Member with £ 150 , 000 for the general election campaign in Britain .
A political group , the Referendum Party , that is a meaningless party in Britain , is interfering in internal Irish politics .
I want to protest very strongly about this .
My dear colleague , you are perfectly well aware that that was not an observation on the Minutes .
Now , we are going to proceed in an orderly and methodical way , keeping to the subject of the Minutes , which I would like to be able to declare adopted once all of you have spoken .
Are there any other comments ?
Madam President , on the roll-call vote recorded in the Minutes , I complained profusely that my machine was not working until Mr Harrison pointed out that I did not have my card .
I then asked that my vote against be recorded , but it is not on the list .
Could it be recorded , please ?
Mr Wynn , I am told that your name does appear on the list .
In any case we will check .
If your name does not appear , obviously we will make a note of your declaration in today 's Minutes .
Are there any other comments on the Minutes ?
( The Minutes were adopted )
Madam President , this is not the first time Mr Andrews has got to his feet in this House and made totally inaccurate statements .
Knowing Mr Andrews it will probably not be the last time .
I find it unfortunate , Madam President , that you allowed him to make such a statement .
I recommend that in future you stand by the Rules of this House and ensure that such assertions , not based on fact , are not made .
I want to make it very clear that what he said in this House was totally wrong , a parcel of lies .
I totally reject what he said .
Mr Nicholson , you know very well that when a colleague asks to speak , one never knows if it is really a motion of procedure or not .
And it is not very polite to interrupt a colleague while he is speaking .
Respect for human rights in the European Union
The next item is the annual report ( A4-0112 / 97 ) by Mrs Roth , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on respect for human rights in the European Union ( 1995 ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the ideal of free human beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can only be achieved if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy his economic , cultural and social rights , as well as his civil and political rights .
The same text appears almost verbatim in the preambles of two major UN covenants : the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights .
Both date from 1966 and have been signed by over 100 states .
We in the European Parliament must take the UN concept of human rights as our basis , and this comprises three central categories : firstly , what might be termed the negative rights to freedom , i.e. the right of each person to enjoy freedom from unjustified state coercion and other violence .
Secondly , the positive rights : these guarantee the participation of the individual in political and social decision-making processes .
And , thirdly , social rights and the right to development , which are invoked particularly by Third World countries : they insist that civil and political rights also include the conditions that are necessary in order to exercise these rights .
These are the human rights of the new , the third generation .
If both the rich and poor are equally entitled to sleep under bridges , this is a very inadequate and cynical type of freedom from the point of view of the latter .
This freedom alone is not enough .
The purpose of social human rights is to ensure freedom , equality and codetermination under the conditions of an industrialized society .
Social human rights complement the traditional liberal freedoms .
And this matter is worth thinking about . I remember last winter , when numerous people froze to death .
The news programmes reported that they died of cold .
In fact , they died of poverty .
It is easy to call for human rights elsewhere .
It is far more difficult to admit to shortcomings in one 's own country .
We have often enough condemned crimes elsewhere : Turkey , China and Iran .
This report , however , is about our own failings .
If we are to be credible , we need to examine conscientiously our own human rights record in the European Union .
We cannot - and must not - console ourselves with the thought that the situation is much worse elsewhere .
As Bertolt Brecht said : ' Let everyone speak about his own disgrace ' .
In drawing up a report on the human rights situation in the European Union , we must avoid hypocrisy .
We cannot - and must not - create a separate European Union human rights concept .
That is the true meaning of the frequently quoted remark : ' human rights are indivisible ' .
In speaking of the human rights situation in the EU , therefore , we must adopt a holistic approach , and not say like the Pharisee in Luke 18 , 11 : ' God , I thank thee that I am not as other men are ' .
This report is accused of being biased .
Of course it is biased - biased in favour of human rights !
There is no such thing as a neutral , disinterested human rights report .
There are only two options : a report which tries to describe the situation accurately , without concern for sensitivities ; or one which plays down , covers up and glosses over , which treats what happens in our own countries as at most a pardonable sin , on the basis of the maxim that , compared to the situation elsewhere , things are not so bad in the European Union .
But the theory of relativity belongs to physics , not in a report on human rights .
This report clearly addresses the situation in the individual EU Member States .
Anyone who criticizes this as interference in the internal affairs of states shows his ignorance of international law .
It is now generally recognized that human rights - and this was recently confirmed at the 1993 Vienna Conference on Human Rights - are no longer the internal affairs of individual states .
No government - not even a European one - can justifiably complain of unacceptable interference if it is criticized for human rights abuses .
Whoever wants to reduce the number of human rights - or even half them - should bear in mind the words of President Roosevelt when he formulated the anti-fascist war objective in 1941 : he said that freedom from material want should have the same status as freedom of speech , freedom of belief and freedom from fear .
It is impossible to define human rights more simply or poignantly .
Roosevelt was 25 years ahead of the 1966 UN covenants .
In 1997 , we must not fall behind him .
I should like to thank all those Members who have taken part in this highly controversial debate so far .
I hope that we secure broad support for this report today .
I hope that we achieve a good result , even if hurts - for a report on human rights must criticize , or it fails to serve its purpose .
Madam President , I am speaking about the presence of Commissioner Van den Broek , whom I would like to thank for coming here and following this debate .
However , I was wondering , in view of the subject of our debate - human rights in the European Union - whether Mr Van den Broek , who is already following a number of dossiers , is really the competent Commissioner in this matter .
Mr Dell 'Alba , I am convinced that the Commissioner is perfectly competent for all subjects and particularly for this , on which he is going to speak in a moment .
( Interruption by Mr Herman : ' The Commission is a college ! '
Exactly , Mr Herman !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is to be expected that what has happened in previous years here in Parliament will be repeated once again this morning , namely that the debate on the annual report on the human rights situation in the European Union for 1995 will degenerate into a discussion marked on the one hand by fundamental differences of opinion on what a human rights debate should involve and , on the other hand , by self-interested national and group tactics .
The latter will undoubtedly colour the vote on both sides of the House again today , in all groups , and I regret that very much .
Mrs Roth rightly said , and the debate and vote in committee also made this clear , that it is a luxury for the European Union to draw up two different human rights reports : one on the situation in the Union , and one on the situation in the rest of the world .
It is as if there were two different kinds of human rights : one for Europeans and one for non-Europeans !
It is completely absurd for us to say that today 's report sets everything out , but that no Member State can be mentioned by name in relation to a specific human rights abuse , and no Member State can be accused of failing to respect human rights fully and completely .
Because the fact is that a debate has been gathering force in all the political groups over the last few years which is aimed at preventing precisely that , in other words saying that human rights are indivisible .
Verifying respect for human rights has nothing to do with a state 's membership of a political union or any other kind of international community , but a great deal to do with whether politicians , governments , administrations - it does not matter where - are capable not only of observing the fundamental rights which they themselves have established , but also of monitoring and , if necessary , enforcing compliance with those rights .
This brings me to two crucial sections of this report , which I should like to bring to the attention of the House .
Mrs Roth deals with the question of the rights of people in detention .
There is no better indication of how humane a society is , how closely it observes human rights , than the degree to which it respects the rights of those who have violated society 's basic rules .
They are nevertheless entitled to an assurance of basic humane treatment , access to a fair trial and observance of the fundamental principles of human dignity while they are in detention .
A democratic state or a democratic international organization such as the European Union - which , as Mrs Roth said , points the finger at other parts of the world , and we in the European Parliament are not exactly restrained in this respect , but seek to reinforce such condemnation - must allow the legitimacy of its criticism of the human rights record of other countries to be judged in the light of its own record .
And , as far as the rights of people in detention are concerned , this report makes it clear that the situation in almost all the Member States leaves a good deal to be desired .
This section alone makes it clear , therefore , that we can longer afford to conduct such a debate - which is characterized by individual interests , and by tactics and manoeuvres aimed at securing a majority in order to prevent a disagreeable outcome - if we wish to retain even a glimmer of credibility in the long term .
There is something else that I should like to draw to the House 's attention .
In past years , we have sometimes had to put up with disgraceful attempts to turn the human rights report into an ideological battleground at the time of voting .
We cannot afford this in the long term .
I would therefore ask the House to consider , in view of the fact that we proclaim in our reports that human rights are indivisible and equally valid throughout the world , whether we need two different human rights reports .
Should we not have a single report on the human rights situation in the European Union and the rest of the world , to be debated and adopted by the House ?
I believe that this would serve to neutralize these tactics to some extent .
Madam President , this year as in previous years , the Group of the European People 's Party has sought rapprochement and consensus in Parliament to make this annual report on human rights in the Union a balanced , structured , legally correct document which impartially reflects the true human rights position in the Union . Unfortunately the result is not what we hoped for .
Everyone knows the Group of the European People 's Party promotes and upholds respect for human rights , is active in their defence and firmly opposes any violation wherever and however it may occur .
That has been demonstrated not only in words but in deeds .
But after what Mr Schulz has said it needs to be put on record that the Member States of the Union belong to a group of countries which guarantee full respect for human rights through democratic and pluralist political systems with effective parliamentary institutions and independent legal systems .
All the same there is no doubt that the risk of violation of those rights still exists in the Union .
Such violations must be denounced before this house , but always clearly and meticulously , after detailed study of each alleged case to establish whether there has been damage to appropriate measures of protection and respect for human rights , or whether the violation has been properly dealt with under the national legal and administrative systems .
Obviously , as a co-legislative body , the European Parliament must ensure that Union law develops in a context of respect for the fundamental rights of the human being , because the main aim of any genuinely democratic social project must be the freedom and dignity of the human being .
But we must stress the need for knowledge of national and international law on human rights in drawing up a report on the human rights position in the Union , as well as an exact idea of the legal concepts and strict application of precise terminology .
It is also important to use legal sources as the basis for the document , not reports without legal foundation based on mere statements of principle or accusations which are sometimes unfounded .
These premises are basic to the design and production of the report and if they are ignored the result may be a profusion of pre-programmed statements which make no sense , a quite arbitrary classification and processing of rights , imprecision in the use of legal concepts and excessive attention to isolated cases only reflecting exceptional situations .
Consequently the report on respect for human rights in the European Union must be circumscribed by our principal guide on the road to European construction : the law originating in the treaty .
The treaty establishes the meaning of the concept of human rights to be respected by the Union and its institutions clearly and unequivocally .
As Members are aware , no act or legislation emanating from the European Union or its Member States can contradict the original law of the Union as set out in the treaties .
So a report on human rights must be structured on the principles contained in the Treaty of Rome .
It is true that as law , politics , and economic and social life have evolved , the States have been recognizing other guarantees linked to the welfare state .
The Group of the European People 's Party has therefore introduced two amendments urging the parliamentary committees covering social affairs and the environment to prepare appropriately thorough reports on respect for those guarantees as they affect their areas of responsibility .
Let me end , Madam President , by expressing my regret that the Group of the European People 's Party finds it impossible to support this report , but this is forced on us because the draft report does not respect the fundamental and necessary legal basis : the Treaty of Rome .
I also want to express my hope that the next report by this Parliament on respect for human rights in the Union will be a structured and rigorous document , a consensual report which is not pre-programmed , a report which does not distort reality to turn it into a political issue .
Madam President , firstly I am anxious to thank Mrs Roth for the work she has done and for the time she has devoted to trying to come up with a text on which there is a consensus .
But in an area in which there should indeed be a consensus , difficulties arise when it comes to the details and when reconciliation of the irreconcilable is ruled out , because then we come up against some real choices of society .
One of the essential criticisms I would make of this report is that it wants to sweep over all aspects of life in society , enumerate all situations , add up all cases of appearance . It is no longer a report , it is a catalogue .
In wanting to be exhaustive , the report runs the certain risk of being imperfect .
The sick and the well , able-bodied and handicapped , young and old , women and men and others , free and imprisoned , servicemen and conscientious objectors , believers and unbelievers , black and white , etc .
And if I may joke about such an important subject : redheads , Mrs Roth ?
You have forgotten redheads !
Not so long ago they were the subject of serious persecution .
Seriously , though , I am still convinced that the model of the genre remains the declaration of human rights of 1789 .
17 articles , not 171 !
Precise , concise articles which apply everywhere .
Everything summed up in its first article : ' Men - from the Latin homo and not vir - are born and die free and equal ' .
In wanting to do too much , one also runs the risk of defending the indefensible .
In wanting to defend freedom of celebration of religions and cults , in article 26 , without reference to our national legislation , you are also defending one of the greatest scourges which affects many young girls of African origin : circumcision .
Of course , our Europe is not perfect .
Of course , our States still have some way to go .
But here , in the European Parliament , I , like members from every State in the Union , enjoy one of the greatest rights which exist , that of being able to vote against your report .
Madam President , Europe has a good reputation when it comes to human rights , and while the European Union is right to try to improve the human rights situation throughout the world , if we wish to do this with any authority , we must first put our own house in order .
That is why the ELDR Group welcomes the fact that we have this debate on the human rights situation in the Member States every year .
The annual report contains a number of good points , but there are three criticisms I would make .
Firstly , our group feels , after discussing the matter amongst ourselves , that the resolution is too long and that this will discourage people from reading it .
We would therefore prefer to shorten it by a few paragraphs .
Secondly , it needs to be less sweeping in certain places .
The situation in prisons cannot be described as bad in every case , though it is true of some .
And thirdly , the resolution mentions a number of areas where the Member States have sole responsibility , rather than the European Union .
A clear example is paragraph 18 on euthanasia .
The European Union does not need to legislate for this , so we would prefer to drop this paragraph altogether .
Unlike the Christian Democrats , the Liberal Group considers that the report should give some attention to basic social rights , such as the right to a healthy environment , but these are quite different from the traditional basic rights in that governments are only required to try to respect them , rather than to guarantee them .

All things considered , we hope that the debate and the votes on the amendments will produce a well-balanced resolution .
Madam President , our democratic societies must create the necessary conditions to ensure that every person , simply by being a person , enjoys human rights , understood not only as civil and political rights , but also as economic , social and cultural rights .
We cannot speak of human rights today without speaking of social rights .
Issues relating to jobs , wages , working conditions , respect for minorities , the fight against racism , and so on , have a great deal to do with human rights .
Poverty is rising in European Union countries .
Increasing numbers of people are victims of this evil for one reason or another and it is essential to promote social assistance and government support to combat it .
We need a policy which promotes fundamental social security and genuinely guarantees equal opportunities .
A wave of racism and xenophobia is engulfing our countries and events in various parts of the Union in the last few days make it clear how serious the problem of racism is becoming .
There is still discrimination against foreigners in Europe , and the law still regards those citizens as a danger to security and public order - targets for police surveillance , not individuals who enrich our society socially and culturally .
Having foreigners and their cultures amongst us definitely adds a socially valuable multicultural aspect which is good for the progress of European society .
We must prevent the development of a hierarchy of people .
Only foreigners from Union countries are good foreigners in the European Union .
All the other immigrants , whether looking for work , refugees , or whatever , are second class human beings with increasingly limited fundamental rights .
In European Year against Racism Member States have a greater duty than ever to guarantee foreign communities protection against racist violence and all forms of discrimination .
And the Community institutions must give priority to funding projects geared to the fight against racism .
A European society which straightforwardly aspires to democracy , solidarity and a high level of respect for fundamental rights , cannot fail to guarantee social security to all its members .
And it is wrong to devalue the multicultural enrichment brought to our society by the integration of foreigners .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the annual report on human rights in the European Union can and must be an important opportunity to find out facts , to take stock and make proposals .
The rapporteur , Claudia Roth , and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs have worked extremely hard on this report .
I should like to begin by saying that I am pleasantly surprised .
This report does not actually reflect Mrs Roth 's personal opinions . Rather than setting out her own opinions , which are - if I may say so - quite extreme in some ways , she has made a great effort to give a comprehensive overview of human rights in the European Union .
That is why I am pleasantly surprised , and I would add that the annual report on human rights in the EU must not - as has unfortunately happened in the past - be the cause of a clash of views between different factions .
I hope that this year , Parliament will manage to rise above such unproductive argument , because there are certainly other ways of measuring the numerical strength of the various groups and factions , rather than by examining and discussing human rights .
I wish to make it clear at this point that I shall be voting in favour of the report , even though I cannot go along with certain parts of it ; I do , however , agree with its overall thrust and am convinced that it is useful and necessary for progress in Europe .
To stress the need to overcome hidebound attitudes , I spoke out several times in committee against the rapporteur 's draft , and I believe that not even she herself agrees entirely with all the paragraphs of the report .
Having read and re-read this report , I have not found any passages in it which are radically at odds with my own views .
I do , of course , beg to differ on certain points , but nothing is fundamentally unacceptable - if it had been , I would certainly not have voted in favour .
The rapporteur has said this morning that , in some respects , her report takes sides .
In one sense it does indeed , in that it is not restricted to human rights as defined by the International Covenant , but covers the broader subject of social rights and social security .
I should like to make one thing clear here . Given that we are dealing with human rights within the European Union , it would be unproductive not to tackle the subject of social rights and social security .
In short , out of respect for human dignity and the role of this House , I hope that in the vote today , we shall manage to avoid factionalism and a distinction between human rights , on the one hand , and social rights and social security on the other .
If we were to vote on partisan lines , in a small-minded way , we should have to ask ourselves what is the point of voting in plenary if all we are doing is recording votes which are unrelated to the content of the report , but determined only by the hidebound attitudes to which I have referred , and by the composition of the groups .
Quite apart from the need to respect human dignity , I believe that it is also essential to show respect for the European Parliament and its role , which must not be either passive or unproductive .
Madam President , the work which has been done by Mrs Roth was indispensable .
Of course , I realise that a number of criticisms were made on the rather rag-bag nature to which her work has been likened . No matter .
I think that , whether we like it or not , to fundamental rights and liberties should be added what were once known as the formal liberties , which are those of association , opinion , expression , etc . ; we must also take into account the right to receive care when one is ill , the right to education and training when one has none , the right to a decent job , the right to decent conditions of imprisonment , the right to breathe clean air .
Of course .
All of these rights are as inalienable as the preceding ones .
However , it is also true that borderline areas exist , and I am very pleased that the rapporteur has pinpointed a fundamental issue , euthanasia .
You do not play around with life , an area in which you exercise in a very real way a social choice , and that has been stated here .
Nevertheless some definitive advice has been taken here , and I would like the whole Parliament to follow her on this subject .
At the same time , it 's true , what can we hope for the future ?
To make progress , certainly , to make progress with these rights , but really it would not be a bad thing if we could just stop regressing , because , in our countries , the rights of foreigners in particular , are being nibbled at , eaten away little by little , and defending the rights of foreigners in our land is now part of the battle for human rights .
Somebody said that we were dealing with a social choice .
Yes , it 's true , it is a social choice , but let us make it clear that , if we want to be faithful to what is required of us , we must work for this society in which men are open to each other , pay attention to each other , that is , for a more brotherly society .
It is for that that I thank Mrs Roth .
Madam President , I have to say that Mrs Roth has interpreted the concept of human rights extremely broadly , but apart from that I agree with a number of the demands and statements that she makes , and I am grateful to her for including the paragraph on euthanasia .

Nevertheless , I have a number of serious objections to the report as a whole .
First of all , there is the fact that it places responsibility for human rights in the Union entirely in the hands of the national governments .
Of course each country is responsible for establishing and maintaining law and order , but it is equally the responsibility of each person in society to accept and comply with this .
Laws and regulations are all very well , but it is we as individuals who determine the quality of the society in which we live .
Think of things such as tolerance , destructiveness and anti-social behaviour .
This is where the root of the problem lies , and if we are to tackle it effectively , we need a clear system of standards and values .
This is what I think is missing in this report .
It is merely window-dressing to try to combat the sexual exploitation of women and children while at the same time allowing pornography and advertising a completely free rein .
My second objection is that the report assumes that we are all our own independent legislators .
This might seem a possible basis for a humane society , but if we do not recognize God 's law in our lives , then not all human rights are safe from attack .
The weak in society are given protection , but the weakest and most vulnerable of all , the unborn child , is left to fend for itself .
Also , every attention is given to alternative forms of society , yet the report fails to make any positive statements about marriage between men and women , which is what God ordained .
Madam President , in this report , in this interminable inventory which resembles less a poem by Prévert and more a catalogue of a grand raffle , there is everything .
I am not the only one to say so this morning .
There is everything and its opposite .
That is how it is that Member States are to be discouraged from thinking about the possible reinstatement of capital punishment for foul crimes while total freedom of expression is to be given to the killers of children yet to be born .
In Belgium , where I come from , the death penalty was abolished one year ago .
It was buried , in Charleroi , where , several months later , the bodies of young girls were being exhumed , who had been tortured and murdered .
Again we find in this report the tireless socialist cliché of the right to health , when no doctor , even the most gifted , can pretend to give it , only to dispense the best possible care for all .
After that , in this order of ideas , next to the surrealist right to health , I would like to inscribe the duty of intelligence for all .
This report really is in need of it .
Madam President , for my part I am sorry that , as in previous years , this important report on human rights has given rise to the same interminable shilly-shallying when defining the limit of the subjects to be dealt with : the static conception of human rights as opposed to an evolving and dynamic meaning .
Mrs Roth 's report , of excellent quality , has not escaped polemics , and I think it is a pity .
Not that the left-right confrontation appears to me to be systematically harmful , quite the contrary , but I am afraid that this opposition on such an important report might put the real division into the background , that which separates the vast majority of this hemicycle , which is conscious that the respect for human rights is one of the essential values of the European Union , from a minority , which will not rest until it has discredited this concept .
Only the right to freedom of expression finds favour in the eyes of the extreme right .
It calls upon this freedom better to pillory legislation which , in France particularly , permits the sanctioning of incitations to racism and the denial of crimes against humanity .
That is why I would like to recall the fact that the United Nations committee responsible for monitoring the application of the international treaty on civil and political rights by the 133 signatory countries made an important decision last November .
It nonsuited the negationist Robert Faurisson , who was claiming that the loi Gayssot attacked his freedom of expression and education .
The committee considers that it does nothing of the sort and that freedom of expression can be subjected to restrictions necessary for the respect of the rights or reputation of others .
You might think this goes without saying .
But it undoubtedly goes much better for being said .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the original aim in drawing up this report was to legitimize the European Parliament 's condemnation of human rights violations in other parts of the world .
The report has moved a very long way from this initial approach .
It no longer has that purpose .
Indeed , it is difficult to see how this report can legitimize Parliament 's criticism of human rights abuses in China or Zaire .
I should like to give you an example .
The report states that the European Parliament ' advocates the drawing-up at Community level of a binding legal instrument laying down minimum guarantees in respect of income , social protection , and the right to medical treatment and housing ' .
With respect , Mrs Roth , how does making such a boundless demand legitimize Parliament 's condemnation of human rights violations in Zaire ?
The problem with this report is the following : it does not deal with specific human rights violations , but lists political demands .
It has a political agenda .
It sheds more light on the rapporteur 's political views than on the human rights situation in Europe .
And that is precisely its weakness .
We must change that , if we wish the report to be taken seriously around the world .
There are some examples of this too .
The rapporteur takes a critical view of the demand for so-called ' zero immigration ' .
She condemns the fact that no Member State allows unrestricted immigration .
And that is portrayed as a human rights violation !
Mrs Roth , it is quite wrong to call this a human rights abuse .
You are way out of step with the general political consensus .
Furthermore , the rapporteur rails against the application of the concept of a ' safe third country ' with regard to the right of asylum .
Clearly , this is a question open to dispute , but to portray it as a human rights violation is , if you will forgive me for saying so , entirely wrong .
I should like to propose a way out .
I propose - and here I share the views of Mr Schulz - that we abandon the distinction between human rights in Europe and human rights in the rest of the world .
If the concept is indivisible , it must apply in Europe in exactly the same way that it applies in China and Zaire .
I therefore propose that we include in the report only human rights violations for which an action can be brought before the Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg .
I would suggest that we consider entrusting this task to Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights .
This dispute , which is inevitable if such a political agenda is put forward , is helping neither the cause of human rights nor Parliament .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to compliment Mrs Roth on the careful , meticulous work that has gone into this report , most of which I too can agree with , although certain paragraphs are a little controversial , I have to say .
Debate in the House has crystallized very much around what have been defined as the static and the dynamic concepts of human rights - and today is no exception .
I have no answer to that : I do not know which of these two notions is correct . What goes without saying is that we all have to come to terms with rapid change .
The concept of human rights is changing because the rights themselves are changing , in particular so-called social rights .
We cannot , of course , agree with many of the report 's prescriptions - to coin a term - concerning social rights , and still less those concerning the right to social security : when the right to social security is taken to extremes and effective social and economic protection is demanded - including the right to a home , to good health , to a family , to beauty , to a wife , to make love , to do everything - well , that is obviously a way of devaluing the concept underlying this report .
However , I do regard economic freedoms as fundamental , but for the opposite reasons to Mrs Roth : it is in fact because the welfare state is overloaded that cases of grinding poverty , exclusion and unemployment exist today .

Of course Europe must set an example , and Mrs Roth is quite right about that : prison cannot be regarded as a place for punishment or , even worse , torture , but is for rehabilitation ; trials must be just , so there must be genuine equality between the prosecution and defence ; there must always be respect for the rule of law , even when combating terrorism or the Mafia ; citizens should not be encouraged to become informers ; asylum-seekers must also have a fair trial , including those fleeing from war or famine who are seeking hospitality from us - obviously this does not mean opening the floodgates to immigration .



On all these points we shall naturally be voting in favour of the Roth report ; the Italian delegation will vote in favour of the report despite its doubts concerning many paragraphs , such as paragraph 18 on active euthanasia , which we do not understand , paragraph 26 on depriving sects of freedom of religion , where it is unclear what constitutes a sect , and paragraph 142 on the right - amongst others - of adoption for homosexuals .
Madam President , could this report be too reckless , too daring ?
On sight of the amendments , this would seem to be the opinion of many of our colleagues .
But human rights are not a static thing .
Their definition is prone to change with time , with changes in mentality and in accordance with the conception one has of man and his dignity .
That does not mean that it is okay to reduce the classic corpus of human rights : it retains all its value .
Perhaps the time has come rather to complete it .
Our rapporteur invites us to do so explicitly by adopting the now classic distinction between human rights of the first generation and those of the second .
She invites us to codify and guarantee a third generation of human rights .
Of course the objection can be made that in wanting to increase and extend human rights , there is a danger of stripping them of their impact and diluting the very strong symbolic and political significance which characterises them .
This objection should be taken seriously , but the fact remains that thinking towards an extension of human rights is perfectly legitimate and undoubtedly necessary , if only because it makes us think about the destiny of our society and because it allows us to correct certain developments while there is still time .
This evolutive approach is also justified by the fact that the classic declarations and texts are also the result of an evolution which took place over several centuries before arriving at a legally binding codification .
This is particularly true for legal matters of an international nature , where the time lapse between what had been accepted for a long time at home and a code of good conduct applicable to relations between States is particularly striking .
Of course , there is also this other mismatch between the solemn proclamation of great principles and the sociopolitical realities which , sadly , make human rights remain unheeded .
Mrs Roth has taken great pains to show us that everything is not for the better in the best of worlds , as far as the respecting of human rights and basic freedoms in the European Union is concerned .
This rather damning report may shock some but , in this area , it is important to be particularly exacting and not to give way to the tendency to hide one 's face or look away from unpleasant things .
It is upsetting to note that , even where we live , reason of State can take precedence over the respect of principles which should be dear to us .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , whenever the question of human rights in the European Union is on the agenda , national sensitivities suddenly begin to dominate again , and indeed under the banner of non-interference in countries ' internal affairs , a concept which I remember well as a cornerstone of the human rights policy of the Communist countries .
But the European Parliament is checked here by the European Convention on Human Rights - the only legal framework for any discussion of the protection or violation of human rights .
It clearly was not created with this in mind !
A twofold error underlies this approach .
Firstly , Article F ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union requires the Union to respect fundamental rights , not only as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , but also as they result from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States , in which the social and cultural basis of human rights is taken into account and amply developed - and certainly not always as restrictively , Mr Nassauer , as in the German Constitution .
Secondly , Parliament is not the European Court of Human Rights and is not conducting a trial , which can naturally only take place on legal grounds .
This is a report which has to draw on the human rights concepts embodied in the relevant UN Declarations , the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , and lastly the whole body of non-discrimination legislation of the European Union itself : everything , that is , which the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris refer to as the ' human dimension ' .
Indeed , this forms part of the Member States ' common legal philosophy .
How can it be neglected , therefore !
The purpose of this report is not to freeze human rights concepts and practices at their 1950 level , but to update them in accordance with the totally different circumstances of our times .
Since the Council has just given a lamentable example of the weakness of the European Union 's human rights policy , it is now up to Parliament to rouse itself and demonstrate to the people of Europe and the world that a sufficient number of Europeans wish to rectify that weakness .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fact that we are discussing the human rights situation in the European Union today .
Mrs Roth is right to call for the abolition of every form of discrimination on the grounds of race , sex , sexual identity , religion , persuasion , age and disability , and to state that human rights are one and indivisible .
I also think she is right to call for the concept of human rights to be extended to include such things as social , environmental and health rights .
However , I feel that there is still one thing missing in her excellent report : the right to be able to live freely in one 's own culture .
Linguistic diversity is part of the European Union 's rich heritage , and communities must have the right to express themselves in their own culture and to do so with Europe 's protection .
The European Union has made considerable progress here .
European funding is now provided to support the so-called minority languages and cultures , and it would have been a further step forward if all fifteen Member States had signed the European charter for regional and minority languages .
These are fundamental human rights too , and I regret the fact that two Member States have been unable to sign .
In my opinion , this is a really glaring shortcoming in our attempt to achieve unity through the recognition of diversity .
Only when diversity is treated decently shall we be able to make progress towards a strong and genuine European Union .
Madam President , from this side of the hemicycle , we are following with some amusement the division between right and left on the more or less extendable definition of human rights .
But we think that , before creating new rights , it is first necessary to make sure that the fundamental rights are respected , that is , firstly the right to freedom of expression , including for those who think differently from you , including for those who think differently from the dominant cultural or political power .
Because , in truth , it is primarily for political minorities that liberties should be granted and defended .
Right to freedom of expression , right , also , to the freedom of association , including for opponents of power , including for people who meet up to say things which you do not like or which the dominant majority do not like .
Lastly , human rights also mean the right to electoral freedom and trade union freedom .
And there is in France , from this point of view , much abuse where trade union freedom is concerned , since it is only possible for workers to stand for professional elections if they are members of unions which are duly approved and limited by law .
It is not possible to create new unions , it is not possible to stand freely , in France , in trade union and professional elections and this is obviously a very serious attack upon human rights .
This attack has just be stregthened by the Perben law , which limits the liberties which still existed in the civil service in this area .
This freedom is also limited by a number of court decisions taken by sleeping judges , on the orders of the authorities , which have finished up by prohibiting a number of national unions , in particular the Force national-transports en commun ( TGWU ) , which aimed to enable the representation of free workers in the transport sector .
So , yes , human rights in Europe must be defended , but first we must defend the fundamental liberties : electoral freedom , trade union freedom , freedom of speech , freedom of expression , and freedom of association .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Roth on her excellent report .
It confers a political and social dimension on the concept of human rights which sits well with developments in European thinking on the subject . We have moved forward a step or two from the concept of human rights developed at the time of the French Revolution .
One year ago I wrote a letter to the new Greek Minister of Defence , Mr Akis Tzohatzopoulos , informing him of the resolutions and concerns of the European Parliament on the question of conscientious objectors and requesting him to make better arrangements for such cases .
I am glad to be able to tell the House today that a bill providing for an alternative form of national service which will , I believe , finally resolve an issue which has troubled the European Parliament and many of us , too , for so many years , has already been laid before the Greek parliament .
We have tabled an amendment with Mrs d 'Ancona which will , I hope , with the assent of Mrs Roth , be accepted , because in Greece , which is the only Member State with no border with another Member State and in which military service is compulsory under the constitution , the issue is quite a contentious one .
I hope that the arrangement that is being made will meet the requirements of the constitution - which makes national service compulsory for all - and make it possible for those who object to bearing arms to serve their country without compromising their principles .
On another point I wish to say that since the fall of the Greek junta in 1974 , after the terrible experience of dictatorship , the Greek constitution has actually been very progressive .
It does enshrine and guarantee the right of freedom of association and assembly for all citizens , including those belonging to minorities .
The provision of paragraph 47 in Mrs Roth 's report is probably the result of false information , because the Greek constitution does actually enshrine this right .
Madam President , the human rights report now before the House continues the tradition of previous years .
It is certainly not a report on respect for human rights in the European Union , as the title would have us believe , but once again - if we compare it with previous reports - an attempt by Socialists , Greens , leftists and liberals to present to Parliament and the public at large , under the guise of human rights issues , ideological positions which could not otherwise be discussed in such depth .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party believe that human rights are simply too precious to be allowed to serve as an ideological battleground .
We therefore recommend that Parliament should return to discussing actual violations of human rights , highlighting and condemning any such violations in the European Union and doing everything possible to ensure that they are not repeated .
Like previous reports , Mrs Roth 's report discusses everything under the sun .
It calls for the right to health , the right to social security and the right to a healthy environment .
Clearly , these things must be discussed ; but they must be discussed in the committees responsible , and not under the guise of a debate on human rights .
If everyone thinks they are obliged to say something on every subject , Parliament will run the risk of being branded a talking-shop by the public !
I am in favour of things being discussed responsibly by the responsible bodies .
We are running the risk of discrediting ourselves .
When we read that Parliament is concerned at serious and inadmissible human rights violations , the existence of degrading detention conditions and the erosion of basic rights and fundamental freedoms , that it is deeply concerned at cases of torture , cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment , including cases of death , we could be forgiven for thinking that we were in Burundi or Zaire , and not the European Union .
We must get back to the facts when discussing human rights , and we should not have to remind ourselves where we are .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party would like to see Parliament get back to legally enforceable rights , discussing actual human rights abuses and calling for respect for human rights in cases where the path of human rights has been abandoned .
Madam President , one would expect nothing less from somebody like Mrs Roth , whom I consider an extraordinary individual .
Mrs Roth has produced a report which contains a number of paragraphs that some Members have reservations about .
Nevertheless , I have to say that , overall , the weight of this report encourages me to vote in favour of it .
I would cite , for example , the references to the treatment of prisoners and the protection of children .
Taking a position on euthanasia is not a responsibility of the European Parliament .
The lack of concern about the victims of crime has , to a certain extent , been redressed by the amendments adopted in committee .
But much more must be done for the victims of crime .
While I fully endorse giving priority to setting up units to provide palliative care for the terminally ill , so that they can die with dignity , I believe that the sensitive question of euthanasia is not one that should be dealt with by the European Parliament .
There is justifiable criticism in the report of the use of violence , inhuman , cruel or degrading treatment or punishment inflicted on persons on remand by the security forces or the forces of law and order .
Those responsible for such abuses should not go unpunished .
Belmarsh security unit in England , which I visited recently , is a virtual concrete tomb in which prisoners are incarcerated for long periods of time .
Women imprisoned in jails anywhere in the Community must be treated properly and with dignity .
I wish to thank the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , and particularly its chairman , Hedy d 'Ancona , for accepting my amendment calling for appropriate facilities to be provided for pregnant women in prisons .
I welcome Mrs d 'Ancona 's proposed visit to Holloway Prison .
The way in which Roisín McAliskey , an unconvicted prisoner and expectant mother , has been treated in Holloway Prison is outrageous .
In March , the Guardian newspaper wrote that Miss McAliskey 's case illustrated how prisoners awaiting extradition or deportation hearings could find themselves treated worse than those who had been convicted .
The Guardian also reports that the German Government has promised Miss McAliskey that , if extradited , she would be able to take her child with her .
I want to thank the German Government and the German Members of Parliament for their understanding of this particular case and for their support for my campaign for the proper treatment of prisoners in English jails .
Madam President , I would like to give two examples to illustrate that the report is , in my view , unrepresentative and far too general .
1 ) Denmark is named several times , whereas other countries scarcely appear .
I would not wish to conceal the situation in Denmark , but it is quite simply an inaccurate picture of Denmark with respect to the other countries in the Union .
But perhaps this is because we do not have a representative on the committee and can therefore serve as a scapegoat .
For example point 159 is completely wrong and point 33 misleading .
2 ) If the environment is to be included in these annual reports , then one should point out specific violations of the environment legislation , and not make do with general statements .
In conclusion , Madam President , I must say that the report does not fulfil its function and appears to be in appropriate . I would recommend that future reports be shorter , more precise and more accurate .
Madam President , we intend to vote for Mrs Roth 's report because of its comprehensiveness , sincerity , boldness and objectivity .
In addition we shall support it because of the way in which certain sides of this House have spoken against it during the debate .
We shall support it , moreover , because it makes it abundantly clear that if the Community wishes to have credibility it must first of all ensure full respect for human rights within its own borders .
That condition is not fulfilled in a Community in which several of the leading countries are plagued by racism and in which xenophobia culminated in the recent sinking in the Adriatic of a ship carrying women and children refugees from Albania .
We support it also because it makes specific mention of the fundamental right to work and to a proper standard of living - a right which is being denied to 25 million unemployed people in the Community , 50 million who are living on the verge of hunger and an equal number of homeless people .
Finally , we will be voting for it because it insists on absolute respect for nature and the environment .
This , too , is lacking in the Community , because mad cow disease is the result of a violation of nature and the genetically modified maize that we debated here yesterday is also a violation . Likewise , the continued production of nuclear waste by leading Community countries for dumping in various regions of the Community and elsewhere is a violation of nature .
And , furthermore , Madam President , we will be voting for it because on certain points it is critical of Greek policy in this area and - even though one may have certain reservations in that regard - we consider such criticism to be very useful for my country .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let us take an inclusive political view of this matter , rather than a divisive legal one .
It is a question of the equality of freedom of all people as living beings .
We breathe the same air , we drink the same water - as Antiphon the Sophist said , who first expressed the idea of equality of freedom .
The thinkers of the Enlightenment revived this concept , and it was never applied merely to abstract legal entities or property-owners , but to real , physical , historical , social living beings .
In other words , the distinctions that are being made here are artificial .
They were invented subsequently .
We need to develop a human and civil rights policy like the one which Etienne Balibar has set out repeatedly in his most recent publications .
Let us all finally recognize the fact that human and civil rights policy represents a key element of Europe 's heritage that is essential to building a Europe which seeks to make its own specific , positive and constructive contribution to the development of human civilization !
Madam President , a report calling for respect for human rights should really be quite straightforward .
If only because of its scope , however , the report which is now before the House does not really lend itself to detailed discussion .
While expressing a general criticism of the report 's unclear definition of human rights and echoing some of the points which have already been made , I should therefore like to focus on a particular paragraph - paragraph 146 , understandably enough - which attacks Austria 's legislation on the age of consent for homosexual relations .
Leaving aside considerations of international law , I see this as an unwarranted interference in Austria 's jurisdiction .
Perhaps we Austrians are rather sensitive to German proposals in this area .
Furthermore , this criticism is not justified by the facts .
After long and controversial deliberations on the criminal law amendment bill of 1996 , after organizing hearings of experts and taking all the arguments into account , the Austrian Parliament reached the conclusion that the protection of minors was of paramount importance .
In response to the claim in paragraph 54 that the failure to comply with the commitment to freedom of establishment has caused citizens to lose confidence in the European institutions , I would suggest to the House that the public 's impression that those up in Brussels , as it is always called , simply wish to brush aside democratically established laws is leading to a far greater loss of confidence .
That is the public 's real concern .
And it casts doubt on the professed commitment to subsidiarity .
I was a criminal judge for many years , and I am also the father of a fourteen-year-old boy .
Speaking from both points of view , I wish to say that I firmly believe that the repeated claim that a homosexual orientation is genetically pre-programmed is not exclusively true .
Anyone who has one in their family will know how easily influenced , how immature , young men of that age are .
The report 's call for tolerance for homosexuals is not called into question ; but tolerance must include understanding for those who wish to protect their sons while they are growing up .
Madam President , I congratulate Mrs Roth on an excellent report and I am very sad that the right and the centre-right have taken the attitude which they seem to have taken a couple of years ago with the Newman report .
We on the progressive side of this House understand individual rights collectively acquired .
Women would not have got the vote had there not been collective action with the Suffragette movement .
Trade unions would never have been recognized had people not combined together to ensure their recognition .
Therefore our experience is different from that of the right and that is why we consider that collective rights are as important as individual ones although we recognize and understand the latter in terms of this report .
Can I , although Mr Nassauer is not here , remind him that the title of this report is in fact human rights in the European Union not human rights in the entire world .
Having said that I believe that individual rights can be acquired collectively , can I point out the relevance of paragraphs 53-59 which concern the right to free movement for European Union citizens ?
I believe that the Schengen agreement does not obviate the duty of Member States to comply with Article 7a of the Treaty , but it is being used in that way , and the fact that a number of states have concluded the Schengen agreement does not enhance the fundamental right of citizens to move freely within the European Union .
This is greatly to be regretted since only a limited number of states have signed the Schengen Agreement and therefore the individual right of free movement is not guaranteed even collectively .
That is the reason why I endorse paragraphs 53 to 59 and I say that free movement is a human right essential not only for the citizen but for the working of the European Union .
Madam President , Europe wishes to place itself on a pedestal as an international guarantor of democracy around the world , but without having put its own house in order .
Its statements and declarations , which undoubtedly have a basis in democracy , are going to waste , as are its criticisms , condemnations , reproaches , concerns , indignation , observations and comments , because of the sanctimonious exhortations which it never fails to utter when commenting on the major social tensions which are brought to our notice every day by the diligence of the press agencies .
Whenever social tension erupts in Europe - or elsewhere in the world - it is now customary to accuse the peoples of the EU of selfishness , and their great sacrifices , their tremendous commitment to their work , are never recognized .
All too often , ordinary Union citizens have to shoulder the responsibilities of governments and wealthy capitalists .
The rapporteur mentions a number of sacrosanct rights and principles which the Union cannot overlook , not least because it needs to claim the role of international guarantor of human rights in order to draw a veil over the real , anti-democratic Europe of big business .
The report makes no reference to the Europe of workers and small businesses , whose rights are obstructed every day by infuriating laws . It does not refer to the right to self-determination of the peoples of the Union , nor to the daily injustices suffered by the inhabitants of Sardinia , Corsica , Padania , Ireland , Scotland and so many other peoples whose calls for freedom are systematically ignored and dismissed as selfish .
Mr President , my congratulations to Mrs Roth .
Many of us in this Parliament deal on a regular basis with human rights in the world .
We talk about forced labour and child labour in various parts of Asia and we condemn them , quite rightly so .
Now today , while we concentrate our focus on human rights in Europe I would urge you to look at one section of our society in Europe for whom the situation is no better than anywhere else in the world : I am talking here about women .
We , that is 50 % of us , do not have the right to walk the streets in safety .
Furthermore , the existence of poverty and unemployment throughout the Union constitute continuing breaches of fundamental human rights .
Here I would urge support for the establishment of a binding legal instrument laying down minimum guarantees as regards income , social protection , medical treatment and housing , and particular attention must be devoted to the needs of elderly people .
Finally , I want to endorse the call that is made in the report for Member States to recognize the rights and needs of the travelling community , in particular their accommodation needs , their medical needs and indeed their education needs .
Until we recognize these particular rights we do not have the moral authority to criticize others elsewhere in the world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I was not surprised to hear Mr Dell 'Alba ask , as a point of order at the beginning of this debate , to what extent the Commission should be involved in the discussions , given that it has no formal powers in the field of human rights in the Union .
I quite understand why he made this point , but I am nevertheless grateful to have had the chance to listen to the various speeches , which have shown how incredibly complicated this issue is , and how difficult it is to reach a consensus on the human rights situation in the Union .
It is especially difficult to define what human rights actually are , and to agree on whether certain things are simply desirable , or are really needed to correct abuses of the fundamental rights and freedoms set out in international conventions .
The Commission entirely understands that this is a very difficult distinction to make , but at the same time I would point out that when working with the Member States ' governments on external policy matters , including the Union 's external human rights policy , we in the Commission set great store by the fact that we can be part of an internal debate which is , as we see it , primarily designed to promote self-criticism and self-examination within the Union , so as to increase the credibility of our external human rights policy .
It does sometimes happen in the international arena that we are accused of criticizing various countries for failing to respect human rights while the situation in our own countries still leaves a good deal to be desired .
So I think that this kind of debate , which shows the world outside that we are prepared to take a critical look at ourselves within the Union , can have a very positive effect .
In view of the limited time available , I should like to give a few examples of what the Commission is doing to help to protect fundamental rights and freedoms within the Union .
Take , for example , an extremely important topic which a number of speakers referred to this morning : equal treatment for men and women .
This is a fundamental legal principle and also , in our view , an integral part of democratic citizenship , which is one of the reasons why the Commission has put forward a number of proposals on the subject in the report which it is currently preparing for the Intergovernmental Conference , including a recommendation that the principle of equal treatment should be included among the tasks of the Union .
There is also a proposal to introduce a new non-discrimination article banning sex discrimination , since equality is a basic right .
The Commission has also made a number of statements and recommendations about equal pay for work of equal value , and equal treatment in terms of work and occupation .
I would also mention the role which the Commission has played in combating racism and xenophobia .
Was it not the Commission which proposed that 1997 should be declared the European Year Against Racism ?
We see this as a milestone for the European Union , in that it was the first time that the European institutions agreed to take practical measures to combat racism from within the Union 's existing institutional framework .
In our opinion , this sent out a very positive signal .
Of course , the European Year Against Racism is only part of our overall strategy for combating racism , and real progress has been made on this since the Cannes summit .
I am hopeful that a European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia will be set up in the not too distant future .
Finally , the Commission has stated in its report for the Intergovernmental Conference that the Conference should include provisions in the Treaty banning any form of discrimination and condemning racism and xenophobia .
A further point is that the elements of social security that are specifically designed to prevent poverty and marginalization are naturally to remain the responsibility of the Member States .
Since the 1970s , various initiatives have been launched to help to combat poverty and social exclusion .
Another important subject is the fight against the trade in humans , both adults and children , and the sexual exploitation of children .
On 26 January 1997 , the Council approved joint action to criminalize certain types of conduct and to improve judicial cooperation in this field .
The types of conduct covered include the exploitation of children for the purpose of producing , selling , distributing or otherwise trading in or possessing illegal material .

In short , the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms are indeed tasks which are primarily the responsibility of the Member States , but they are also tasks which affect the whole of the international community , and any measures taken will be all the more effective if all the members of the international community , every organization and every institution , including those of the Union , join forces to promote them .
I should like to end by thanking Mrs Roth for her report , and in particular for the tremendous efforts she has made to produce a report again this year , even if a consensus has yet to be reached on it .
I hope that the foundations have once again been laid for a further constructive debate on this extremely important subject next year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia
The next item is the report ( A4-0110 / 97 ) by Mr Ford , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0615 - C4-0070 / 97-96 / 0298 ( CNS ) ) establishing a European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia .
Mr President , I have just spoken to Mr Caccavale .
The report is now available in all languages .
However , I have tabled an amendment which is not yet available so I accept the ruling that we will vote tomorrow , even though that will cause me some difficulty .
I have been speaking for almost twelve years now on the subject of racism and fascism , xenophobia and antisemitism .
I chaired a Committee of Inquiry from 1984 to 1986 on the growth of racism and fascism in Europe .
I was rapporteur for a second Committee of Inquiry between 1989 and 1990 on Racism and Xenophobia .
I have spoken in a multitude of urgency debates on issues ranging from the bombing of trains in Italy by right-wing terrorists through to the horrors of the desecration of the Jewish cemetery in Carpentras .
In addition I participated in the annual debates on racism on a number of occasions .
However , today is a first .
For the first time we are actually talking about a technical report from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs with an opinion from the Committee on Budgets about a solid proposal to address the issue of racism and xenophobia .
This is a report on a proposal for a Council Regulation for the establishment of a European monitoring centre for racism and xenophobia .
The origins of this proposal from the Council lie with the late François Mitterrand and Helmut Kohl who , at the Corfu Summit in June 1994 , established a consultative committee including the representatives of fifteen Member States plus the Commission , the Council of Europe and Mr Oostlander and myself from Parliament , to look at the problems of tackling racism and xenophobia .
Over a series of four reports that outlined the need for such a centre , having been asked by the European Councils in Cannes and Madrid to do such work , the Council , following the report of the consultative committee , agreed in principle and asked for further elaboration .
This was done and a full proposal was presented to the European Council in Florence .
The study was approved and the consultative committee instructed to continue its work .
At the Dublin European Council it was reiterated that the Council wanted to press ahead and to see the launch of such a centre at the Amsterdam European Council .
In the European Parliament , we are clearly completely in support of the principle of such a monitoring centre and have demonstrated that in a series of resolutions .
However , we have a few reservations and observations .
Firstly , the European Parliament would like to see not just a counting-house producing an annual , dull , desiccated report consisting of rows of numbers listing racial incidents or even racial attacks .
What we want is an institution capable of drawing up and drawing together local , regional , national and international resources already available all around the European Union and outside , using especially the expertise of the Council of Europe which , very successfully , ran its ' all different , all equal ' campaign last year .
We want to draw those together to produce evidence of the best practical means of preventing and combating racism and xenophobia and producing lists of recommendations for local , regional and national governments and also for Parliament , Commission and Council .
That explains the amendments we have tabled - Nos 1 to 7 .
I would bring Amendment No 6 ( g ) especially to your attention .
This calls for the establishment and coordination of a European racism and xenophobia information network that draws together specialist centres at regional , national and international level to enable common criteria and comparable data to be established .
I would also mention Amendment No 6 ( e ) , that the centre formulate conclusions and recommendations for the Community and its Member States primarily at the request of the European Parliament , the Council or the Commission .
Amendment No 7 calls for information and data to be collected , in particular on preventative measures and means of action .
There is also a new amendment tabled by Mr Oostlander asking us to look at the issue of religious freedom and racism , in particular related to the issue of Islamophobia .
Amendment No 14 requests that we have a representative on the management board from the European Parliament , not a Member but someone appointed on behalf of the European Parliament .
Amendment No 17 deals with the issues of staffing .
In our amendments we deal with two points .
One , that the staff should be recruited with no discrimination on the basis of nationality , race , religion or colour .
Clearly it would be absurd to have an antiracist observatory that discriminated in its staff recruitment .
But more importantly in one sense , we ask that the staff be recruited mainly on temporary fixed-term contracts or on secondment .
We want this to be a clearing house , the centre of a network of expertise that is drawn from those people already involved .
We want to avoid the problems of bureaucratic capture .
Amendment No 18 ( c ) mentions the possibility of outside sources of funding .
Someone asked me where this is coming from .
One might well look towards Switzerland where the Swiss Government has recently set up a fund to fight racism and to engage in research on the issues of racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism .
There are a number of other amendments from the Committee on Budgets .
I agree with them and so does the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
Mr Tappin , draftsman of the opinion , will explain those in more detail .
However , there is one technical point I should like to make .
Amendment No 18 , the last part of 4 ( c ) , should go to Amendment No 18 , Article 13 , new 1 ( a ) .
This is quite important .
It says that without prejudice to the provisions set out below , the principles and provisions governing the revenue and expenditure of the Community shall be applicable .
That should apply across the board .
My last point is that 1997 is the Year against Racism .
It was meant to be a beginning , not an end .
It will be a severe disappointment to the 12 to 14 million third country nationals and the four million black Europeans if this was to be an end .
There are proposals for Treaty changes to include racism but even if those are agreed in June , it will take several years for legislation to be established .
The observatory is symbolic of progress .
One Member State has indicated that it has problems with Article 235 although the Drugs and Health and Safety Agencies were both set up on that basis .
We believe that our amendments will allow the monitoring of racial harassment , the other problem that Member State has , and my own party believes there will be no fundamental problem in approving such an institution , should there be a change of government on 1 May in the United Kingdom .
I look forward to Parliament adopting this report leading to the establishment of such an observatory at the European Council in Amsterdam in July .
Mr President , Parliament has a long history of supporting the fight against racism .
As colleagues will be aware , last year the Committee on Budgets supported the raising of the budget line to ECU 8m from the ECU 4.7m proposed by the Commission .
Mr Ford has gone into great detail on the reasons why this agency should be set up .
We fully support this in the Budget Committee .
I will just address myself to a couple of points that Mr Ford has taken on board but really are to do with the Commission itself .
As regards the budgetary aspects of this agency , our concerns remain the same as they are with other agencies .
Amendments have been put forward to ensure that it operates according to harmonized regulations including the right of Parliament to give discharge .
We are not prepared , from the Budget Committee or from a Parliament perspective , to have the management board giving discharge .
I wish the Commission would accept this argument without our having to go through this same process every time .
We also seek greater involvement on the part of Parliament and have asked for a representative , nominated by Parliament , to sit on the management committee .
That has now been agreed by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
The next question is the question of own resources .
We argue that the agency should be set up in line with Article 142 of the Financial Regulation and that own resources should be treated as Community resources and shown as such within the budget itself .
However , as Mr Ford has indicated , there may be additional , ad hoc resources available to this agency .
All that we ask is that the staffing arrangements and work programme for those additional resources are funded and kept separate from the budget lines .
As far as the future is concerned , when the organization comes on line , we would like to see our budget line B34114 reduced in a concomitant way .
But the Budget Committee supports the establishment of this agency within the general lines and regulations we have set out for all other agencies .
We support Mr Ford in his proposals .
Mr President , the arrival in the House of right-wing extremists in 1984 marked the start of a series of activities designed to combat racism and xenophobia .
With the Commission and the Council , we have covered this extremely important aspect of European integration - the prevention of another Holocaust and the right to equal treatment of anyone lawfully resident in the territory of the Union - in resolutions , annual debates and the work of the important advisory committee set up under Mr Kahn .
My group sincerely hopes that this year , in which the IGC reaches its conclusion , will also see the implementation of three of the Commission 's recommendations .
Firstly , the inclusion of an article on non-discrimination in the Treaty of Amsterdam ; secondly , a code of conduct for political parties to prevent normally reputable parties from peddling extreme right-wing views for electoral reasons ; and , thirdly , a Monitoring Centre for Racism , which is the subject of this morning 's debate .
We also hope that the Major government will abandon its opposition to the Monitoring Centre , because its argument that there is no legal basis for it is both weak and irresponsible .
With a little creativity , we could find other articles as well as Article 235 to use as a legal basis , such as Article 6 , which prohibits discrimination on the grounds of nationality , or Article 49 on the free movement of workers , Article 160 on education and , in particular , Article 213 on carrying out checks .
A combination of Articles 213 and 235 would mean that we could make the earliest possible start and send out a very important signal , because we must do everything we can to make it clear that we take our fight against racism , anti-Semitism and xenophobia very seriously .
Mr President , the setting-up of the Monitoring Centre is really the crowning glory for the Kahn Committee on racism and xenophobia , which has done its best to include the input from the European Parliament in its final proposals .

The rapporteur , Mr Ford , and I have tried to ensure that the House 's ideas were reflected , and I think it was a good thing that we tried to include as many of the initiatives put forward in the Kahn Committee as possible , and to refer to some of the European Union 's existing projects and programmes , of which there are many in the social affairs , education and cultural sectors .
It is perfectly possible to include racism and xenophobia as part of these , as we have already done with the subject of equal treatment for men and women , which is now automatically taken into account in programmes intended to benefit the people of Europe .


Combating racism and xenophobia is not something that can be done in isolation , but must form part of an integrated approach .
There were a good many points in the Commission 's proposal to which our committee - and indeed my group - objected , but we worked hard in the Committee on Civil Liberties with the rapporteur and Members from various other parties , and managed to produce an excellent result without any polarization .
I do not believe in polarization , to hark back to the previous debate .
What struck us as strange was that the Commission proposed an EU organization with the independent nature of an NGO .
This is clearly a feature of what we refer to as agencies , and it may therefore be that the idea of an agency is not such a good one , since it will mean that there is , by definition , little parliamentary control .
We should like the Commission to have a great deal more responsibility and to have political control over what happens to the Monitoring Centre , and we have tabled amendments to this effect .
We should also like the Monitoring Centre to give priority to questions from Parliament and the Commission .
We need to be able to monitor the budget , rather than just rubber-stamping whatever the Management Board puts in front of us , and the Committee on Budgets has our support on that point .
It is in fact unfortunate that the Management Board is organized as if it were a government consultation body .
This undermines the independence of the Centre itself , and we are doing everything we can to have that changed .
We would emphasize that the Centre should be there to serve the research institutes .
It has an enormous budget of ECU 6 million , which has already worried some organizations , such as United .
We think that six million is actually about right , but it must be put to maximum effect , and should therefore be used to help to encourage and promote research in existing research institutes .
We should aim to secure the greatest possible benefit from it , especially given the importance of fighting racism .
This is why we have proposed that the Centre should employ people from the network on secondment or on temporary contracts , so that there is a constant flow of ideas in both directions .
Coordination , harmonization and promotion will be the main functions of the Monitoring Centre , and we hope that it is very successful in helping to combat racism and xenophobia .
Mr President , all instances of racism and xenophobia , both old and new , are utterly contemptible , as we all agree .
But I believe that it is wrong - as has happened once again this morning - to point the finger at one part of the political spectrum , in this case the extreme right , not so much because the extreme right does not sometimes show its racist and xenophobic colours , but because I believe that this way of focusing the debate will encourage , not prevent , racism and xenophobia : the more the finger is pointed at them , the more this phenomenon will flourish underground .
I do believe that the idea of the observatory is justified in theory , but in practice it still strikes me as somewhat vague .
The reason I say so is that it unfortunately remains a dialectical exercise - which will cost the European taxpayer between ECU 6 and 7 million , I would point out - the aims of which have been clearly set out in the report by Mr Ford , whom we would compliment on his work : research , ad hoc working groups , annual reports , conclusions and recommendations , meetings of experts , debates , round tables , other similar meetings , and so on and so forth .
In short , it all seems to me to be a theoretical exercise which may well often prove pointless .
In my view , the root cause of racism and xenophobia is ignorance , and above all a lack of mutual understanding which generates suspicion and mistrust .
Practical ways must therefore be found of exchanging knowledge and information , especially among young people : that is the most effective way of combating racism and xenophobia .
Mr President , I am sorry to bring a discordant voice to what will probably be a great harmony , but I think that what we are working towards is the inflation of some structures .
In short , this observatory seems to me to be superfluous .
When you know the quality of the initiative of the Council of Europe , of which we here are the hosts , and which does a considerable body of work which has been kept under a wraps when it should have been the concern of our entire continent , all of these elements seem rather puzzling to us .
Indeed the kind of institution chosen , a monitoring centre , is part of a movement which consists of accumulating structures likely to do the same work twice over .
Next , it encourages the relaxation of policy and more precisely of political action , in favour of an observational role , which illustrates well the rather slack consensus with which our Parliament is happy to be quite familiar .
Finally , it presents itself as an alternative to civil action which is being increased in the territory of the Union by various associations and which seems to me to be much more important .
Mr President , this is the umpteenth report on racism or the fight against racism which Mr Ford has thrust under our noses , this time about the setting-up of a European Monitoring Centre for Racism .
This new toy is going to cost the European taxpayer around ECU 6 to 7 million a year , on top of the ECU 8 m we have already wasted this year on the European Year Against Racism .
On the pretext of fighting racism - which may exist as a marginal phenomenon , but has not reached sociologically or politically relevant proportions in any Member State - the taxpayer is having to foot the bill for a centre which is merely designed to gag freedom of expression , along the lines of those that exist already in various Member States .
In my own country , for example , there is already one of these ' propaganda units ' led by a man called Pater Leman , who has quickly earned the nickname of Grand Inquisitor Torquemada .
What it is really about , of course , is not combating racism , which is scarcely of any relevance anyway , but combating freedom of expression and any policy or expression of national or European preference .
Whenever I read the reports by Mr Ford , I am transported to a different age , back to the stifling totalitarian and intolerant atmosphere of the Spanish Inquisition , the book-burnings in Nazi Germany or the Moscow trials .
This may sound exaggerated , but having seen violent demonstrations just last week here in Strasbourg outside a conference organized by a party which won 26 % of the votes in the region , demonstrations that were welcomed and funded by both the State and Europe , I really do not think it is such an exaggeration after all .
Every day , ordinary people in the Member States have to face the true misery of life in so-called multicultural neighbourhoods , terrorized by violent gangs of foreigners like those who totally destroyed the ' Café Local ' in Amsterdam last weekend .
Almost every major city in Europe has a time bomb ticking away , a time bomb of displaced and impoverished people who are presented to us as the ' multicultural society ' .
The House would do better to draw up a report on that instead .
Mr President , in this European Year against Racism , Xenophobia and Anti-Semitism I believe it would be extremely positive if we could get beyond declarations and create a permanent centre working for those three objectives .
Many people are working on these issues in society , and especially in local and regional government which have prime responsibility for problems of arrival and abode - and I mention arrival because that is what is happening in my country - relating to people from third countries .
It is most important for this observatory to provide networking and information exchange facilities , and assistance to those already active in the field .
I do not think the ECU 6 million we are going to devote to it will be much of a burden on the Union budget and if it can also serve the purposes of coordination and raise the alert about racist phenomena , that may even save money and rationalize the use of resources .
That seems to me to be the meaning of the text the rapporteur has put before us and that is why I think it should be supported .
So I only hope the pitfalls in the Council will disappear and the observatory will be created during this European Year against Racism and Xenophobia , in line with the objectives we are expressing here today .
Mr President , the Monitoring Centre is a theoretical instrument for combating racism , but in my view , practical measures are still the most effective ones , such as fighting unemployment , crime and the drugs trade ; establishing a clear and - eventually , I hope - a Community approach to asylum and immigration policy ; and , in particular , promoting education to prevent racism .
I am still not convinced that the Centre is going to be more than just the sum of all the small organizations that are already working to combat racism , and I hope the Commission can give me some kind of assurance on this point .
I certainly do not want to see it turn into just yet another gravy train .
We must not allow this to happen , because we have already seen racism lead to genocide here in our own continent .
The fact is that there is a covert form of racism and discrimination at work in Europe against Islam .
People clearly seem to find it hard to distinguish between Islam and Islamic fundamentalism , and this is precisely what we need to guard against .
Perhaps the Monitoring Centre has a role to play here .
Racism is a complicated issue which causes a great deal of confusion .
Turkey , for example , regards our attitude in relations with it as covert racism , whereas it is actually the logical consequence of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
I was in Geneva last week , and I found out that the UN Commission on Human Rights is still treating the joint opinions delivered by the European Parliament as intergovernmental statements .
If this is what the prospects are for the Monitoring Centre , then we are unlikely to make any progress at all .
Finally , I would point out that an absolute majority will be required in Parliament for the discharge of the budget of the Monitoring Centre .
Mr President , earlier this morning , we discussed human rights in the European Union and the various kinds of human rights violation .
For some Members , that went too far ; for others , not far enough .
The report by Mr Ford which is now before the House deals with racism and xenophobia , and I ask myself whether this kind of human rights violation is the cause of lack of respect for people , or the effect of it .
In today 's society , which is built on a sense of community and tolerance , racism and xenophobia are not marginal phenomena , but are regrettably on the increase .
Society frequently tolerates right-wing , xenophobic slogans without questioning their consequences .
At a time when social security is being undermined by unemployment , poverty and organized crime , these problems are not being blamed on inadequate economic management or government mistakes , but on the immediate environment , which is more tangible and more accessible .
People in our society are no longer viewed as a whole .
Some people are allowed to be here because of their nationality ; and others , whom we call foreigners , are allowed to stay because they have lived here for a long time .
But there are others who have no right of residence , and whom we should like to see removed from our territory as soon as possible . There are many other kinds of unequal treatment .
For example , there are people who have work , and there are people who are not given the opportunity to work , because there is no work for them . But people with different religious beliefs , the elderly , the disabled , and so on are also frequently the victims of discrimination .
1997 is the European Year against Racism , and establishing the European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia this year would not only be symbolic , but would represent a natural addition to existing efforts .
The task of this Centre will not only be to collect and process data , but above all to inform , instruct and raise people 's awareness of the causes and effects of these phenomena .
History has taught us that racism and xenophobia destroy people and cause enormous suffering .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I wish to congratulate Mr Ford and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs on the excellent work they have done , and particularly on the rapidity with which they have dealt with this particular proposal .
I hardly need stress that the Commission and Parliament are completely united in their struggle against the ugly phenomenon of racism and xenophobia and that , on this particular proposal , there are no fundamental differences between us .
It is very appropriate that this matter is being debated here in Strasbourg where , in their demonstrations just two weeks ago , the people showed the repugnance they feel towards this phenomenon .
The setting-up of this observatory underlines the commitment of the Community to defending human rights and , more particularly , to respecting human rights in its legislation and policies .
In order to do this the Community and the Member States must have at their disposal accurate and objective information concerning all the problems associated with racism and xenophobia .
With regard to the specific amendments which are proposed in the report , I am pleased to say that I can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 9 , 10 , 15 , 16 and 19 in full and Amendments Nos 6 and 14 in part .

Those amendments which the Commission cannot accept fall broadly into two groups : the first group are those which change the nature of the Centre or go beyond the original scope of the proposal , and the second group are those which change standard formulae or raise matters of a general interinstitutional nature which would be better dealt with in a different , more general context .
In this respect , I refer in particular to Amendments Nos 13 , 18 , 20 and 21 which concern budgetary matters .
Let me now look in detail at the amendments .
These are the ones I cannot accept : Amendment No 3 misrepresents the role of the Centre when it speaks of it being ' given over to research ' .
Amendment No 5 gives a misleading impression since it overlooks the fact that the Centre will be independent from the Commission .
Amendment No 7 would extend the field of action set out in Article 3 to areas which do not have a specific basis in the Treaty and would , therefore , hinder adoption of the proposal in the Council , where some Member States already have concerns , as has been stated by Mr Ford , about the legal base .
Amendment No 8 cannot be accepted since it is unnecessary : the wording proposed by the Commission is a perfectly standard and adequate formula and the conferring of legal personality is not restricted to application of the Financial Regulation .
Amendment No 11 is unnecessarily restrictive of the Management Board 's autonomy .
Amendment No 12 is , in the Commission 's view , unnecessary .
Amendments Nos 13 , 18 , 20 and 21 concern budgetary matters and , as I have said , raise broader institutional questions .
Here the Commission 's original proposal very closely mirrors the texts establishing the other agencies and it would therefore be inappropriate to diverge from these texts in this particular case .
Finally , Amendment No 17 , relating to recruitment of staff , is not acceptable .
The formulation used in the proposal is perfectly standard and it is not appropriate to change it at this time .
I reiterate again that any differences between us are really minor compared to the large measure of agreement which exists as regards the basic aim of the Centre .
Finally , I wish to thank you once again for the speed with which you have dealt with this particular proposal .
I trust that the Commission 's proposal can now go forward for rapid adoption by the Council , amended , as of course it will be , following Parliament 's opinion .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for all the work he has done with regard to the centre .
In general I welcome the statement he has made with respect to Parliament 's opinion .
The only point I would ask him to look at again on behalf of the Commission is Amendment No 17 .
I understand the necessity , normally , for following formal rules but , as I said in my introduction , it would be rather absurd for us to discriminate against people legally resident in the European Union who did not have the nationality of one of the Member States in recruiting staff for an organization fighting racism .
I realize this would not be standard practice but this is not a standard institution .
So I would ask him to look at this point again .
Lastly , in reply to Mr Vanhecke 's point about book burning .
They may not be burning them in Orange but they are certainly taking them out of the libraries !
Mr President , I have some sympathy there with Mr Ford .
I recognize the point he is making .
If he could try to see it from my perspective , we are trying to put it into the context of the existing system that operates so far as staff recruitment is concerned .
He has made a point and I will consider it .
But he should understand that a certain system already exists and is applied right across the board , and that this would be a change that might not be possible at this time .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner under what circumstances a standard procedure might be changed .
We cannot simply say that once such a procedure exists , it may not be departed from at any time or in any way .
Surely , given the particular nature of this report and the need to make the Centre as effective as possible , we should also be allowed to change the procedure ?
I appreciate the point Mr Oostlander is making .
But you must also try to appreciate that any change would have to go right across the board .
I am prepared to discuss this with Mr Liikanen , my colleague , who is responsible for questions of personnel .
It would not be appropriate I believe to just simply make a change regarding this particular agency without concerning ourselves with its general application right across all of the Union 's operations .
I do however take your point .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Growth , employment and convergence
The next item is the report ( A4-0111 / 97 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission 's Annual Economic Report for 1997 - Growth , employment and convergence on the road to EMU ( COM ( 97 ) 0027 - C4-0078 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , economic growth in the European Union is like the current season : spring has arrived , but it is still cold .
Despite the excellent starting conditions , business activity is sluggish and not taking off .
The horse has been led to water , but it will not drink .
However , the annual economic report does not reflect this everyday reality in the European Union .
Its tone is too bright and too optimistic , despite the greater realism it shows in comparison with last year , and despite the new attitude to the impact of globalization and technological progress and the role of monetary policy .
Unfortunately , the confidence of economic operators in European growth - and this must be emphasized - remains low .
Only lack of confidence can explain the fact that , despite high company profits , lower interest rates and reduced company taxes , investment has failed to materialize , especially in the private sector . And it is not encouraging that the rate of public investment has also fallen , from 3.5 % to less than 2.5 % of GDP .
I would point to the absence - and this is a weakness of European economic policy as a whole - of clear objectives and sound and reliable decisions in European economic and financial policy .
The Member States have been working with the so-called broad guidelines of economic policy for over two years , without managing to develop concerted and coordinated economic policies .
This is another explanation for the weakness of European growth .
The Member States are still much too far away from coordinating their modernization and innovation initiatives .
The Union will continue to lose competitiveness and jobs if energies are not focused in this area , and if the Community instruments for financing this process of modernization , this innovation revolution , are not finally mobilized .
We must promote a spirit of innovation , strong investment and employment in the European Union .
This requires greater action at Community level .
Then the annual economic report will certainly also show some different results .
Hopefully , the upturn is now gathering pace and unemployment will finally be reduced .
Also important , however , is a different policy approach , which makes it clear that employment policy has to be integrated into virtually all other policies - from structural , regional , innovation and industrial policies to economic , financial and wage policy .
Supply-side conditions in the European Union can certainly be improved - from the easing of cumbersome authorization procedures to the urgently needed reduction of taxation on the labour factor .
It is more important , however , to overcome the weakness of investment , to stimulate domestic demand within the European Union and to boost consumer purchasing power .
We know that anti-cyclical programmes carried out at national level have little effect .
Given that up to two thirds of aggregate demand in Europe comes from outside , demand stimuli that are applied only at regional or national level will obviously peter out .
Hence the need to formulate a European economic policy worthy of the name .
With the introduction of a single currency for a single market covering 90 % of EU production , it will clearly be possible to pursue effective demand management .
The lack of confidence of economic operators is an obstacle to growth and investment .
Ultimately , it is not only private investors who are holding back .
It also has to be said that the investment that is being made is aimed at improving productivity rather than expanding capacity , and is therefore not creating jobs .
The annual economic report fails to highlight this weakness .
It is absolutely scandalous that , although an employment chapter is being drawn up at the Intergovernmental Conference , the European employment pact is still far from being realized . Parliament sees this annual economic report as a unique opportunity to promote the implementation of the decisions of the European summits from Essen to Dublin , not least as regards the employment pact .
Economic development in the European Union requires the following policy approach . First , it must be made clear once and for all that monetary union will be introduced .
The constant creation of uncertainty by the political élites among the public and the markets is counterproductive for investment .
Europe 's civil war over monetary union is an obstacle to increasing the EU 's economic power .
Secondly , the Community must have an appropriate and balanced policy mix , since it is increasingly difficult to pursue exclusively national policies successfully within the world economy .
There is a need for financial policies which bolster rather than undermine the fragile economic structures .
Thirdly , budget consolidation must continue , but it must be organized and implemented in the medium term in such a way as to ensure that it does not cause additional macroeconomic problems , but makes it possible to continue to pursue sound investment policies .
The implementation of the Delors White Paper has so far foundered , though not because of Parliament 's decisions .
Parliament has therefore rightly continued to point to the need to mobilize the Community financial instruments .
Why should ECU 10 billion a year not be innovatively employed in EU infrastructure modernization programmes , via the European Investment Bank ?
It is high time for this to happen .
Since the entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty , the European Parliament has regarded the broad guidelines of economic policy as a means to implement the provisions of Article 103 and overcome the difficulties of economic and monetary union .
To date , no Council presidency has been able to contribute to surmounting those difficulties , because the Member States have always agreed on the lowest common political denominator .
Perhaps this critical analysis of the annual economic report will help to bring about concerted political action and ensure that a market economy underpinned by a socially responsible economic order and job-creating growth finally sees the light of day in the European Union .
Without the productivity factor that is the welfare state , there can be no stable economy , and the European Union is therefore faced with a creative mission , which it must acknowledge .
Mr President , the European Commission 's Annual Economic Report for 1997 comes at a crucial time in the process of integration that has been taking place on the continent since the signing of the Treaty of Rome , and we have just celebrated its fortieth anniversary .
The signatories of that historic treaty could surely never have imagined that 40 years later the problem of unemployment would be the most serious threat to their project for achieving a united , prosperous and mutually supportive Europe .
Everything the Community institutions are currently doing is dominated by the prospect of economic and monetary union .
This new step in the deepening of integration will undoubtedly have positive consequences for resolving the unemployment problem .
So I think this Parliament has a responsibility to collaborate as effectively as possible to achieve monetary union of as many countries as possible under the terms of the treaty .
The Commission 's report is essentially positive , because it highlights the effort being made by the Member States to keep that historic appointment .
For instance , my own country , Spain , which has the highest rate of unemployment in the European Union , hopes to demonstrate that only by adopting strict economic measures - aided by the exemplary social agreement on reform of the labour market which is reaching its culmination - can we be optimistic and confident of a hopeful future for jobseekers .
There are certain points in the report approved by the Committee on Economic Affairs which my group finds hard to support , but I want to thank Mrs Randzio-Plath for her willingness to incorporate some of our committee 's conclusions into her report .
However , given that I am speaking as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Social Affairs , my task is to analyse the report from the unemployment angle .
Investment in infrastructure , coordination between the various departments responsible for unemployment problems , the creation of mechanisms of financial assistance to small and medium-sized businesses , the elimination of administrative and bureaucratic burdens , the exploitation of new sources of employment in sectors like environment , leisure , culture and the third age , the incorporation into the treaty of a new chapter on employment , with a greater involvement of Parliament in the planning and development of employment policy , and the new formulae to combat unemployment proposed in the Commission 's report represent many opportunities for action , so we should not resign ourselves .
But we must act with the urgency that the problem demands .
The Commission 's Annual Economic Report is a good document on the whole and should help us , all of us who have any responsibility , try to change the scenario it depicts of weak job creation over the next few years .
European integration has achieved the longest period of peace between the countries concerned , but it runs the risk of being held liable for unemployment if we do not succeed in defeating this problem together .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I would like to thank Mrs Randzio-Plath for an excellent report and we certainly will be supporting her report when we vote on it today .
I want to address my points to the European Commission , because we have to look at the annual economic report and ask ourselves why it commands such little attention in the press and the media , and in the debate that goes on within the European Union , if you compare it to the OECD report .
That report is reported much more widely in the financial press and is debated in the Member States .
There are three reasons why the annual economic report of the European Union seems to have such a low profile .
Firstly it deals largely with the issue of fiscal and monetary policy .
It is too narrow in scope .
It does not deal with the broad structural policies which balance fiscal and monetary policy .
It does not deal in detail with issues related to investment , research and development , training and education .
What we would like to see from the Commission in next year 's annual report is a proper balance between these issues .
We need to see all of the economic activities of the European Union analyzed more comprehensively .
Secondly , Commissioner , on growth and employment ; we all know , and have debated many times in this House and within our committee , that we have inadequate growth in the European Union and excessive levels of unemployment .
Yet your report largely concentrates on the issues of inflation and interest rate policy which of course are important but in themselves are not the only issues of concern .
What about investment levels ?
I know from talking to your own economists in DG II that they are very concerned about the inadequate levels of investment within the European Union .
We have an investment rate of only 19 % of GDP in Europe today .
We need an investment rate of 25 % if we are going to boost the growth potential and growth opportunity of the European Union so that we can create jobs .
We need to say more in the future about this issue .
Of course the third reason why this report is largely disregarded by the people who debate economic policy in Europe is that it is seen as subjective ; it is not seen as objective .
It is seen as largely a theoretical exercise that is now conducted by the European Commission .
We must recognize that this is the E in EMU , it is the economic aspect of EMU and unless we can give the economic aspects of EMU real resonance in the European Union people will believe it is a monetary union only .
That is why I would like to propose to you , Commissioner , that for the 1998 report we should have proper consultation with all the economic players within the European Union and that your own economists should speak to independent experts as they do in Germany and the United States and the OECD .
By doing that we will get a proper debate in the European Union on economic policy instead of the rather sterile debate we have today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for Parliament , the annual economic report represents an important basis for the discussion of the employment situation that will continue over the course of the year .
In the debate in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we were able to see that the realistic optimism which characterizes this report is shared by the majority of members of the committee .
This realistic optimism was also apparent at the Council 's deliberations in Noordwijk , where , firstly , the timetable for the introduction of monetary union was confirmed ; secondly , the relationship between the countries which take part in EMU from the outset and those which join later was clarified in an agreement on the European Monetary System , and its continuation in a modified form ; and , thirdly , agreement was reached on the stability pact .
As chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , however , I wish to stress that the discussion of the stability pact has not finished , that Parliament will be holding a second reading on this subject , and that we are expecting Parliament 's views - and we shall do our best to conclude our debate by the middle of this year - to be taken into account in the final deliberations .
Now to the problems .
We can see that export trends are positive , but that , as the rapporteur has said , domestic demand still leaves a good deal to be desired .
We note that investment is weak , even though the basic conditions for the economy are extremely positive , and that it is essential to boost confidence .
In discussions with economists and investors , I repeatedly observe that confidence in the prospect of clear economic growth is still lacking in many EU countries .
Then there is the totally unsatisfactory employment situation . We are convinced that unemployment is a structural problem , and that the forecast growth rate of 2.3 % will not be adequate to resolve it .
Let me comment on some of the important points raised in this debate .
Firstly , there is the question of having to economize because of Maastricht .
It is widely said that the Maastricht Treaty and monetary union require us to economize .
It must be said , however , that we would have to economize with or without the Maastricht Treaty and monetary union , because total debt in the European Community is far too high and interest charges account for 20 to 30 % of our budgets , on average .
This makes it clear that we are losing our room for manoeuvre and our competitiveness , and that we must continue down the road of budget consolidation .
A second issue addressed in Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report is that of the leeway in assessing budget deficits and government debt .
This is a question that will undoubtedly occupy us in the coming months , and we do need clarification in this context .
I would point out that a number of preliminary decisions have already been taken which indicate that the leeway for assessment will be used responsibly .
For instance , the Maastricht Treaty provides that the decision on which Member States participate in the first wave of EMU on 1 January 1999 may be taken on the basis of either estimates or hard figures .
We have now learnt that it has since been decided that this decision will be taken on the basis of hard figures .
A number of other decisions on these lines have also been taken , and I presume that on 23 April , when the Commission presents its assessment of the figures for 1996 , Parliament will have the opportunity - in the debate which I assume will take place before the press conference - to request further clarification on this matter .
Mr President , our regular examination of the economic report looks at how the European Union is preparing for the landmark events in its future .
It is our duty every year , when discussing it , to stop and reflect on what has been done over the past twelve months to create genuine economic cohesion among the Member States .
If this issue were to be tackled properly , we would in fact see improvements in the Community in terms of the three main areas covered in the report : growth , convergence towards monetary union and unemployment .
However , the citizens of Europe , and in particular industrialists - large and small - still cannot see any significant , practical results in these three areas , which are so crucial to the economic future of Europe .
The most glaring example of the Community institutions ' unsuccessful efforts is their inability to solve the problem of unemployment , which is still the greatest of all those confronting the individual Member States and the Union as a whole .
And if we fail on the economic front , those failings are bound to have repercussions in the social sector .
Excuses can be found if we are incapable of forming a European military corps to help solve the conflicts in former Yugoslavia , but there can be no justification for neglecting to help businesses stay competitive in the market , to grow , develop and hence create new jobs .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has tabled a resolution which , while on the one hand commending the Commission 's work , calls on the other for direct , immediate action to revitalize the labour market .
The solution lies principally with small and medium-sized enterprises .
Helping them grow also means making their job more straightforward and less bureaucratic , relieving them of excessive taxation and improving the image of business people so that they will serve as an example and stimulus to young people , who may otherwise be attracted by easier options leading inevitably to unemployment .
Finally , there is one instrument which is both a means and an end when it comes to a successful Community-wide economy : the single currency .
Thanks to the euro , the citizens of Europe will discover , as consumers , that they are living in a large internal market where they can purchase , study and travel in fifteen different countries with just one currency .
Thanks to the euro , industrialists - especially in small and medium-sized firms - will be able to offer their products or services to a market of 370 million consumers .
And finally , once the obvious teething troubles have been overcome , the euro will be what compels all the Community institutions and the Member States to think in European terms .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , analysis of the Annual Report for 1997 presented by the European Commission is particularly interesting in a key year for achieving the two objectives of economic and monetary union and the euro .
In the process of economic convergence the economies of the European Union are developing extremely well in terms of inflation rates , interest rates and monetary stability .
The difficulties lie in attaining the targets for reducing debt and public deficits , because , in addition to essential budgetary austerity , it is crucial to meet the forecasts for economic growth , which are the most important indicators - in my view - at this time .
We share the concern expressed in the report on the need to pay special attention to the most serious social problem in the European Union : unemployment .
The high rate of unemployment is significantly limiting the Union 's options , and that means we must concentrate on overcoming the grave deficiencies and inflexibilities which are having a negative affect on the productive structure of the European Union . As Mrs Randzio-Plath says in her report , this requires further liberalization of key sectors , more intense application of research and development programmes , deepening of the European internal market and implementation of the Delors White Paper proposals - which are unfortunately blocked by the Council .
I just want to stress that we stand more firmly by our position on the achievement of the European single market and the elimination of inflexibility , than on certain rather interventionist aspects of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report , so we will support the amendments that accord with our position and give our overall support to the report on the Annual Economic Report for 1997 .
It is a pleasure to begin by heartily agreeing with my colleague , Mrs Randzio-Plath who reiterated and stressed the concern about over-optimistic ideas becoming the officially accepted norm .
In our opinion this optimism reflects an intention and an attempt to create a climate conducive to an economic policy strategy which are in no way worthy of the holy water contained in today 's analyses , and similarly cannot , if they are followed , bear out the optimistic tone of the forecasts for the future .
We are aware that confidence is needed to enable the forecasts , as a factor in economic trends , to help to improve the short and medium-term situation , but we do not accept that this strategy and these policies should still be pursued on the basis of a misrepresentation of the facts .
We also note , on the other hand that the report before us clearly lacks an all-round approach taking appropriate account of the essential link between supply and demand , the role of public investment and the effect of keeping too tight a rein on public finances , thus immobilizing this public investment , which is after all essential .
This aspect seems to us to be all the more important in view of the state of the productive economy and , above all , of the social situation caused by the policies elected as regards supply and by conflict and dissension over working and social conditions , which also often means that forecasts are not met .
We therefore think we should once again condemn the insistence upon and speeding up of economic strategies and policies which led to these situations , since it is clear that they could not improve trends before making them worse .
It almost goes without saying that in our view to depict the single currency as a great objective or great national and European scheme , or the panacea for all the economic and social ills , is to create fatal conditions for a fresh wave of frustration - the Chechini announcement , which was not pursued ; Maastricht was cracked up to be the opposite of what it turned out to be , the White Paper on Competition , Employment and Growth did not prevent the employment rate from continuing to rise , cure the lack of or weakness in growth or increase competition .
We should like to draw attention to one new point in the Commission report before us - the emphasis placed on the question of the wage spread based on the example of the United States and some mythical downward flexibility , which we can only regard as an unfortunate reference , since it fails to consider situations such as those in Portugal where the range of wages is comparable to that in the United States but where such downward flexibility would exacerbate social inequality which is already on the limit of what is acceptable , if not for the sake of the economy then from the social aspect .
We urgently need to give consideration to cutting through the unfounded optimism , the lack of a global economybased approach , disregard for the social consequences of economic choiced made and the retention and stepping up of undeniably negative aspects .
There is no desire to moderate the strategy and economic policies because they serve certain interests and financial groups .
We understand that , but that only makes it more essential for us to assert more strongly and more doggedly that there are other interests and groups to be supported , other social situations which need to be considered as a matter of priority .
Economic , but not solely economic .
( FI ) Mr President , the Commission 's economic report for this year places far too much stress on growth and the strengthening of supply mechanisms .
Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report deserves praise in particular for pointing out that at present demand is weak in the European Union .
This weakness in demand poses an obstacle to economic recovery and to so-called rational investment .
In her report , Mrs Randzio-Plath puts forward a number of very interesting and original proposals which our group supports .
She points out that investments should not be treated in the same way as consumer spending , which does not give rise to innovations or foster future development .
This is indeed an idea which should be taken into account in the Maastricht criteria .
The overall impact of public spending should be assessed in the light of longterm perspectives .
It is absurd to make savings today in areas which will later give rise to very substantial costs both for us and society .
It could be said that a sound , sensible social policy also represents a sound , sensible investment for the future .
We could also discuss whether the idea of rational investment geared to the future could not be applied to the entire Community budget , which tends to look back into the past .
Half the budget is accounted for by agricultural subsidies .
Could we not see the Union budget as a whole as creating the conditions for future economic development ?
All in all , our position differs from that of Mrs Randzio-Plath only as regards the issue of whether the time has now come to make the transition to the Euro .
Personally I would say that until such time as the thinking behind the Union 's entire economic policy has been clarified , and while that policy offers no genuine prospects for the future , it is a somehwhat brave step .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mrs Randzio-Plath for the positive qualities of her report .
Its quality of diplomacy , first of all , when she delights in the optimistic evaluation of the Executive Committee .
Its quality of content above all , when it comes to supporting the process of monetary union while also asking for forceful measures in favour of growth and employment , after recalling the dramatic weakness of demand within the Union .
As far as we are concerned - and we will perhaps be a little less diplomatic - we are even so a little surprised to hear the Committee in its recent report on the beneficial state of strengthened cooperation recall to mind what it calls the ' workforce potential ' available to the Union , made up not only of 18 million unemployed , but an additional reserve of at least 9 million people who would enter employment if there were jobs .
Really the fear must be that the European Union might not survive the lengthy conservation of such a heritage .
Mrs Randzio-Plath is quite right to say that after winning the confidence of the markets - which has now almost been done - it is now an urgent necessity to win the confidence of consumers , that is , the citizens of Europe by boosting growth and employment .
The question , of course , is knowing how this should be done , especially when monetarism can no longer be used and when , moreover , member countries , bound by the stability agreement , are unable to provide the necessary answers , since circumstances deprive them of any room for manoeuvre .
The answer therefore has to be European .
It is on a Union-wide scale , we think , that a vigorous policy for growth and employment must be defined and put into effect , undoubtedly as a priority by the means suggested by Mrs Randzio-Plath , namely the revival of private and public investment .
The revival of private investment by facilitating the access of small and medium-sized businesses to credit , we have already talked about .
The revival of public investment by developing network policy , the policy of research and development , and in a more general way , by the development of structural policies .
In relation to that we can only be seriously worried by the spirit of stabilisation , even of reduction , of the means of the Union , which is presiding over the preparation of the Union budget for 1998 , over financial prospects in the medium term and the reform of the structural fund .
This is , on the evidence , an economic and political nonsense taking account of the circumstances and the state of our public opinion .
In a more fundamental way , this view runs against the objective of construction of economic , we stress , and monetary Union .
Certainly , the Union must have a stable and secure currency , which is the heritage of all Europeans , protected from any manipulation .
It cannot be deprived of the means of an economic policy which Member States are unable to conduct .
Europe 's economic policy will be inevitably complementary to monetary union .
Let us waste no time , let us not allow a period of vacuity of economic power in Europe to settle in .
On the contrary , let us demand that the Executive Committee prepare for us the ways and means of action for economic government of the Union .
Mr President , last year we had discovered within these walls that the Commission 's Annual Economic Report contained almost nothing on a theme essential for growth and employment , that of investment .
What is more , the few occasions we found it was mentioned , here and there , seemed extraordinarily lax .
This lacuna has been corrected in the current report , but the passages it devotes to the subject show a worrying situation , as we had feared .
Indeed , with the current rates of investment , the pace of growth of the economy of the Community in the future can only be very slow , which is incompatible with the need to create jobs .
We would certainly see a convergence develop in Europe , but it would be a convergence downwards , towards a situation of major chronic unemployment .
The report seems powerless to explain this situation , and all the more so since , in its view , the return on capital at the end of the day would not be too bad .
So why this languor ?
In our opinion , the explanation should be sought in the interaction of investment and employment .
Because of the high cost of our workforce , in a context of active competition and the establishment , directly or indirectly , of a sort of global employment market , investment intended to substitute capital for work with the aim of improving competitiveness has been very high .
But as this evolution itself contributes to unemployment , as well as to the development of a psychological climate of depression , demand has remained low and capacity investments , for their part , have not followed .
In all , global investment is trailing .
We would also like to add that it is not enough to say , as the report does , that the return on our investments is the same today as it was yesterday : you also have to show that it is comparable with the situation in other parts of the world , since the market for capital is now also global .
Now , that is not proven at all , and anyway , the Economic Report does not mention it at all .
Under these conditions , it seems to us that to get Europe out of the crisis of languor in which it is struggling , it is a matter of urgency to change policy and renew our thinking on the radical changes globalisation is imposing upon us , a globalisation which up to now we have not been able to control .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , we have all read the Commission 's Economic Report for 1997 attentively .
It truly is a beautiful text , technically , well-researched , with figures , graphs and tables .
You can smell professionals at work .
It would be nice to feel able to believe what these gentlemen from the Commission say , but in actual fact , it is hard to do so .
It is hard to believe that globalisation is not a cause of unemployment , because of the unfair competition it inflicts upon our businesses , because of the relocations it brings about , because of the downward pressure it exerts upon wages .
It is a factor of social regression .
It is hard to believe that unemployment is a question of figures and flexibility of the labour market .
Furthermore Parliament 's report has the merit of emphasising the pauperisation of our continent and the growth of inequality .
The flexibility of the labour market which you call for is synonymous with job insecurity , with deterioration of working conditions and with social regression .
It is hard to believe that the deflationary policies you are imposing will have a positive effect on growth and employment .
It is hard to understand your dogmatic fixation with budgetary deficit , exchange rates and price stabilisation .
The reconquest and the protection of our internal market should be your priority for producing European goods , in Europe , by Europeans .
Furthermore , the Eurocrats consider imbeciles those who do not think like them and have the cheek to write it , covertly of course , on page 31 of the document .
But there is a vast lacuna in their world of figures and statistics : men are only a variable for adjustment , when they should really be at the centre of all concerns .
What do you think the markets will make of the persistant imbalance of employment when it comes to quoting your single currency , the Euro ?
Is an economy in good health an economy in which public debt is lower than 60 % of GDP , where the budgetary deficit is less than 3 % , or that of full employment ?
Really your open Europe is one of insecurity , social regression , unemployment and poverty .
The policy you are pursuing has only one aim : to reassure markets for the introduction of the single currency , but it is for Europeans that you must construct Europe , and that is what you have forgotten .
The debate on the report by Mrs Randzio-Plath will be adjourned at this point .
We now come to voting time .
Votes
, rapporteur , - ( FI ) Mr President , in my capacity as rapporteur I should like to ask that the vote on my report be held over to tomorrow , Wednesday .
Mr President , to justify this unusual request , may I point out that yesterday we heard the statement by Commissioner Bjerregaard , but unfortunately Commissioner Flynn was not present .
The answers gave rise to some confusion and now Commissioner Flynn and other members of the Commission can provide further explanations .
From Parliament 's point of view , it is very important that we should have this additional information before voting and that is why , Mr President , I should like the vote to be held over to tomorrow .
Mrs Ojala , you are asking that the vote be adjourned pursuant to Rule 131 .
Should we adjourn it until noon tomorrow or until noon on Thursday ?

Mr President , I think that tomorrow , Wednesday , would be a suitable time to hold the vote .
Our committee is meeting today and we will be able to discuss the matter at that meeting - Wednesday is thus entirely satisfactory .
( Parliament approved the adjournment of the vote on the second reading on the common position adopted by the Council until noon on Wednesday )
Mr President , excuse me for interrupting , but it seems to me that you committed an error at the time of the vote .
The amendment was not the subject of a separate vote since it simply replaced the first terms of the phrase by terms which were not the subject of a request for a separate vote anyway .
Proceding as you have done , I think that you are going to make us repeat votes which have already taken place .
You should have put the amendment to the vote first , then have taken a separate vote on the rest of the paragraph .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , when I commented at the beginning about confusion being caused in certain votes by various requests from the political groups I also had this point in mind .
It is not necessary for you yourself to have requested separate votes on the paragraph in question .
Other political groups have requested them , and I am effectively obliged to repeat the voting because that is what the Rules demand .
I cannot decide that a vote is not required . I am obliged formally to do what the groups request .
On paragraph 39
Mr President , I should like to know if paragraph 39 falls because of the adoption of Amendment No 9 .
The services of Parliament do not subscribe to that view , Mr Schulz , but I would like to ask Mrs Roth for her opinion .

Mr President , it was agreed beforehand that paragraph 39 would fall if Amendment No 9 were to be adopted .
I have no objection to accepting your view , even though Parliament 's services see things differently .
We cannot , therefore , miss out paragraph 39 .
On Amendment No 3
Mr President , I have the unfortunate feeling that someone is creating confusion here .
An Amendment No 3 has been tabled .
That amendment must be put to the vote as a whole .
If it is adopted , the original text will be changed ; if it is rejected , the original text must be put to the vote .
However , I have not heard anyone asking for a split vote on Amendment No 3 .
The rapporteur has not requested it .
Above all , the author of the amendment has not requested it .
I would therefore ask you to put Amendment No 3 to the vote as a whole , as requested by the Liberal Group , and then to put the original text to the vote .
Mr Schulz , allow me to say that you cannot always know what others have requested .
Just because you have not requested it yourself does not mean that others have not done so .
The Green Group has requested a split vote item by item .
On Amendment No 15
Mr President , the Swedish and Danish versions of this amendment have been mistranslated .
They say that legal possibilities are being prepared in Sweden and Denmark .
That is incorrect .
These possibilities already exist in Sweden and Denmark .
There is therefore a mistake in the translation .
The amendment should say that Sweden and Denmark provide for these legal possibilities , since they already exist in those countries .
We will check the performance in those languages .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , my group and I are voting in favour of Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's report , which spells out clearly what this House has stated on several occasions , namely the need to leave intact those parts of the directive concerning the abolition of animal experiments in the area of cosmetics .
The report which we have received on this is an inadequate one yet again ; furthermore , the Member States have been found wanting , and above all the bodies set up by the European Union to implement the directive have not met their targets .
However , this cannot justify reneging on the commitments laid down in the directive .
So while expressing a favourable opinion on the report , we must repeat - with reference to what the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , has said - that it is important not only in the case of finished products , but also for the ingredients contained in cosmetics that , as from 1 January 1998 , animal experimentation should no longer be permissible , both because it is unnecessary and because effective alternatives exist .
The European body which was to validate alternative methods has failed to carry out the tasks it was given : it must check the literature as soon as possible and identify research which deals satisfactorily with the problem of validating credible , reliable scientific methods which show respect for consumers and avoid unnecessary animal suffering .
The principle challenge we have to take up daily if we want to build a more humane Europe is the struggle against suffering : the suffering of men , but also of animals .
The latter concerns thousands of ' living beings ' submitted to experiments every year .
The cosmetics industry is particularly involved in these processes .
More than thirteen types of experimental method , where this industry is concerned , are likely to use animals .
The directive 93 / 35 / CEE , adopted in June 1993 , planned , firstly , for ' prohibition of the marketing of products , ingredients or combinations of cosmetic ingredients tested on animals from 1 January 1998 ' .
Furthermore , within the framework of this directive , the Commission is bound to ' present to the European Parliament and the Council annually a report on the progress made in terms of the development , the legal evaluation and the acceptance of methods which may be substituted for animal experimentation ' .
The report by Mrs Dagmar Roth-Behrendt stresses quite rightly that , despite the criticisms made of the 1994 report , the 1995 report still contains no emergency measure on the methods which may be substituted for animal experimentation .
On the pretext of the absence of measures in this area by the OECD and the United States , the Commission has judged it impossible to impose a prohibition on animal experimentation .
Does that mean we should tag along behind the United States ?
No .
Parliament has a role to play and should lead the Commission to give unrestricted support to the prohibition from 1 January 1998 .
The Commission must undertake to start taking measures right now to develop alternative methods of experimentation .
Every year 30 , 000 animals die in cruel experiments to assist the production of cosmetics , despite the prohibition , in Directive 93 / 95 / EEC , of the marketing of cosmetics containing ingredients or combinations of ingredients tested on animals and the commitment to promote alternative methods to replace animal tests .
This unacceptable situation is still with us because the Commission persists in delaying implementation of the prohibition and is kowtowing , for the umpteenth time , to pressure from very powerful commercial and financial circles and acting as a loyal disciple of the rules of profit and competition imposed by the big cosmetics manufacturers .
Its systematic disregard of strong public opposition and of the resolutions of the European Parliament constitutes an act of complicity in the barbaric torture of thousands of animals and is discouraging any serious attempt to develop scientifically acceptable alternative methods which could replace animal testing in the cosmetics sector .
It is pretty obvious that no real pressure is being put on the industry to engage in the research and development of alternative methods which can provide a high and reliable level of safety , and that the resources needed for serious research and technological endeavour towards meeting all of the safety requirements and ensuring that the abolition of animal experiments does not lead under pressure of competition to new products , with new and inadequately tested ingredients which may have unforeseen side-effects on the consumer , are not being allocated .
In the light of that there is no justification for postponing implementation of the ban on products tested on animals after 1 January 1998 . And there should be no exemptions to the ban .
Quite the opposite , there should be a commitment to take specific measures to ensure that firms and industries which carry out experiments on animals are obliged to participate in development and validation studies and to fund research and work on alternatives .
The EU has problems when it comes to restricting animal testing in general , and to banning such testing in the cosmetics industry in particular .
Regrettably , it seems that the Commission is giving in to pressure from the industry and is totally unwilling to pursue a policy of promoting alternative testing methods .
This means that more than 15 million animals will also be ' used ' in European laboratories in the future .
This is an unacceptable situation , especially since effective alternative methods are already available . Because of a clear lack of political will , however , these are not being promoted .
In an effort to explain its inaction , the Commission takes cover behind the fact that the USA has also failed to introduce a ban on animal testing in the cosmetics industry .
In my view , however , this argument does not hold water , since if it did , the EU would be unable to legislate independently of the USA at all .
It is absurd !
Given that the European Parliament - the representative of the people of Europe - is calling unequivocally for a ban on animal testing in the cosmetics industry , there is no valid argument for failing to implement such a ban on 1 January 1998 , as Council Directive 93 / 35 / EEC allows .
Such a ban does not have to be to the disadvantage of the cosmetics industry .
On the contrary , if products were to be labelled ' not tested on animals ' in a positive campaign , it could even represent an additional selling point on the world market , in the interests of producers , consumers and animals !
, in writing . ( DA ) The Commission 's report is defective and does not seek the objective of implementing the ban on animal experiments .
A ban which should and must be introduced , as promised , and not deferred any longer .
The ban will not mean any adverse effects on consumer safety , and the development of alternative testing methods is already considerably advanced .
I am against standards being based on the principle of the lowest common denominator .
So when the Commission states that a ban on the sale of cosmetics that have been tested on animals is not possible , partly because the USA does not have similar regulations , this is simply a pretext .
Rather introduction of the ban in Europe could have a knock-on effect resulting in international recognition of alternative testing methods .
Regarding research into alternative methods , there is need for a programme of priorities .
Without a framework , incorporating deadlines , it will not be possible to bring anyone to account for violations .
We would then end up with a series of postponements , which is what the Commission 's report seems to have been an attempt at .
It is expensive to research and try out alternative methods .
Therefore the ECVAM approved money ( 9 million ecus over 3 years ) must be used for its intended purpose .
In 1996 a delegation of MEPs realized however that the approved money was not getting through in the full amount .
This problem must be corrected .
It is necessary to set up a group or committee which will keep a close watch to ensure money reaches its target .
Otherwise we will get nowhere .
Only a framework and a proper , targeted contribution can encourage these alternative methods .
But whatever it is , animal experiments in the cosmetics sector must stop - and now !
I fully share Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's criticism and therefore vote in favour of the report .
resolution on genetically modified maize
Mr President , my explanation of vote concerns the resolution on transgenic maize .
I should like to draw attention to two points : first of all , it is clear that we are about to abandon the principle of prudence , which should be the main principle guiding politicians in the European Union .
Decision-making should not involve risks which are likely to develop into full-blown problems .
In this case , the Commission has clearly yielded to the demands of the representatives of commerce and industry anddisregarded the principle of prudence .
I dare not imagine where this will lead us in the future , when the pressure will be even stronger .
Secondly , I should like to draw attention to the public 's right to be informed of decisions which the Commission takes concerning genetic engineering .
At present , the principle of transparency is being flouted and the scientific committees work behind closed doors .
I have been trying in vain for three weeks to obtain from the Finnish authorities documents concerning the authorization place transgenic maize on the market .
In my view , we cannot go on like this : each and every citizen has a fundamental right to be informed of the reasons on which the Commission bases its decisions .
The transgenic maize affair offers up worrying similarities with that of mad cow disease and shows that the Commission has learned nothing , and understood nothing , unless it is the case that it has been pushed by unspeakable forces which it finds impossible to resist .
Once again , the Commission has shown itself to be more sensitive to the necessities of commerce and the free circulation of products than to risks to consumers .
I should say that , this time , there was the added fear of upsetting the United States , which apparently had so little doubt about the malleability of their correspondent that they had already shipped their maize to our ports before they had even obtained authorisation to put it on the European market .
What happened proved them right : the Commission gave way all along the line , after Leon Brittan explained to it , as the press reported , that we had better not upset our relationship with this great nation .
Apart from the obsession with trade and the free circulation of goods , there are other similarities here with the mad cow case .
Firstly , one finds the absence of transparency over the reasons for the decision , and in particular over the soothing scientific opinions which , it appears , supported the Commission 's decision , but which were only published in abridged form .
Secondly , the Commission 's singular method should be highlighted , by which it used outrageous procedures which exist which give it the right to substitute itself for the Council when the Council cannot come to a unanimous decision , exactly as it had when it lifted the embargo on British gelatine last year .
However it might be noted that in the present case , thirteen States out of fifteen , in the Council , were in favour of the prohibition on importing transgenic maize and that the Commission had no hesitation in defying that crushing majority to place itself in the ranks of the two lax States , of which , sadly , France was one .
Thirdly , as in the mad cow affair , we have seen certain Member States defend their citizens , despite the position of the Commission .
Austria , and even Luxemburg , have prohibited the distribution of genetically modified maize on their respective markets , to protect their populations .
Finally , in this business too , the temptation is seen to be growing in the Commission to attack the recalcitrant States for obstructing freedom of circulation .
Thus are we called to regret once more the fact that the Commission is using the powers given it by the countries of Europe to destroy our defences , when its purpose on the contrary is to strengthen them .
This unworthy conduct - because the Commission 's primary concern should be to ensure the security of Europeans - can no doubt be explained by a total lack of patriotism , and a major susceptibility to external pressures .
In their turn these faults are not fortuitous , they arise from the institutional structure itself of Europe today , dominated by a technocratic structure which considers itself superior to the nations and which , because it is so far removed from them , ends up losing all reference to reality and to the needs of people .
The Commission 's action with regard to Ciba-Geigy is dubious and irresponsible to say the least but not particularly surprising .
Once again the Commission has bowed to financial and commercial pressure instead of protecting the environment and people 's health .
But it is surprising , however , because 13 of the EU 's 15 Member States opposed the introduction of this maize onto the market .
It is positive and encouraging to hear that Austria and Luxembourg have not accepted the Commission 's decision anyway and are now taking measures to prevent the sale of genetically modified maize on the market .
I hope that other EU States will react in the same way , including my homeland Sweden .
People 's concerns about eating genetically modified food are justified and must be taken seriously .
In my opinion , there ought to be an immediate end to the cultivation and sale of genetically modified food .
This situation is more than desirable but unfortunately there does not appear to be any action .
The European Parliament 's common resolution is good , even if it is not sufficiently critical in some sections and I have no hesitation in voting for this proposal .
The British Conservative MEPs are strongly in favour of taking all the necessary safeguards to establish that only foods which are safe are placed on our market .
They also recognize that genetic modification is a scientific tool of possible benefit to mankind which should not be dismissed out-of-hand .
Its possible usefulness in terms of the increased availability of food supplies and a diminution of dependence upon pesticides should be subject to rigorous scrutiny .
We believe that two considerations must be paramount in the consideration of genetically modified food : consumer safety and consumer choice .
On consumer safety , we note that the Commission consulted three expert committees before giving marketing authorization to this product .
The findings of those committees and the list of their members are available to Members : for example , the membership of the Scientific Committee for Food is given in Official Journal C218 of 23 August 1995 , and subsequent updatings have also appeared in the Official Journal .
Where the Commission can be faulted is in not having closer contact with MEPs , especially in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection so that they get an early copy of the reports of such specialist committees and up-dated lists of their members .
So long as Parliament feels shut out from the work of such committees , suspicion and lack of confidence between the institutions will grow .
On consumer choice , we welcome the fact that the Commission is to propose that all products containing GMOs will have to be labelled , thereby extending the current information requirements .
If Europe 's consumers do not want genetically modified products , then consumer power will tell , and firms marketing those products will find that the European market is not profitable for them .
We also welcome the news that Commissioner Fischler is to come forward with a proposal for similar labelling of animal feed .
We believe that with these safeguards Europe 's consumers and Europe 's farmers will be in the best position to combat competition from the US and to judge for themselves whether they want to choose genetically modified products or not .
We regard the joint motion for a resolution as seriously flawed in its rejection of the authorization that has been given , and out-of-date in that it does not take account of the announcements made by the Commission on 2 April regarding the labelling of all GM products .
It does contain some useful points regarding the need for the European Parliament to be more closely involved in the process of authorization of GM products , and we have supported these elements .
The only honest course open to us in the final vote on the whole text was therefore abstention .
It is unacceptable for the Commission to allow the spread of genetically modified maize on the European market .
A large majority of Member States are against this and public opinion is very critical .
The EU ought to have learnt from the BSE crisis that health and consumer protection must take precedence over short term commercial interests .
There have been insufficient scientific studies .
The maize may be resistant to antibiotics and would therefore pose a great risk to people 's health .
It goes without saying that all genetically modified foods should be labelled so that consumers know what they are buying and eating .
The European Parliament condemns the irresponsibility of the Commission , which has authorised Member States to import and market products based upon genetically modified maize in spite of all of the negative opinions of the European Parliament , and which has done this to the detriment of the principle of precaution concerning the health of consumers and the protection of the environment .
France has , for this reason , seized upon this authorisation to permit American imports while prohibiting the cultivation of genetically modified maize , and the inconsistency of such a position can only be condemned .
It is true that the marketing of this maize had been authorised , several days before , thus nipping in the bud a crisis with the Americans , who had a cargo of ' Corn gluten feed ' locked up in one of our ports .
Some very large interests are at stake .
I will briefly recall the fact that transgenic maize has been made resistant to the larva of a crop-devastating insect .
Its cultivation , which has already been carried out in the United States and Canada , produces better crops and strengthens the competitive edge of a product in a very competitive world market , as we know .
The uncertainty about long term effects , the desire to reassure consumers still traumatised - and quite rightly - by the mad cow crisis , have weighted the French decision , which many observers have judged inconsistent and preelectoral .
I am not out to reject scientific discoveries , because life is synonymous with evolution .
Furthermore , the region I come from - the South-West of France - has largely profited from progress in seed .
But the recent scandals and dramas which we have experienced must make us more cautious .
If the experts subscribe falsely to the view that there is no possibility of risk regarding modified maize , the Scientific Committee on Foodstuffs has admitted that there is a risk of transmission to humans of the marker gene which is resistant to antibiotics .
This re-evaluation should be pursued and , while awaiting this , authorisation granted to import and market these products should be suspended .
For us , the primary need is for transparency in the information conveyed to consumers .
They must take their responsibilities in full knowledge of the facts , with the mandatory requirement for clear labelling of all foodstuffs containing transgenic products .
This law was voted in by the European Parliament in January 1997 and should soon be applied in all 15 countries .
Mr President , despite its deficiencies , I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution , because it condemns the irresponsibility of the Commission which , unilaterally , took the decision to authorise the marketing of genetically modified maize in spite of the negative opinion of the very great majority of the Member States and the European Parliament .
But it should have gone much further than that and demanded that the Commission go back on the decision it made on 18 December 1996 , for as long as sufficiently serious independent scientific assurances have not been given on its consequences as regards protection of human health and of the environment .
The same mistakes are being made over and over again : whether we are talking about authorisation to import genetically modified maize from the United States or the lifting of the embargo on gelatine , suet and bovine sperm originating from Britain , they are the same procedures which are leading the Commission to substitute itself for the Council and to act to the detriment of public health and the environment in our States .
No lessons have been learned from the ' mad cow ' crisis .
And all over again , the Commission is setting itself up as the defender of economic interests which are not those of the Member States of the Union .
To my very great regret , the French government carries a great deal of responsibility in the process which is currently under way .
It was the vote of the French minister which enabled the Council to obtain the qualified majority , thanks to which the substitution of responsibility could operate to the benefit of the Commission .
It was the French government , with its decree of 4 February , which was the first and is still the only government to authorise the marketing of genetically modified maize ( 30 , 000 tons of which , curiously , had already been in French ports for a month ) , while other European countries like Austria , Switzerland and Luxemburg decided to protect their populations .
The two French Commissioners have naturally followed in the footsteps of their colleagues , AngloSaxons in particular , to authorise , without hesitation , the entry of MGM on to the market .
Thus we end up in France with the worst scenario : our own farmers are prevented from using the most productive seed , while products of genetically modified seed from third party countries are freely marketed .
Consistency would have had it that the Union impose a complete moratorium ( since maize is likely to be followed rapidly by genetically modified soya and rape , with all the risks they bring ) , until research with convincing results has concluded either that the marketing of this seed is harmless or dangerous .
Why , on such an essential question , be so afraid of a dispute with the United States before the WTO ?
Or else , is the vocation of the European Union no longer to defend the interests of Member States , aspiring only to become , in the words of Valéry ' an American Commission ' ?
Roth report ( A4-0112 / 97 )
Mr President , we have voted against the Roth report both because of its aspects which are unrelated to the subject and because of its lacunae and omissions .
Indeed , the Roth report does not speak about the persecution to which the unions are subject in France .
That is how a Force national-transports en commun Union came to be created in France in 1996 .
When this union nominated union delegates to the RATP , a major public transport company in the Ile de France , the management took these union members to court .
Several weeks later , these union members presented a list for the professional elections .
This list was refused and there were further proceedings , proceedings brought by the management and the unions of the system and won at the expense of the free union members , the legal system giving in to the demands of the authorities and the dominant unions .
There is therefore a serious attack on freedom of representation and the electoral freedom of workers here .
These liberties are also threatened by attacks by the management of this major public enterprise against national unions : threats against union members and instructions to departmental managers to harass them .
We are sorry that these attacks on freedom of representation do not feature in Mrs Roth 's report .
We welcome the Schengen Agreement as an important step towards the right to freedom of movement for the people of the Union .
But we think that the way point 57 of the report is written could allow different interpretations particularly on the issue of using strong measures in the fight against drug trafficking . This is something we cannot accept .
Antilla , Lindqvist , Ryynänen , Virrankoski and Väyrynen ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Seppänen , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm and Lindholm ( V ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen , Krarup and Sandbæk ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) The struggle for human rights is very important everywhere .
In no way does the EU have sole rights in this domain .
Much of the content of this report is totally unnecessary in a report on human rights .
Why should the EU become a legal entity and sign conventions ?
Why should so many of the measures be raised to a federal EU level ?
Why do Community level controls need to be introduced ?
We are against this and think it is totally unnecessary in an otherwise quite good report .
Of course we will also be voting against the proposal that the European Court should have jurisdiction over the implementation of the Schengen Agreement .
The good thing about the report is that it is progressive on many points and highlights a number of matters which are currently badly handled by EU Member States .
But this does not mean that they would be better handled at community level .
On the contrary , there would be even less democracy in the EU .
We think that the criticism of the repressive and often racist asylum policies is justified .
I voted against Amendment No 43 on abortion information - as it is worded it is unacceptable .
Not even the most radical pro-choice supporters are actively advocating abortion .
Abortion is a choice many women make for a variety of reasons - many tragic .
In Ireland we have a very high level of abortion , disproportionately high in comparison with other EU countries .
I believe our resources should be focused on prevention of unwanted pregnancies and support for those who feel forced to take this choice .
Our constitutional referendum overwhelmingly supported information and freedom of movement .
So do I.
We are sorry that the European Parliament has thought it right , despite our negative votes , to adopt the Roth report which contains a whole series of aberrations , like the request to Member States to recognise homosexual couples and to grant them the right to adopt children .
We also find that the European Parliament has once again declared that freedom of circulation is not a reality in Europe , on the pretext that border controls on persons have not been abolished completely .
Once again , this is not our opinion and when we move around in Europe we do not experience controls as hindrances to our freedom of circulation .
I would , however , focus my explanation of vote on a specific technical point , since Parliament has just asked that the Schengen Agreement come under the competence of the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
We do not agree , for two reasons , of form and of substance .
On the form , we do not see why the Court of Justice , which is a community institution which comes under the fifteen Member States , should deal with specific agreements which certain States conclude among themselves , except of course if the States request it expressly .
But that is not the case here .
This observation should be relocated to the context of the debate at the Intergovernmental Conference on differentiated cooperation , which we hope we will not see become a matter a priori and systematically for the Court of Justice .
On the substance , it is unlikely that matters relating to the circulation of persons , and in particular foreigners , which closely affect public liberties and national sovereignties , will be able to be entrusted to the arbitration of an institution which is not a democratically elected assembly and which is not a national constitutional Court subject to the democratic regulation of each State either .
We are presented with an acute problem , which nobody wants to look in the face , of distortions between the status of the Court of Justice , which was at the start a Court intended to deal with technical problems linked with the interpretation of a well-defined treaty , and the breadth of competence which one would like to give it today , which would result in the serious diminishing of national democracy and straightforward democracy itself .
We hope therefore that the Intergovernmental Conference might demonstrate realism , and that , before any extension is made to the competence of the Court of Justice , it should revise its status in such a way as to introduce into it , one way or another , the right of appeal before national parliaments on questions of principle .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of Parliament 's annual report on respect for human rights in the European Union ( 1995 ) with the exception of point 159 .
We believe that the report is satisfactory in general .
Our opposition to point 159 is due solely to the fact that it contains a factual error .
Thus Danish criminal law contains an unequivocal ban on the possession of ' photographs , films or similar items portraying children having intercourse or sexual relations other than intercourse ' ( Criminal Law § 225 , point 2 ) .
This ban also covers paedophile magazines .
I voted with my Group ( the PPE ) against the Roth resolution even though I supported over 90 of its paragraphs and appreciated many aspects of the rapporteur 's work .
The report does , however , contain inaccuracies and goes beyond the scope of a work of this kind , which ought above all to help to bring to public awareness the problems concerning the fundamental rights of citizens in the European Union who deserve better attention and treatment .
On the other hand it seems to me that social rights and environmental rights not only hold a different significance , but should be studied in greater detail by the relevant Parliamentary committees .
In addition to this general criterion which helped me to finally make up my mind about the report as a whole , my criteria for voting on the various paragraphs were as follows :
I voted in favour of many paragraphs on the mechanisms for strengthening human rights , the right to life and the right to freedom of movement , the rights of access to justice , rights of prisoners , the fight against racism and xenophobia , the right to privacy , non-discrimination and children 's rights .
I voted against those paragraphs mentioning individual Member States which have not had the opportunity to put their side of the case which must be regarded as States following the Rule of Law , plus those paragraphs dealing with national policies on asylum and immigration when there is still no real European policy in this area ;
I abstained on those paragraphs on human rights outside the European Union or concerning events in years other than 1995 and on paragraphs which wove fact in with fiction .
We find it very positive that the European Parliament is making a serious and in-depth analysis of respect for human rights in the European Union , all the more so since there tend to be too many value judgments made about what is happening in this field outside the Union .
There are various significant problems noted within the European Union .
Fundamental rights and freedoms are not infrequently called in question .
Racism and xenophobia are spreading .
There is a growing tendency to curb the right of asylum .
All forms of discrimination are on the increase .
It is important to stress that negative phenomena are on the increase particularly in the social sphere , and they cannot be ignored here , despite what some sectors of this House claim .
The right to a job , steady employment , adequate social security and finally a dignified standard of living are undeniably essential aspects of human rights ; this list should also include the fight against unemployment , poverty , exclusion and marginalization .
Mrs Claudia Roth has for the most part approached this subject in a thorough , positive and appropriate manner in her report , which we welcome ; we shall be voting for it .
We shall for the same reasons be voting against the proposals tabled which run counter to the spirit of this approach .
When it comes to human rights , Europe must defend its good name on the world stage .
I therefore greatly regret the fact that the opposition of some EU Member States to a resolution which critically analysed the human rights situation in China has meant that the Union is not now tabling a human rights resolution before the UN .
The human rights debate has been supplanted by concern for business interests .
I also wish my negative vote to underline this scandalous situation !
Human rights have no political complexion .
They are neither Christian Democrat nor Socialist .
Rather , they are universally valid , as is enshrined in the relevant international conventions .
The concepts must therefore be clearly defined , and these general principles strictly applied .
Unfortunately , this is not the case in the Roth report .
The report is ideologically biased , and contains many elements which have a great deal to do with economic , social and environmental policies , but absolutely nothing to do with human rights .
It is a ragbag of issues , problems and lists which mean everything and nothing .
I would have preferred to see a discussion of fundamental rights , such as the rights to life , integrity , adequate defence before the courts , freedom of expression , privacy , non-discrimination and the like .
Any report on this subject should , in my opinion , deal with excesses against fundamental human rights such as the freedom of speech , freedom of the press , religious freedom and freedom of association .
It should also investigate and advise on whether the right to legal aid and the right to be allowed to do military service without bearing weapons are being correctly enforced in the EU Member States .
But to expand the term , as has been done in this report , to include the right to freedom of mobility within the Union , social security , the right to medical treatment and so on is incorrect . These issues belong in other political arenas .
Perhaps future issues of this annual report could be extended to include comments on other failings based on a model for good quality of life , such as the right for all citizens to live near beautiful municipal parks .
Of course it is never wrong to demand better health care .
But that is not the point .
The core of our criticism lies in the fact that the term human rights is being confused with the term quality of life through such an expansion . ' Human Rights ' has a quite distinct meaning in the international arena .
Point 119 of the proposal for the Resolution complains that more and more districts , particularly in France and Germany , outlaw begging .
Expressing oneself in this way in a report shows that we accept begging as a source of income for some people .
This cannot be tolerated .
That is the end of voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Growth , employment and convergence ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( ( A4-0111 / 97 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission 's Annual Economic report for 1997 - Growth , employment and convergence on the road to EMU ( COM ( 97 ) 0027 - C40078 / 97 ) .
As long as our governments put all their energy into meeting the convergence criteria , unemployment is unlikely to fall .
We know why this is .
Economic growth in the Union is too low .
Average growth of 2 ½ % is needed simply in order to absorb the increases in productivity and the growth in the supply of labour , but we are not achieving this , and the outlook for the future is poor .
Why is the economy in the European Union not enjoying more robust growth ?
The Commission has no answer to this .
Like last year , it concludes that all the supply factors such as inflation and wage levels are favourable for stronger growth , but it refuses to believe that the cutbacks of an average of 1 ½ % of GDP which the Member States are aiming to make in 1997 have anything to do with the low level of growth .
On pages 77 and 78 of the Annual Economic Report , for example , it claims that a further cut in interest rates and the feel-good factor will compensate for the fall in demand caused by the cutbacks .
It therefore feels , quite wrongly , that it no longer needs to insist that those Member States which are in a position to focus policy on maintaining and promoting growth should actually do so .
Yet stimulating employment by promoting growth should be given at least the same priority throughout the Union as achieving the convergence criteria .
And promoting growth and achieving the convergence criteria are not mutually exclusive , of course .
Higher growth not only creates more jobs , but also makes it easier to achieve the convergence criteria anyway .
Both objectives , employment and the convergence criteria , are the joint responsibility of the entire Union , and this is why the countries which already meet the EMU criteria and are enjoying stronger growth should be urged at least to maintain growth at its current levels , for the benefit of other Member States .
Mr President , last year I was the rapporteur on the 1996 annual economic report and I am very conscious of the difficulties under which both the Commission and the rapporteur have had to work .
I wish to congratulate the Commission this year on having got its annual economic report together rather more coherently and rather earlier than last year .
I would also like to congratulate the Commission on a welcome note of realism in this year 's annual economic report .
There has been a tendency in the two previous years to be a little bit too sanguine about the prospects for the European Community 's economy .
Quite rightly , this year the Commission has highlighted that there has been absolutely no improvement at all in the overall employment position here in the Community .
That remains the fundamental problem which faces Europe .
As the front cover of The Economist said this week : Europe is not working !
The answer to that problem , of course , lies not really within the European Commission and still less in the European Parliament , it rests with the authorities in the Member States .
I am delighted to see that , although I do not agree with everything the rapporteur says in her report , there is an acknowledgement - in paragraph 8 of the resolution - of the harmful effects of ' high statutory non-wage costs on labour ' , which leads to a reluctance to hire people .
But , on the other hand , there is a lack of realism : in an earlier reference in paragraph 5 ( ix ) we have the usual rehearsal of left-wing objections to the activities of speculators .
It is not often appreciated that speculators can be Member State governments , for example , who might hold off paying money to the European Community , expecting to have an improvement in their national currencies ' exchange rates against the ECU .
There is , however , one thing to which I would like to draw attention : paragraph 26 , which calls for an end to ' what is unfair competitive taxation in the European Union ' .
If taxation is ' unfair ' , it is because some Member States maintain too high levels of tax , and the effect of competition in tax , as in air fares and everything else , should be to bring down tax rates .
That would increase Europe 's competitiveness and would also result in a revival of the European job market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to concentrate on our amendments , and in particular Amendment No 9 on growth , employment and convergence on the road to EMU .
Economic growth alone is not an adequate indicator for combating and reducing unemployment .
When you consider that the German Government has promised to halve the number of unemployed by the year 2000 , a similar exaggeration with regard to Europe is not difficult to understand .
It is quite wrong to regard growth as the sole driving force and goal of Europe 's economies .
Economics and ecology go hand in hand ; unfortunately , however , people are coming to this realization far too slowly , and not in sufficient numbers .
The annual economic report - and this will be nothing new to those attending this debate - lacks a forward-looking European economic philosophy .
And I use the word philosophy quite deliberately - it simply lacks the sense that Europe needs to bring its economies into line with one another .
The situation in Germany , which has a publicsector share of 51 % , is totally different from that in the United Kingdom or Greece , for example .
We therefore also need to address the issues of the public-sector share and bringing Europe 's economies into line with each other .
With regard to monetary union , let me say the following : we must not begin monetary union by lying to the people .
I would particularly ask Mr de Silguy to bear that in mind .
Paragraph 12 of the annual economic report refers to pension liabilities and the reserves to cover them .
If it is the case , as in Germany , that this question of pension liabilities is not raised , not even in the context of the criteria for EMU , then this is starting with a lie , and the criteria are being fudged .
We must remain credible . The postal workers in Germany will be the latest to see that something is amiss in that country .
Lastly , I wish to point out that the German version of Amendment No 5 contains a translation mistake .
It should say ' ineffective control ' , not ' inadequate control ' .
Mr President , Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report states , among other things , that one cannot go along with the Commission 's proposal on greater wage distribution between the regions .
I am very much sympathetic to this view , since this is not a matter for either the Commission or Parliament to tackle , but something that must be handled locally , either between bodies involved in the job market or in the national parliaments , in accordance with the regulations of the individual countries .
The annual economic report from the Commission also expresses a wish for greater wage distribution within the different sectors and branches .
It is a pity that the rapporteur is not here now because I would have liked to hear her views on this .
The report fully supports Delors ' white paper on growth , competitiveness and employment , and this surprises me somewhat because this also advocates wage distribution .
Moreover I must refrain from supporting the resolution to introduce gradually absorbed wages for the least qualified , the young or the long-term unemployed , since in my own country this has always meant a violation of collective bargaining rights which are enjoyed by those operating on the employment market .
And to propose a form of economic control at an EU level would mean going off at a tangent .
Let us give this more thought , and let us instead discuss whether adoption of the EMU convergence criteria is not the real reason for the unacceptably high unemployment rate in all EU Member States , before convincing ourselves and others that the unemployment problem can be resolved by adopting the EMU .
Let us listen to the strong protests being raised against the EMU plans throughout the countries of the European Union .
Mr President , I agree with the rapporteur 's view that the annual economic report is too optimistic and does not take the problem of rising unemployment seriously enough .
It makes an over-simplistic connection between competitiveness and labour costs , whilst ignoring the importance of creativity and innovation to both production and marketing .
The mania for budget consolidation in both the public and private sectors is directed too much towards cutting jobs and too little towards investment .
The example of France makes it clear that competitiveness cannot be improved by reducing labour costs alone : despite the reduction of labour costs in that country , unemployment has not fallen , and there have been further losses of market share .
It will therefore be important in the future to take a critical look at the EU 's patterns of expenditure .
As long as the bulk of the Member States ' financial contributions is poured into support for agricultural overproduction , while comparatively paltry sums are earmarked for research and development , we should not be surprised if the EU 's competitiveness is declining .
Mr President , the great debate which casts a shadow over the Commission 's Annual Economic Report is , of course , that of employment .
We know that we cannot satisfy ourselves in this respect with the single thought , and that we must find something else .
We cannot satisfy ourselves with economic policies at national level , when monetary policy will be on a Europe-wide scale .
We cannot allow unemployment , poverty and exclusion to develop and leave everything to the market .
The excellent report by my colleague Mrs Randzio-Plath is intended to give a lesson in voluntarism in this respect and , with your permission , I would like to extract two ideas .
The first idea is the need to give a European dimension to economic policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , I come from Luxemburg , a country which every year for the last ten years has created thousands of distinct new jobs , and yet unemployment rises inexorably .
Why ?
Because the country lies at the centre of a basin of cross-border employment in which unemployment is as high as 10-15 % , or more than that .
This shows very well that a country which is pursuing a policy of growth faster than its neighbours above all is supporting the economy of its neighbours .
And if we want national policies to succeed , we should at least make sure we coordinate them at a European level .
The second idea is the need for a common policy for growth .
The dyed-in-the-wool dogmatists say no , that is not possible .
Because they are absolutely set upon the criteria of convergence for reaching the single currency , they want neither to let another penny go to the Community budget , nor to care about their neighbour .
The Socialists say yes .
Without lapsing into a blissful Keynesianism , they think that it is possible to act upon demand , even with a European budget which is only 1.27 % of GDP .
If I may permit myself , Mr President , to paraphrase Jacques Delors , would the European Union , which is borrowing so that it can lend to Bulgaria and Hungary , not do so to invest in its own quality of life or the future of its younger generations ?
Mr President , I therefore think indeed that as the rapporteur proposes , we must have an economic policy of European dimensions and , above all , an economic policy for growth .
Mr President , I am perhaps going to make myself look like a defender of the single thought , which will please Mr Fayot , but that is too bad , I will go ahead anyway .
I would like to give my reaction both to the Annual Economic Report and to Parliament 's report .
I would be less critical of the Annual Economic report than is Mrs Randzio-Plath , but I still have a number of remarks to make on the Commission 's text .
Like the Commission , I think that the improvement in performance of the European Union should be saluted , and the renewal which is under way should encourage us to continue along the route we have mapped out .
Having said that , and I think everyone agrees , we should not rest on our laurels because we are a long way off reaching the target for growth and for unemployment , which , as we know , is still dramatically high .
Why , in fact , do we have this poor growth rate and high unemployment rate in Europe ?
For a large part , it should be said , because of the poor economic policies pursued since the beginning of the ' 90s : budgetary policy which is too lax , monetary policy which has been badly managed , until recently at least , and an employment market which has become too inflexible .
So , my dear colleagues , let us learn lessons from these examples from the past .
We will not solve our growth and employment problems by relaxing budgetary discipline , and we will not solve our growth and employment problems by relaxing monetary policy .
In proposing these kinds of measures , the report which Mrs Randzio-Plath has presented to us misses the mark .
The reduction in real interest rates , which our rapporteur quite rightly hopes for , will not come as a result of this kind of relaxation .
It will result from the pursuit of budgetary cleansing , from the removal of risk premiums on interest rates and therefore from a stable monetary and fiscal environment .
Contrary to what has been proposed to us , we must reduce public spending and obligatory contributions , and to do that , we must implement a number of structural reforms in order that these reductions actually take place and will last .
From this perspective , we have two large areas of work to be done in Europe .
The first concerns the reform of the labour market .
This must , as a general rule if not in all countries , be rendered more flexible .
Above all , we must accelerate the reduction in labour costs , in particular for the least qualified , contrary to what our previous speakers have said .
Because that is where the key to unemployment lies , unemployment among the poorly qualified , which is the largest sector of unemployment in our various countries .
And to do that , there is no other solution than to reduce obligatory contributions .
I am rather sorry that the Commission has not stressed this matter a little more , even if it has mentioned it .
The second area of work concerns the problem of globalisation and the progress of technology .
The Annual Economic report gives an interesting chapter on the subject .
There again , I think the subject deserved to be developed .
Perhaps it will at the next presentation . I would like to stress one thing on this subject , which is that there is no a priori reason why globalisation should not lead to the creation of jobs , even if this poses a number of problems in the short term , as we know .
Anyway , I will stop there , Mr President .
I would just like to say that , with the PPE group , I and Mr Herman have put forward a number of amendments : the fate reserved for these amendments will obviously determine the group 's vote .
Mr President , for twenty years there has been mass unemployment in the European Union .
One of the reasons for this has been the dominance of orthodox economic theories in economic policy .
So the report by Mrs Randzio-Plath is a refreshing change .
It advocates an aggressive , expansive policy .
It offers an insight into the active role played by the public sector in finance policy .
The report breaks with orthodox opinion which is otherwise the hallmark of debate in the European Union and its institutions .
On the other hand the report contradicts itself by expressing confidence in the role of currency union .
It is precisely the EMU regulation system which must bear the greater part of the blame for deflationary policies .
The notion of convergence must be given up in the long-term if we are to deal with the crisis .
We must establish a new freer currency co-operation on a more global basis .
Despite these criticisms the report is still a ray of light in the darkness of dogmatism .
Mr President , crying over spilt milk will not solve the problem of unemployment in Europe .
The obstacles to true economic growth and increased employment are well known by now , and most of the Member States are falling over one another to suggest solutions which they do not then put into practice .
Italy is a bad example , one not to be followed , where the fashion is still to nationalize losses and privatize profit .
The Wages Guarantee Fund applies only to large companies ; small firms have no access to it .
Why is the Union wasting time before setting up well-targeted projects in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises ?
The data available confirm that the many economic and employment-related problems can only be solved by giving a helping hand to small businesses .
Let us waste no more time : let us invest in infrastructure , transport networks , the environment and energy ; let us organize ourselves better , so that small and medium-sized enterprises can benefit from research investment and the Member States can reduce the fiscal burden consisting of taxes and social contributions .
We have been heading in the wrong direction , but we can remedy the situation by putting an end to unfair competition in the fiscal sector : a fiscal protocol should be incorporated into the Maastricht Treaty , containing a good practice guide for Member States on the taxation of businesses and capital .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , this afternoon 's debate on the Commission 's Annual Economic Report gives me the opportunity , first of all , to commend our colleague , Mrs Randzio-Plath , warmly on the quality of her work as well as the thoroughness and intelligence which are characteristic of her in all her work .
This report also leads me , Mr Herman , to say that the Executive Committee has worked hard , in the context of the treaties which govern us , obviously , and the decisions of the Council of Ministers , without of course forgetting , Mr Herman , the dominant liberal ideology in which our Union basks .
But when you have 18 million unemployed and 9 million people who would enter work if jobs existed , the rather artificial convergences required for the single currency , the small amounts of growth which have no real impact on unemployment , and the proposals which rush towards greater flexibility of work , less social protection and greater liberalism , are no longer enough .
While I approve of some of the Executive Committee 's proposals on education and training and on local employment initiatives , I would say , like many others here , that unemployment needs shock treatment , along with effective stimulation of internal demand for goods and services , a reduction in interest rates , an increase in research and development , a less dogmatic and ideological approach to the criteria for convergence , a way of proceeding with restructuring which is undoubtedly gentler , and finally a genuine desire for industrial development .
What it requires therefore - and I am concluding in a general way - is that before any decision is made , all the decision-makers analyse its effects on employment in the short and medium term .
That is how , and it is the only way , confidence will return and , along with a progressive reduction in working hours , unemployment will finally fall .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is unfortunate that the rapporteur is not present for the continuation of the debate this afternoon .
However , I would not have congratulated her , since her report is not as good as others have made it out to be .
In fact , it contains a great many contradictions .
I should like to thank the Commission for a good and generally realistic annual economic report .
The criticism of Mr de Silguy is unjustified , since ultimately it is the Member States which are responsible for economic and financial policies .
The Commission cannot be blamed for the Member States ' failings in their entirety .
As many speakers have already pointed out , Europe 's main problem is high unemployment - structural as well as cyclical .
Increased growth alone will not be sufficient to remedy these structural shortcomings .
It is certainly needed to create new jobs , but it is not enough .
As the Commissioner rightly indicates in his report , Europe has opted to take an unequivocal free-market course .
Through the single market programme , the Maastricht Treaty and EMU , clear and promising ways to improve the competitiveness of European jobs have been set out .
Key objectives are to establish the free movement of goods , services and persons ; to enhance Europe 's competitiveness through the liberalization and privatization of important sectors such as telecommunications , transport , postal services and energy ; and to extend the trans-European networks , for which the funds are still lacking . Other important goals are to rein in the State and reduce state responsibilities - a matter covered by the Maastricht Treaty - and also to fight inflation and achieve the convergence of monetary and financial policies .
A currency 's domestic stability is ensured in particular by a low rate of inflation .
Europe can boast a number of successes in this respect .
We are agreed - and the portrayal of EMU in the report is therefore accurate - that we can achieve the introduction of the euro , the launching of stage three , without relaxing the criteria and by interpreting them in accordance with the Treaty .
However , what we certainly cannot do - and here Mrs RandzioPlath 's report contradicts itself - is take remedial action in the form of short-term , Keynesian anti-cyclical programmes designed to stimulate economic activity , which merely produce a flash in the pan in the wrong places .
On the contrary , we must eliminate structural shortcomings in the right places , as indicated by Mr Fourçans in his speech and amendments , for example by regarding public investment not as a substitute for , but as the basis of , private activity .
Above all , we must promote the flexibility of the labour market and eliminate the problems in the internal market - the remaining barriers to trade , for instance - as soon as possible .
I would therefore urge you , Commissioner , to stay on the right track and carry on with your policies as you began .
Mr President , the excessive optimism of the Commission 's report is provocative : it speaks of a successful transition to EMU , of real growth in GDP , of new job creation , of strong economic recovery .
In our country , Mr President , we use the expression ' God first drives mad those He would destroy ' to explain the self-destructive consequences that can occur when a person is out of touch with reality .
This Greek popular saying appears to be totally apposite to the case of the European Union 's principal institutions .
The persistence with a policy that is increasing unemployment , poverty and social exclusion in Europe by the day is truly remarkable .
The European social model is falling apart ; the worker is gradually metamorphosing into someone who just has a job ; the labour relations that have been built up through the struggle and sacrifice of an entire century are literally disintegrating ; the demands of bankers are taking precedence over the democracy of the people .
I can see no alternative to popular mobilization and a fight by the workers in defence of their rights .
Only then , perhaps , will the European Union draw the conclusions that it should draw .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I had prepared a note , but it shall not speak from it because I want to dispute some of the things that have been said by Members on the other side of the House .
For example , it has been said that we should not rest on our laurels !
Which laurels , Mr Fourçans ?
Where did you find them ?
The workers of my country are finding only thorns , and resting on thorns is not very easy .
It has also been said that we must reduce taxes and air fares .
Down to what point should we reduce them ?
To the point at which the planes start to fall out of the sky ?
Are we to have a cost- benefit study setting the added profit of the airlines against the added value of the lives of the passengers who will die ?
Financially such a thing would make sense : the value of the lives of the passengers is limited . And , of course , the added profit may more than compensate for those lives .
Is that the sort of value judgment that we should be getting in to ?
Economics is not an exact science . It is a science full of value judgments , and , before we finish with the technical aspects , we would like you to tell us which of the values out of those that we defend are furthered by the economy .
I am not one of those who believe that unemployment should be used as a weapon for getting on top of inflation .
That , in effect , is what your report advocates .
Not is so many words , of course ; but it does , essentially , advance the case that unemployment should be used as a means to controlling inflation .
We would have preferred a different report , because there are ways of getting on top of inflation other than by allowing unemployment to race out of control to the current 12 % and to the 20 % that it will rise to very soon and to the 30 % that will come after that .
Where will it end ?
This business that began in 1970 when stagflation was tackled to the detriment of the workers , where will it end ? That is what the whole of your case boils down to .
Year after year you say the same things over and over again .
You never make the slightest effort to find another way through the problem .
In finishing I would like to endorse the proposal made by Mr Donnelly this morning that other viewpoints on the matters covered by these reports should at long last be given a hearing so that we can escape from the intellectual cul-de-sac that you have led us into .
Mr President , in the annual report , the Commission calls - rather surprisingly - for greater wage differentiation between the regions .
I cannot think of any arguments in favour of this .
I do know that people in Europe already have tremendous problems with the wage differences between the various countries and the unfair competition which these create , and I can therefore only imagine that the Commission 's proposal will force wage levels down , and with them the benefits that are directly linked to wages in many countries , as well as the minimum wage .
I think the Commission 's proposal is a really outrageous one , especially when it has not had the courage to bring forward a directive at the same time on a minimum wage .
In other words , it has produced a proposal which will force wages down , yet it refuses to introduce a directive which will give the people of Europe the minimum basic protection that they need .
I think the only sensible thing to do is to withdraw the proposal as quickly as possible .
Another reason for opposing this proposal is that it would seriously weaken the position of the trade unions , and there are absolutely no grounds for doing this .
On the contrary , we should be trying to find ways of improving and consolidating their position as part of the social dialogue that we are forever discussing .
Finally , one of the biggest problems we have is that firms are currently moving to locations outside the Union , and the Commission 's proposal is only likely to increase this trend .
I cannot understand why this was not given due consideration .
It seems to be yet another attempt to substantiate the old complaint that the workforce is not sufficiently mobile .
If we want to increase mobility among the workforce , then we need to ensure that something is finally done about harmonizing wages and social security .
This would also mean finding a genuine solution to the problems faced by frontier workers in the areas between the Netherlands and Germany and between the Netherlands and Belgium , which have been under the microscope for ten years now without any sort of useful proposals coming from the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to speak first of all about the Maastricht Treaty , monetary union and the convergence criteria .
We insist on a correct interpretation of the convergence criteria and reject any simplifications or talk of symbols , but after the recent ECOFIN Council and having read the newspapers over the last few days , I fear that we are indeed gradually becoming bogged down in symbolic discussions and that it is becoming increasingly difficult to produce a serious interpretation of the convergence criteria which is in keeping with the spirit and the letter of the Maastricht Treaty .
My second point is that we naturally need to prepare for the third stage of monetary union , and I would refer here to what Mr Cassidy said about fiscal competition .

I am extremely concerned about fiscal competition and the ease with which tax bases can be moved from one Member State to another , and I am afraid that this will mean less money for social protection , and that if we have monetary union while we still have fiscal competition , but without tax coordination , social protection will come under increasing pressure .
Thirdly , the finishing touches were last week put to the stability pact , which is now to be known as the pact for growth and stability .
Commissioner , I wonder if you could tell us where , in the stability pact , ' growth ' is described as a proactive objective ?
The stability pact rightly assumes that the convergence criteria must continue to be observed even after the third stage , and I entirely agree with that .
But what the stability pact lacks is the growth element .
I would strongly urge you to do something about this .
If you do not and my fears become a reality in the Member States , while you continue to insist that only a monetary free market can ensure the future of the people of Europe , it could mean the end of the European ideal as far as the public is concerned , which is the very worst thing that could happen .
Mr President , I would just like to point out that there are a number of serious errors in the description of the economic situation in Sweden in the Commission 's report .
For example , it states that interest rates have never been as low as they are now and that the difference between the interest rates in Sweden and Germany has never been so small as now , but this is totally untrue .
The Commission is basing its information on nominal interest rates but , as every economist knows , it is real interest rates which are important in this respect and these have never been as high in Sweden as they are now .
It goes on to say that the level of savings has gone up in Sweden as a result of lower growth rates , i.e. a sort of reverse Keynesian relationship .
Once again the truth is the opposite : We implemented a tax reform in Sweden which increased the profitability of savings .
The level of savings rose , demand fell and the rate of growth fell as well .
Every Swedish economist is aware of this .
The Commission cites these mistakes to provide an illustration of the fact that economic development in Sweden has been favourable because we have followed the economic policy recommended by the Commission , whereas traditional Social Democratic policies failed .
But it is the reverse which is true . It was when Sweden ended their Keynesian demand policy , when we started to fight inflation before fighting unemployment , when we started to apply the convergence criteria , or to put it briefly , when we adopted the new liberal policy recommended by the Commission , that Sweden began to have problems .
It was then that our unemployment went up from 2 to 12 percent .
Swedish development is therefore an excellent example of the fact that a traditional social democratic policy works , a policy which tackles unemployment before fighting inflation .
It is my tragic prediction that unemployment in the Union will not be reduced until both the Commission and the Council understand this fact .
Unfortunately , the many errors in the report makes me fear that it will be some time before this realisation hits home .
Mr President , the most salient feature of the Annual Economic Report is the Commission 's self-satisfaction in assessing the economic situation in the Union .
The result of that is a passivity which entrusts all economic certainty to the maintenance of a few healthy balances or macro-economic fundamentals , public finance and inflation in particular , as if this were enough to ensure growth and the creation of jobs .
The evidence from the various economies does not confirm this analysis .
The macro-economic fundamentals are improving , nominal convergence is progressing , but the hiatus in growth is persisting and unemployment remains at intolerable levels .
As the only explanation , the Commission continues to rely on the vague concept of lack of confidence .
And yet citizens are experiencing day by day the economic horror which provided the recent title for a famous French bestseller .
As far as we are concerned , the economic situation in the Union exhibits significant deficiencies in crucial aspects which need to be stressed .
Despite high levels of saving , investment is far lower than in the past .
Public investment is becoming the major casualty of the process of achieving healthy public finances in the various Member States .
So we propose that when public deficits are judged excessive a fundamental distinction should be made between current expenditure and capital expenditure , between deficits to finance current spending and deficits to finance investment .
Even more worrying is our lag in research and development , especially in terms of the information society .
A European strategy must be implemented urgently to reap the existing benefits of an economic area integrated at Union level . Action continues to be dispersed because this is an area where public authorities have a determinant influence , but each State is operating on its own account , coordination is extremely limited and direct action by the Community institutions is minimal .
In conclusion , we socialists think it is wrong to reduce all economic policy to the objective of ensuring a healthy economic framework .
It is also necessary to commit ourselves to active policies for employment , training , investment , research and development strategy , a more active supply side policy , and management of aggregate demand as well .
We hope these considerations will be taken into account when the broad guidelines for economic policy are drawn up .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to address Mrs Randzio-Plath who has demonstrated or tried to demonstrate , in her absolutely brilliant exposé , that Spring is still very cool .
Undoubtedly she was alluding to the ambient temperature this morning , in the streets of Strasbourg .
Perhaps like me after dinner , she might have realised that the temperature had warmed up .
That leads me to think that just because Spring is cool it does not mean it cannot be followed by a beautiful Summer and a rich harvest in the Autumn .
But to take in a good harvest , Mrs Randzio-Plath , you also have to put in some good work .
Meteorological conditions do not explain everything .
That , definitively , is what we wanted to do with the Annual Economic Report , because the report contains all the elements needed for a strategy for an overall economic policy , not only on convergence and economic and monetary Union , but also for growth and employment , which are two themes I would like to tackle now .
Permit me , nevertheless , to make a parenthesis , directed at Mr Donnelly - who , sadly , is not here to hear my reply , which you will transmit to him : he asked for the Annual Economic Report ( AER ) to be the subject of publicity , a greater public explanation .
Personally , I find this an interesting idea .
We are going to think about it and I think there are several ways to proceed .
First of all , we can think about having the next rapporteur , for the next AER , named earlier and we can hold preparatory discussions with some parliamentarians before publishing the Annual Economic Report .
We can also think about holding a public debate with economists , research institutions , journalists and parliamentarians .
I am ready to consider all of these ideas and work on them .
That is how I would reply to Mr Donnelly .
I come now to my two subjects - which I would like to stress - so as not to waste your time .
First of all , growth .
I think that many of your questions , in this hemicycle , have revolved around the following question : how can growth be improved ?
First of all , I would say that growth - perhaps regrettably - cannot be decreed .
It results principally from sound economic foundations .
I am sorry , Mr Willockx , but public deficits have never created jobs .
If they did , we would be in a position of overemployment .
You have accused us of seeking , above everything else , excessive stability , to the detriment of employment policy .
What I say , what I think , is that a sound economic policy is a prerequisite for the constitution of an economic framework favourable to growth , even if - and here I agree with you - it does not make it possible to sort out the unemployment problem entirely , and that these policies must be complemented by other policies .
Why are economic policies orientated towards stability necessary ?
Because they make it possible to ensure medium-term growth , which will be drawn along by demand and supported by investment .
First of all , growth must be supported by demand and on this subject I would like to stress this : that the Commission does not dispute the fact that demand must accompany growth and that the current deficiency in internal demand explains in part the caution of the current renewal .
I would remind you that growth was 1.6 % in 1996 and that it will be between 2 1 / 4 and 2 1 / 2 % in 1997 .
But artificial support for demand , which with a budgetary expansion or an increase in wages which was too rapid would threaten the foundations , would be counterproductive and therefore short-lived .
Why ?
Because gains in productivity are an important driving force of growth and because the reduction in relative prices , in sectors in which productivity is showing a strong increase , makes it possible , indeed , to increase demand for the purchase of goods and services in sectors in which productivity is increasing more slowly and in which , all the same , jobs are being created .
An attempt has been made to demonstrate this on page 34 of the AER .
As your Assembly recommends , this process is facilitated by the suppression of obstacles to innovation and by a policy of research and development which is better directed .
But I would add that demand is picking up again in Europe today , and on a sound footing .
Exports have been the first support for this .
They should now hand over to private consumption , which should grow by 2 % in 1997 and 2.5 % in 1998 .
These improved prospects for demand should also stimulate investment .
I come now to my second point , that is growth supported by investment .
The Commission shares the concern of your Assembly , Mrs Randzio-Plath , on the relative stagnation of investment in Europe .
It is true that , up to now , the renewal in investment worldwide is still timid .
However , we can already see an improvement in performance of investment in machinery , even if the construction sector is still slow to react .
I think , and this is not to demonstrate excessive optimism , Mr Ribeiro , that all of the elements are in place for a more open renewal in business investment , which represents all the same 85 % of investment worldwide , particularly thanks to an appropriate return on capital invested and a more relaxed policy mix .
However , more specifically , concerning public investment , I recall that the Commission has always insisted , including in the Annual Report for 1997 , that public investment is preserved .
Indeed it is an important factor for long term growth .
The Commission has therefore constantly lent its support to community investment projects , beginning with the trans-European networks .
That is what I wanted to say to you very quickly on growth , an essential condition for the creation of jobs .
Now , very briefly , because time is limited , I will say a few words on the second question , that is the creation of jobs : how can we facilitate the creation of jobs in Europe ?
On this point , too , the 1997 Annual Economic Report contains some important analyses and recommendations regarding the employment market .
These measures , may I remind you , fall essentially , in this area , under national competence .
Mr Langen has quite rightly highlighted this , moreover .
The Commission therefore invites Member States to assume their responsibilities in the matter .
I would very quickly like to tackle two problems - the employment market and wages policy - which have been mentioned within these walls , this morning and this afternoon .
The employment market , first of all .
The most active policy on the employment market should be pursued .
Indeed , during the period which followed the first oil crisis , the high level of labour costs , wages and non-wage costs , and in some cases , the existence of rigid regulations regarding job security , reduced the interest in labour as a factor of production .
To remain competitive , businesses continued to substitute capital for labour .
However , employment markets in the European Union adapted progressively and this has led to a considerable improvement in profitability .
Mr Berthu and Mr Lukas , and also , to a certain extent , Mrs Randzio-Plath , raised the question of investments for rationalisation - these are necessary to safeguard competitivity , but may destroy jobs - as opposed to investments for expansion , which increase our capacity for growth and therefore employment .
The Annual Economic Report analyses these problems in relation to the substitution of capital for labour .
What we need is to add many more investments for expansion , which create jobs , to the investments for rationalisation .
The conditions of development , at that point , become much more favourable .
But the effects of the employment intensification process of growth are not immediate .
The Commission recommends therefore that the capabilities of employment markets should be improved , their capability of adapting to economic changes , in particular by modernising the organisation of work and by increasing geographical and professional mobility .
The Commission is convinced that it would be desirable to implement pragmatic solutions to broaden the scale of labour costs , according to qualifications and according to region and , up to a certain point , according to sector .
This could be done , for example , by lowering non-wage costs , by lightening the tax burden on the wages of poorly qualified workers - I join with what Mr Fourçans said along these lines - and by instituting first-time employment wages for disadvantaged workers .
But this adaptation of the labour market also involves a certain wage differentiation , which would have to be agreed between social partners .
To judge from your draft resolution , if I have understood correctly , a certain wage differentiation between regions can only favour the downward revision of wages , and can only result in new relocations .
Well , no , the Commission does not share this point of view .
I can reassure Mrs Lis Jensen and Mr Wim van Velzen .
Exactly the opposite !
Provided that they are based upon the different levels of productivity according to region , these differentiations would not lead to any business relocations from one region or from another .
On the other hand , they would lead to the creation of new business activity and new employment in areas with high levels of unemployment .
Allow me , Mr President , Ladies and Gentlemen , in conclusion , to underline , and to recall , the fact that the Annual Economic Report responds to an overall coherent strategy of growth , employment and convergence which is developing in Europe .
I give as proof the short term reduction in real interest rates in Europe , by nearly 500 basis points since 1993 , that is a historical reduction of 70 % - I give as proof also a large , and probably more meaningful , reduction in long term interest rates .
The debate we have taken part in today will enable us , Mr President , Ladies and Gentlemen , to refine our analysis for the development of the major orientations of economic policy , which I will come and present to you on 23 April , that is , the very day on which the Commission will adopt them .
You will be informed in real time and , then , on the basis of this analysis , we can take the debate on European economic policy up again .
I have a question to put to you , Commissioner . You referred , amongst other things , to the formulation of the broad guidelines of economic policy .
Can you tell the House whether you are prepared to anticipate the debate on the formulation of the broad guidelines of economic policy by letting Parliament know which aspects of the resolution it adopts tomorrow will be incorporated into those guidelines , so that an exchange of views between Parliament and the Commission can take place in good time before 23 April ?
Mrs Randzio-Plath , I have only two concerns on this matter : to respect the Treaty and to strengthen the collaboration between your Assembly and the Commission .
First of all , I consider that the intense , active debate which has taken place on the Annual Economic Report already gives us a great deal of information .
I am ready , nevertheless , Mrs Randzio-Plath , if you wish , to organise a working group between a delegation of parliamentarians and my departments , before we have the Annual Economic Report adopted by the Commission .
To respect the Treaty , I am obliged , however , to make it a meeting of an informal nature .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Support facility for balance of payments
The next item is the report ( A4-0105 / 97 ) by Mr Metten , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ( COM ( 96 ) 0545 - C4-0588 / 96 ) - review of the facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments - Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 88 / 1969 .

Mr President , my report looks at two questions : firstly , whether the existing funding facility for balance of payments problems should continue beyond the start of EMU on 1 January 1999 ; and , secondly , whether this kind of assistance for payment problems might not also be useful for Member States in the Economic and Monetary Union which experience national difficulties .
To begin with the first question , the funding facility for balance of payments problems has proved its usefulness in the past .
It has been useful for the countries which have had recourse to it , because they obtained cheaper loans than they could otherwise have done themselves , while the other Member States gained stability on the internal market and were able to obtain repayment guarantees through the conditions attached to the loans .
Because the loans are usually paid in tranches , the implementation of the conditions designed to help economic recovery can be closely monitored .
The important thing with this facility , therefore , is that both the recipient Member State and the Union as a whole benefit from it .
The total costs are paid by the beneficiary countries , and the only risk the Union takes is that the loan cannot be repaid , which has never yet happened .
Should this facility now be abolished when EMU begins on 1 January 1999 ?
Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs recommends not .
Not all the present Member States will be joining the EMU straight away , and the ' pre-ins ' and the ' outs ' initially outside the EMU might well encounter balance of payments problems .
So the facility should certainly continue until these countries join the EMU .
But even once all the present Member States have joined the EMU , which might be the case in 2002 , there will still be a clear need for this instrument .
From 2002 onwards , the first Central and Eastern European countries will be joining the EU , and at least one , Hungary , has already indicated that it will certainly need a few more years before it is ready for EMU .
So there will be a period when countries which have joined the EU but not the EMU could well encounter balance of payments problems .
It is thus a useful instrument which should certainly not be abolished just yet .
This brings us on to my second question .
Would not this facility , which operates via the capital market in the form of loans guaranteed by the Community , be a useful one during the third stage of EMU , particularly for countries facing national difficulties ?
The Maastricht Treaty expressly provides for this possibility in Article 103a ( 2 ) , but no action has yet been taken under it .
One of the possible problems that may result from EMU is that Member States are less able to cope with national upsets , in other words shocks which affect one country and not the others .
Exchange rates will no longer be an option , and the capacity of the budgets to act as shock absorbers will be restricted by the stability pact .
A positive instrument which could help Member States out of an unexpected recession would certainly be very useful , and there is no reason to fear that Member States would be less disciplined if such an instrument were available .
It must be approved unanimously by the Council ; there are strict conditions attached , and all the costs are borne by the beneficiary country .
A further factor is that the stability pact , which expects governments to have healthy finances that can cope with less serious national upsets involving less than a 2 % reduction in the economy , is likely to make things worse rather than better for the Member States concerned , since they then face payment of a fine or a deposit .
Mr Zalm , the President of the ECOFIN Council , compared the stability pact to an atom bomb which is there as a deterrent rather than to be used .
Or as President Santer said , it is like a pre-nuptial contract : never intended to be implemented .
That being so , an instrument which served the same purpose but could actually be used would be extremely valuable .
I would therefore call on the Commission to undertake to develop a proposal under Article 103a ( 2 ) and to forward it to Parliament and the Council .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , will it be necessary to extend the financial support facility for balances of payments beyond the date set for the entry into monetary union ?
As Mr Metten has said quite rightly , as far as the first years are concerned in any case - the years during which not all Member States will be members of the monetary union - this facility may still be of some use .
However I will make a distinction , which Mr Metten did not make , which consists in putting on the same footing those countries which would like to join the monetary union , but are not in a condition to do so at present , and those countries which are in a condition to belong but refuse to do so .
It is obvious that if one wishes to encourage Member States to remain outside the monetary union , it will , of course , be necessary to apply advantageous conditions of the aforementioned facility to them .
That is not , I think , the vision we have .
I do not think it is the vision of Mr Metten either , because it is in all our interests that the extent of the internal market should coincide with the territory of monetary union .
From that time , we are not going to give those who fulfil the conditions and who do not wish to join - essentially for political reasons - the additional gift of saying that they will benefit from our solidarity if they have any problems .
We are neither masochists nor sadists , but we must at least keep our feet on the ground .
If we create a structure together in which we would like everybody to participate , we are not going to encourage those who remain outside it to remain outside it !
Personally , I am not going to follow Mr Metten down that path .
The other question which arises is this : will it be necessary , as Mr Metten suggests , to design a facility of this kind and maintain it when monetary union is complete and everyone belongs to it ?
Indeed , he says , there will still be situations in which Member States suffer shocks which will require that they are helped out .
That is a case which will become very limited .
Why ?
Because , when you have a large market , a single currency and , in addition , not only criteria of convergence but also stability pacts , it is obvious that most of the shocks which will continue to occur will be shocks from outside .
Internal shocks will be reduced , it seems to me , to very little .
They will be accidents which may result either from natural disasters , or from political disasters such as prolonged general strike .
It is permissable to imagine similar situations , but in this case , the appropriate technique does not seem to be that which Mr Metten suggests .
That is why I am expressing reservations on the final part of his exposé , and I wonder if it is necessary to imagine , on the basis of Article 103 , paragraph 2 , a facility similar to the current facility , but intended to sort out the problems of budgetary adjustment of Member States .
I do not think so .
I think that , to confront this situation , it is more sensible to play with the few elements of flexibility which exist in the stability pact because , according to his analysis , Mr Metten records that as being among the problems which will have an influence on budgetary balance .
Now , as regards problems of budgetary balance , it is not a facility intended for the balance of payments which should be used : it is another facility .
And I am quite ready to support the idea that something should perhaps be planned .
Whatever happens , we have plenty of time because this problem will not arise until after the year 2000 .
Mr President , the report by Mr Metten brings a most serious issue to the forefront of our discussions : the stabilization of the European economy during and after the introduction of the single currency .
Although stabilization is an important aspect of economic policy in the contemporary economy and in the control of finances , very little is said on the subject at the official level .
So we should be grateful to Mr Metten for his very important contribution and for endeavouring to draw our attention to the subject .
You will all be aware , ladies and gentlemen , that currency stability is a prerequisite for participation in the exchange rate mechanism and , of course , for participation afterwards in the single currency venture .
Although at this moment the mechanism allows fluctuations of up to 15 % from the central parity , it is accepted that the countries which are hoping to move to the euro are striving , unofficially , to maintain much more stringent parities , and already some of them have begun to face balance of payments problems and tensions .
The crucial thing that should be borne in mind now is that it cannot be excluded that those difficulties may become worse when the sheep are separated from the goats , that is to say when the countries which join the euro are separated from those which stay out .
That will be the tricky time , and at that time the stabilization mechanisms must be strengthened and not removed . We must not follow the Treaty and terminate a stabilization mechanism which could be important for those who stay out .
Stabilization problems will continue to exist within the euro system as well , because that system will be composed of economies with varying productivity levels , and it is common knowledge that the existence of such disparities in productivity levels can lead to internal shocks which it will be possible to counter only by budgetary measures in the federated states .
Mr Metten 's proposals are flexible on this point .
They use whatever is in the Treaty and I feel that they deserve our support .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal Group I want to note the elements of agreement and disagreement with the emphasis placed by Mr Metten in his analysis .
Firstly , in the area of agreement , we share the rapporteur 's view that this balance of payments facility should continue beyond the establishment of the Euro in Stage III , but only for those states that are in a pre-in condition .
I agree with Mr Herman .
We have got to look seriously at what we owe in the way of solidarity to those who could qualify but clearly choose politically to stay out .
We do not owe them solidarity .
They do not show us solidarity .
But in so far as Mr Metten agrees on this and suggests it should continue for pre-ins , I accept that because that is what the Treaty says .
Article 109k ( 6 ) provides for precisely such a possibility .
However , when Mr Metten , by the back door - and that is what this is - recycles a balance of payment facility into some kind of a stability pact accelerator / decelerator model to deal with cycles in the economy , I have a problem .
I do not like dealing with so serious an issue through the back door .
The difficulty is that it is a back door mechanism because the balance of payments facility for those states inside the Euro is clearly provided for ; in the Euro it will cease to exist .
Why ?
Because the balance of payments constraint and problems will cease to exist .
That is perfectly logical .
So if we want to have a discussion about how we conduct a balanced economic programme to cover various exigencies as they arise , let us have it up front and openly .
I do not like the back door .
I take note of the novel , innovative suggestion of the rapporteur , but I do not support it through the back door .
Mr President , very briefly I would simply like to register the complete agreement of my group with respect to the proposals made by Mr Metten as regards both , on the one hand , the maintenance of the current support facility for balances of payments for the benefit of States which will be unable to join the economic and monetary union from 1 January 1999 , and , on the other , the creation of a community loan instrument which would make it possible to contribute in a slightly more flexible way to the absorption of macroeconomic shocks which could occur once the third phase comes into effect .
Indeed , we think that it is essential to complete the monetary instruments and add to them other instruments for economic guidance .
We still do not know if there will be a pilot in the cockpit during the years to come - we do not know today - but at least , with Mr Metten 's proposal , we are assured that there will already be a first control lever .

Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the Commission document and Mr Metten 's report look in detail at the question of whether the balance of payments facility should continue after the start of EMU , and the rapporteur is rightly concerned about how Member States which have joined the EMU will cope with national upsets .
And what do we mean by national upsets ?
Natural disasters , mismanagement in a particular economic sector or , in more general terms , an economic crisis in a sector which is vital to the Member State concerned .
He concludes that the defence mechanisms against national upsets come under pressure from EMU , but he is reassured by the fact that Member States will probably be slightly less susceptible to such upsets anyway .
That is still unconfirmed speculation .
Of the examples I gave , it is difficult to see why those types of sectors should be any less susceptible .
The problem is that EMU has no automatic stabilizers .
The stability pact will continue to have a destabilizing effect as long as there is no budgetary equilibrium , since Member States with large deficits are required to pay substantial fines .
Little help can also be expected from the ECB , whose primary objective is price stability .
That is all well and good , but national upsets are almost certain to bring higher unemployment and higher interest rates .
I would remind the House of what the Bundesbank did after the monetary union between East and West Germany .
To avoid the risk of inflation , it simply cut off the money supply .
Inflation was stifled , but interest rates and unemployment soared at the beginning of the 1990s .
In the period between November 1991 and March 1995 , there were ten occasions on which a Member State had to devalue its own currency because it appeared too high against the German mark .
Basic economics indicated that this was the right thing to do , and you have to listen to basic economics .
That is the strength of exchange rates : they can prevent unemployment and migration by cutting their coat according to their cloth .
Balance of payments assistance is an artificial device which may help efforts in the short term , but cannot offer a structural solution if that is what is required .
The problem we are facing is not an economic , but a political one .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two points I should like to make .
Firstly , the state of a country 's balance of payments is one of the fundamental factors which determines the value of its currency .
If we are soon to enter the third stage with some of the Member States in and some out , or out for the time being , then it seems logical that the existing balance of payments support facility should remain in place , if only to help those countries whose balance of payments could , as Mr Katiforis said , come under even greater pressure once the single currency is launched , to show solidarity with them and to help them towards convergence .
Secondly , the road to convergence , Commissioner - and this is not intended as a criticism , it is simply a statement of fact - has a number of deflationary effects .
I can see this in my own country , which has been making tremendous efforts to achieve convergence over the last few years .
I have always been in favour of making these efforts , but they have tended to cause deflation .
In other words , there is a price to pay .
I think that Mr Metten has come up with a very important idea , that Community loans should be granted not to help countries cope with national upsets , Mr Herman , but to deal with collective shocks as part of an anti-cyclical policy that may yet need to be introduced .
So it could be vital for the Commission actually to expand the Community loans facility , and I would urge the Commissioner to act on this .
The Treaty makes provision for it , and I think it could become an important addition to the traditional methods used in monetary policy .
Mr President , the facility we are discussing today has proved its worth on eight occasions since 1974 , four times for Italy .
The assistance provided makes the markets more confident that a particular country can improve its financial situation .
The PPE Group therefore agrees with the Commission that it is likely to continue to play a useful role during the transition to the third stage of EMU , when balance of payments problems could still occur despite the progress made towards meeting the convergence criteria and the continued integration of the markets .
It could even continue to be useful for those countries which are unable to join EMU in 1999 , the pre-ins and the new members .
For the countries which have opted out , the facility should be available only until they meet the criteria : beyond that point , our solidarity with them should extend as far as their solidarity with the rest .
However , the PPE Group feels that the facility should not be available for Member States which join the EMU , since it will not encourage the necessary discipline and stability , and will undermine the stability pact agreed last year in Dublin .

That is why we have tabled an amendment to Mr Metten 's report , which we have toned down in the hope of reaching a compromise , so that the facility is not an alternative to the stability pact , but merely offers a basic level of support .
The fact that having a financial assistance facility for EMU countries is neither necessary nor desirable is also clear from the fact that the stability pact itself makes an exception for countries with excessive deficits caused by exceptional and temporary problems , such as an unusual event beyond the control of the Member State which has a very negative effect on its financial position , or a very serious economic downturn .
In both cases , the national governments can concentrate on reviving their economies , without having to worry about sanctions being imposed under the stability pact .
In conclusion , my group would urge the Commission to consider , when it makes its new assessment of the facility , what provision the stability pact also makes for the EMU countries .
The facility cannot be an alternative to the pact , nor should it really be able to provide assistance for countries in difficulty , since this is already provided for in the pact .
The PPE Group therefore intends , as Mr Herman said , to vote for the resolution , but only in order to support the Commission , and we leave Mr Metten to be responsible for the substance of the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Metten 's report , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States ' balances of payments , justly highlights the usefulness of this loan facility .
Your rapporteur raises two different questions , which the debate has really brought to light .
The first question relates to the maintenance , for the ' outs ' - the Treaty 's euphemistic name for those who will not be in the Euro area at 1 January 1999 - anyway , the maintenance , for the ' outs ' , of the instrument of assistance for balances of payments provided for in Article 109 H after EMU has come into effect ; the second question relates to the implementation of financial assistance provided for by Article 103 A , paragraph 2 , for a Euro State which is in difficulties .
Very quickly , I will make a distinction between these two elements .
Regarding the maintenance of the current instrument , the Commission - and you must grant me this - can only go by the Treaty .
Now , in accordance with Article 109 K , paragraph 6 , of the Treaty on the European Union , the Commission recalls the fact that the ' outs ' will continue to benefit from this financial support facility for balances of payments provided for by Article 109 H. In 1998 , the Commission will , therefore , proceed to re-examine the current facility .
To do so , we will have to wait until decisions on the passage to the third phase have been taken and the names of the countries who will participate in it are known .
This will be done at the end of April / beginning of May 1998 .
We will have the chance to talk about it , I think , in a little while in the Committee on Monetary Affairs .
So what the Commission will have to do will be to check whether the regulation currently in force , that of 24 July 1988 , still applies , and secondly , whether the line of 14 million Ecus , let us call them Euros , written into the Community budget is still appropriate .
As you wish me to , I can assure you that the Commission will inform your Assembly of its work as soon as possible , after it has carried out and concluded its thinking on this .
The second problem is that of financial assistance for a State within the EMU .
Mr Metten 's proposal calls up two comments from the Commission .
Firstly , Article 103 A , paragraph 2 , pursues a different objective to that of Article 109 H. Indeed , it institutes an exceptional facility which should permit a Member State which is , I quote the Treaty : ' in difficulties or is seriously threatened with severe difficulties caused by exceptional occurrences beyond its control ' to confront them .
It cannot , therefore , be linked to the stability and growth pact .
This pact is permanently in application and I will remind you that , by its preventive aspects , it aims to give Member States budgetary room for manoeuvre which is sufficient to confront difficulties which are not of an exceptional nature .
The second comment is that Article 103 A , paragraph 2 , was not created to respond to balance of payments crises , but to really exceptional events , for example earthquakes , tidal waves , or comets which might crash into Member States , the list is not exhaustive , of course .
However , on the occasion of next year 's review of this loan facility for balances of payments , the Commission , with the Council and Parliament , will look at how to implement the provisions of Article 103 A , paragraph 2 .
I cannot give you any solutions today .
I can , however , tell you that on that occasion we will have to examine four questions .
The first question concerns the appropriateness of a Community regulation to respond to events of an exceptional nature .
Would it not be more appropriate to give the Council the ability to make decisions on a case by case basis ?
The second question relates to the definition of instruments covered by Article 103 A , paragraph 2 .
They are not solely concerned with loans .
The notion of Community financial assistance - that is the Treaty 's expression - does not , indeed , exclude genuine budgetary interventions .
The third question concerns the regulation of application of Article 103 A , paragraph 2 .
The fourth question , and I can assure you I will stop here , concerns the possible means of financing of this financial assistance .
These have to be defined .
In conclusion , because I do not want to prolong the debate on this point , I am anxious , Mr President , to thank you and thank the Parliament for its suggestion , which opens a first track for the application of Article 103 A , paragraph 2 once the third phase on economic and monetary union has come into effect .
I can assure you that the Commission will not fail to make the most of this facility when it re-examines it next year , and that we will have the chance to talk about it again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Competitiveness of European industry
The next item is the report ( A4-0113 / 97 ) by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 96 ) 0463 - C4-0622 / 96 ) on benchmarking the competitiveness of European industry and the Commission Staff Working Paper concerning a European Quality Promotion Policy for Improving European Competitiveness .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the Commission Communication to Parliament and the report I have the honour of presenting to you have an obvious point of departure : European industry is currently less competitive than American industry and Japanese industry . As proof of this statement , the Commission Communication presents the loss of market share that European industry is suffering , especially in the emerging markets - the most vigorous markets - while our main competitors , America and Japan , are maintaining their position .
The Commission Communication seeks the reason for this loss of competitiveness . And to find that reason it uses the technique of comparison - or benchmarking - between European industry and its competitors .
Benchmarking can be applied at various levels : it can be used to compare systems , framework conditions , and structural factors which are the responsibility of the public authorities ; it can be use to test the efficiency of industry as a whole , or some of its sectors or subsectors ; and finally some - or all - of the companies that compose them .
Although all these levels of comparison must concern them , it is obvious that this Parliament and the public institutions should concentrate their analysis on the framework conditions , the responsibility of the public authorities .
And to complete what may be called this ' methodological ' or ' introductory ' stage , I would say that the Commission starts from the sensible position that competitiveness is not an end in itself , but a means of obtaining better living standards and higher levels of welfare .
And this line of thought , which coincides with what may be called ' revived capitalism ' , seeks to define standards of living by using criteria which are non-quantifiable and nonmeasurable , but which have an incidence on the welfare of the citizens .
Sustainable development is one of these and has been emphasized by various groups .
The points the committee had to examine , and which this report centres on , basically cover four areas : services and infrastructure , as they affect competitiveness ; the labour market , social legislation and training of workers ; capital markets ; and finally , the position of research and development in European industry , by comparison with its competitors .
As regards services , there are three basic findings : the purchase of services absorbs 20 % of the profit and loss account of European industrial companies ; European services , which affect competitiveness , are dearer than services in the United States and Japan ; thirdly , there are sectors protected from competition and therefore less efficient .
And starting from these statements - which I agree with - two measures are advocated : liberalization of services - acceleration of the processes of liberalization already in progress - and opening up to competition - the opening up of those markets in service sectors that are still protected .
In terms of infrastructure , there are two findings in the report : first , that the infrastructure stock , obviously , affects the competitiveness of industry and , secondly that it is desirable to reduce the imbalances between the various regions of the Union to promote their competitiveness and access to the favoured areas .
Starting from these findings , the report and the Communication it deals with come out in favour of benchmarking between our levels of investment and American levels of investment , of seeking formulae for cooperation and collaboration between the public sector and the private sector to finance investment in these difficult times and , thirdly , of encouraging all Union institutions to reduce differences in infrastructure between the various regions , making the principles of cohesion and solidarity effective .
There is just one finding about the labour market : our rates of employment and productivity are lower than those of our competitors and this translates into our lesser capacity to create jobs .
So the stress must be on active measures of training and mobility rather than passive measures geared to mitigate the consequences of unemployment : a review of taxation on earned income which act as a brake on entry into the labour market , especially in the lower bands ; the idea that stability and flexibility are not opposing concepts ; and , finally , greater recognition of workers ' qualifications to make the free movement of workers effective , one of the remedies for coping with the crises of imbalance we were talking about just now .

I end by mentioning the capital market : the restrictions in this market - basically on mortgages , pension funds , etc. must be brought to an end . And an observation on R + D : our rate is lower than the American rate , the private sector effort is lower here and the American technique of tax incentives achieves better results than the aid we use here .
Thanks to all those who tabled amendments , almost all of which I have accepted , and to the committees which have worked on this report . I believe it can be of use to the Commission in pursuing a technique which we would like to see encouraged at all levels .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , benchmarking is set in the context of both the drive for competitiveness and the pursuit of a new model of sustainable development which is more in keeping with the times .
And in this respect , it should be clearly borne in mind that while determining the level of competitiveness is a market method for gauging efficiency , the economical use of resources and the sure achievement of goals , it is only an indirect method .
In other words , we must not fall into the neoliberal trap of believing that market indicators are the be-all and end-all , and that the most reliable expression of competitiveness is permanent export surpluses .
On the contrary , there must be mutual benefits , as I am sure Mr Bangemann will agree .
A world in which everyone has permanent export surpluses is impossible .
It is therefore a question of countries benefiting each other in the long term , and in this sense , the drive for competitiveness without cooperation is misconceived .
It is important to apply the same criteria to public services and the production of public goods , since they also require the economical use of resources and the sure achievement of goals .
And it is important too for the modern techniques of quality management to be more widely applied .
If we regard benchmarking not as the illusory replacement of policies with self-management of the economy , but rather as a methodical attempt to achieve qualitative goals by means of organized action , then we can begin to refer back productively to the Delors White Paper - in which the two sides of the argument were still unbalanced - and actually use benchmarking to achieve the methodical renewal of policies .
In this sense , Mrs Schörling , on behalf of whom I am speaking , is calling for the adoption of a benchmarking method for employment and environmental policies as well as for sectors of industry , with the aim of speeding up the monitoring and diffusion of best policies and practices that reinforce sustainable development .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his report and also the Commission for its proposals .
This is a report which is of genuine interest to a lot of the small and medium-sized enterprises throughout Europe and certainly to smaller companies in the area I have the privilege to represent - towns like Wolverhampton , Dudley or Halesowen in the industrial West Midlands .
I must stress that for this process to be successful it must be inclusive .
We must involve all the interested parties .
If people feel threatened by the process , it simply will not work : we need to involve everybody in a partnership .
If we do that then benchmarking can be a real opportunity for us to increase the competitivity of our businesses , increase profits in our businesses and , most of all , increase the job creation potential of our businesses .
I should just like to draw attention to three or four key paragraphs .
Firstly , as paragraph 5 states , it is important that we look at specific mechanisms to help our small companies make the most of benchmarking .
Secondly , I should like to see the Commission give us some information as to why certain sectors of European industry actually outperform their counterparts in America and Japan .
We ought to look at our own successes and learn from them and , similarly , learn from the successful cases of countries in Europe which have lower unemployment rates compared to our main competitors , Japan and America .
It is also important that Parliament itself be involved with the tripartite visits which the Commission organizes to America and Japan to look at benchmarking to see what we can learn from other countries .
I hope the Commission would accept that as a positive development .
Finally , in Paragraph 14 , Parliament calls for the Commission to look at the quality of our managerial skills in Europe .
Much of the time it is not the fault of the workers but the weakness of our management structures .
We need to look at that and here benchmarking would be very useful .
If we look at this as a partnership approach involving all the social partners , it will be successful and will be a positive asset to us in our ability to create a competitive Europe .
Mr President , a few weeks ago we read headlines in all the newspapers about how far Europe was lagging behind America and Japan .
The report held our attention for a week or so , but now Europe 's poor competitive position in relation to the other OECD countries and a number of improving Asian countries seems to have slipped into the background once again .
The fact remains that even our exports to the OECD countries have fallen since 1985 .
Now , however , we have battened down the hatches and put our noses to the grindstone - and that is just as well , since no one else is interested .
Investors are looking anywhere but Europe .
We have too many rules , too much industrial unrest , we are not flexible enough , and our decision-making procedures are much too long . In other words , all we do is talk , not act .
In the Netherlands , an investment project takes 26 years to get from the drawing-board to the official opening - 26 years .
What firm would want to do that ?
At international business meetings , the word Europe is only ever mentioned as an example of how not to do things .
We are currently obsessed with the convergence criteria and being tenths of a percentage point above or below them .
Why on earth are we bothering about that ?
The German mark has been the anchor currency up to now , and even if Germany 's deficit is 3.5 % and the euro is not introduced , the mark will go on being the anchor currency for the time being .
We are fussing about it all unnecessarily , and every day we are undermining the confidence of the major financial markets further still .
I say that the mark will remain the anchor currency ' for the time being ' quite deliberately .
The international community sees Germany as in crisis .
At an important meeting of the Global Forum , a senior official from the Deutsche Bank gave Germany three years to carry out the necessary reforms , otherwise it would not be able to join the EMU .
Workers and trade unions should ' benchmark ' the productivity , flexibility and employment of Germany against those of their competitors .
The miracle is no longer working in Germany : in fact , it is not happening at all .
It is clearly a great mistake to label as ' social ' an old-fashioned social market economy which dates from the time when Europe and the United States led the world .
Those days are gone , and a policy that still has its roots there is not sustainable .
It does not suit all conditions and is actually asocial rather than social , as we can see from the 4 million unemployed people in Germany and the almost 18 million in Europe as a whole .
And the Netherlands , which observers generally regard as doing better than average , is classified by the OECD as having a major nonparticipation problem .
The difference is that the Dutch economy is growing and the Netherlands has gradually made its system a little more sustainable , but that is the only difference .
Mr García-Margallo Marfil 's report is an excellent one , since relevant comparisons could well open Europe 's eyes .
Not just to the fact that our share of the market is declining : of course it is .
America 's share is also falling .
Our share of the world market can never grow as quickly as the market itself , and the newly industrialized nations are too big to enter the world economic stage unnoticed .
We are a mature economy and we must compare ourselves with other mature economies , such as the United States .
That is what benchmarking is all about : comparing comparable quantities in order to find out why one is doing better than another .
And in terms of maturity , we can well compare ourselves with the American economy .
The question then is why should employment be growing in the US , whereas here it is not just stagnating but disastrous ?
Of course , there are demographic factors which are not in Europe 's favour , but to take just one example , why are we still just talking about continuing education for workers , when the Americans have already put it into practice ?
Perhaps we should be sitting down when we come to see the real results of benchmarking , otherwise the shock might knock us over .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , the report on the promotion of benchmarking - for which I would prefer it if we spoke , in correct French , about location and standardisation of performance - has the support of our group .
We consider that the Commission 's document is heading in the right direction when it stresses the three possible levels to the subject , that is , level of performance in relation to framework conditions which should permit the evaluation of the capability of Europe to attract as a production zone because of costs , infrastructure , skills and innovation , that of sectors of activity which should permit the measurement of European industry 's capability to adapt to globalisation and , finally , the level of businesses , which comes under their own responsibility but for which Community action could be useful to SMEs and could contribute to harmonisation of the methods employed .
All the same , it is advisedly that the Commission proposes , on the basis of a partnership between industry and the Member States , the establishment of a work programme for 1997 from pilot projects intended to test the validity and the feasibility of the application of benchmarking at the level of the European Union .
Our group gives a favourable welcome to the quality report of Mr Garcia-Margallo y Marfil , as to all initiatives aiming to improve the competitiveness of European industry .
However , we consider , for our part , that such an activity should continue to be principally the responsibility of the private sector as far as industry is concerned and that it should be approached with caution at the level of the framework conditions .
Indeed , we would have a few reservations about the benchmarking of framework conditions if the consequence of it was that matters which are essentially matters for subsidiarity were analysed at Community level , that is , the competence of Member States , such as the organisation of public bodies in their relations with industry , as is the case with energy policy for example .
We also think that it is difficult to make a useful comparison of macro-economic factors without taking account of the individual environmental , economic , social and cultural policy of each State .
We also think that it would be more sensible rather to give greater importance to the benchmarking of the industrial sectors , and we think that there is everything to congratulate , in this respect , in the work undertaken by the Dutch President in the electronics sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
He is right to say that we can only maintain our social model and thus our standard of living if we can rely on an industrial sector that is in a position to compete .
I would remind you that the European Round Table of Industrialists has been trying its best for over three years now to put the competitiveness of the European economy on the political agenda , and the interaction between competitiveness , employment and growth was explained in the Delors White Paper .
I am also delighted that the Dutch presidency is making benchmarking one of its priorities .
Benchmarking employment is probably the most urgent task currently facing Europe and our national governments .
Conditions will have to be made much more favourable if our economy is to become more competitive , and I think we have a good deal to learn here from the United States or even , closer to home , the Netherlands , both of which have managed to expand their economies and create jobs .
Government at all levels must constantly test out the business climate and policy in the countries with the best performance and then take whatever steps are necessary , such as making the labour market more flexible , liberalizing government services , investing in human resources , promoting research , and developing and pursuing a quality-led policy .
Only then can we hope to bring about lasting improvements in the competitiveness of our industrial sector and , in the long term , our standard of living .
The Liberals support the Commission 's plan to put forward a benchmarking programme , in close consultation with the industrial sector and the Member States , in order to monitor progress in key areas .
I would also point out , however , that the SMEs must not be forgotten here .
Finally , we are also looking forward to having the results of the pilot projects that the Commission has launched , which the Industry Ministers are to examine on 24 April .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to say at the outset that I am in favour of benchmarking and that I shall be voting for the report .
I say that because I would like to avoid wasting time on praise and instead make a few critical observations , having made my position clear on the main point .
The first thing that I want to say on this matter , Mr President , is that it is essential to make a clear distinction between means and ends .
We can compare means , but it is not always easy , and perhaps not desirable either , to compare ends .
The report says that gross domestic product is not a good measure of prosperity .
That is very true . But gross domestic product is an end rather than a means , and it is not easy to fit it into the benchmarking framework .
Then there is the attractive ' undertaking-economy ' example .
Namely , that because benchmarking works well for companies we can transfer it to the economy in general .
Things are not that simple , because two companies of the same type have the same ' objective function ' .
It does not follow that two economies have the same objective function , and what constitutes the objective function of an economy is in itself a very big question .
The factor that maximizes the objective function in the one case cannot necessarily be said to maximize the objective function in the other .
One could go to Brazil , for instance , and see canals which are open sewers right by the side of aristocratic neighbourhoods .
I do not know if the Dutch would like the canals of Amsterdam to become open sewers for the sake of competitiveness .
Lastly , Mr President , the strength of competitiveness does not lie in sameness .
When we do benchmarking we necessarily compare the same things ; otherwise the exercise makes no sense .
But the strength of competitiveness is not found in sameness , but rather in difference .
It lies in innovation , and as far as that is concerned nothing can help us .
No research into how others do it is going to give us innovative ideas so that we can do something different and thus gain an advantage .
So benchmarking does have a place , but only when closely applied to an undertaking , at the sectoral level and with very great caution , and not to the economy in general .
Mr President , the Commission 's communication on the competitiveness of European industry prompts me to make a number of comments .
I welcome the attempt to analyze the parameters for industrial competitiveness in a rational , scientific way , and I agree with the rapporteur on the need to maintain a strong production apparatus in Europe and to eliminate inefficiency and waste , while preserving the essential protection which has been achieved for the weakest members of society .
I should like to dwell briefly on a second point which is of great concern to me , namely the relationship between technology and industrial competitiveness , to which it should somehow be possible to apply benchmarking .
It seems to me that industries and services are no longer high or low-tech nowadays .
As well as boosting productivity and - regrettably - sometimes replacing manual work , technology can improve the quality of a product or service , and therefore creates added value and , in the long term , new job opportunities .
I believe that more should be done to utilize public research to increase industrial competitiveness , and I wonder whether benchmarking could be taken further in this area .
On the one hand , we must continue investing in basic research , without which we would lose out in the future ; on the other , greater synergy is needed between expenditure applied to the Member States ' research institutes and research programmes carried out by the Union and industry .
It seems to me that the fifth framework programme is designed along these lines , but I think that a further appraisal , based on the criteria proposed in this communication , would be useful for studying and evaluating other measures in terms of taxation , job motivation and mobility , with a view to improving the link between technology and industrial competitiveness .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , Commissioner , one thing is certain : to improve our economic performance and therefore have the chance to reduce unemployment , we must have competitive economies and businesses .
Who disagrees ?
One other thing is also as certain : it is necessary to have the means to measure this competitiveness and to act upon its causes and on any hindrances to it .
So I have nothing against the standardisation of performance as a tool , nor anything against comparisons for the purpose of choosing the best solution .
All the same , does it really have to be the case that along the way it is exploited for the purpose of issuing us once again with all the old recipes for the liberal economy and to put the blame for all our difficulties at the door of too little liberalism : public deficit , State aid , flexibility , labour cost , etc .
I will end the litany there .
Of course Commissioner , I do not think so , as you know !
And like many of my colleagues here , I would say that competitiveness is not an end in itself .
The end in itself is the reduction in unemployment , services rendered to the public , social cohesion , a better lifestyle for the majority and , of course , for there to be no increase in unemployment , even when the objective announced is the improvement of productivity .
Greater solidarity is needed therefore , particularly financial and fiscal solidarity , and if benchmarking has any use as a management tool , it should perhaps also be applied to the comparison and standardisation of the policies of the fifteen Member States in the domain of employment , with the prospect of a genuine partnership of these States .
In conclusion , Mr President , economic science certainly does need tools - and I approve of them - but take care lest the tool replaces the objective : it is the objective which should be reached using the tool , and if that is not the case harmonisation will always be downwards , and with that we return to the previous debate of the economic situation of the Union .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank the rapporteur and all those Members who have taken part in this debate , since although the word benchmarking may not at first appear to be particularly meaningful , if we succeed in developing a method for determining why certain undertakings are successful in creating jobs and thereby combating unemployment , it will be an important step forward .
That is the background for our communication , and we are pleased that the Dutch presidency took up this idea immediately .
What is benchmarking ?
It is not , of course , a scientific or economic end in itself .
It is a method of acquiring certain information .
And it is a method which has the advantage of enabling us to avoid the kind of ideological disputes that Mr Caudron always likes to start with me , and simply concern ourselves with practical examples of things that other countries do better than us .
Clearly , there are differences in results - within the Union , between the Union and the Member States , and in relation to third countries - and we wish to start by analysing those differences at three levels .
Firstly , at the level of undertakings .
First and foremost , of course , small and medium-sized enterprises must be included , and both sides of industry - not just management - will take part in all these deliberations .
That can be a very great help .
Some undertakings have struck better deals than others with their workforce or with the unions , for instance on flexible working hours .
They are more productive and therefore even able to give job guarantees .
For example , the chemical industry in Germany has agreed certain rules on working hours with the unions . Because of these agreements , it has been able to pledge that there will be no more operational redundancies before the year 2000 .
So if benchmarking is used properly , it can contribute to the achievement of goals that we presumably all share .
Secondly , we wish to analyse the differences at the level of industrial sectors .
We have already done this in the past , moreover , when considering what policies should be pursued for the car industry in the internal market .
In doing so , one of the most important questions was : is the car industry still competitive ?
What do we have to do to make it more competitive ?
We first examined this in relation to other automobile industries .
We issued communications and drew up recommendations aimed at ending the protection of the industry from foreign competition by means of quotas .
Because the fact is that protectionism - I am sorry to have to tell Mr Caudron , although free trade is a Liberal concept - merely leads to the protected industry becoming weaker and less competitive , so that it has to confine itself to its home market . And if that market is one day opened up , the industry can no longer compete with its rivals .
That was already happening .
As I have already mentioned , we are currently benchmarking the chemical industry - moreover with the aim of improving the skill levels of the workforce , so that if workers remain in the industry they will be more productive , and if their new skills help them to find another job , they will improve their future prospects .
And , thirdly , we wish to analyse the differences at the level of political systems , both within and outside the Union .
Certain Member States - Ireland , for instance - are performing brilliantly .
Ireland is on the periphery of the European Union , but because of its close economic links with the other Member States , it is now performing excellently .
Why is Ireland performing better than a great many of the larger Member States ?
Germany has already been mentioned .
We should give this some careful thought .
If , for example , a large industrialized country invests money in industries that are clearly no longer competitive , Mr Caudron , I cannot help it ...
( Heckling from Mr Samland ) I was thinking of the coal industry , Mr Samland , but we can also take the example of agriculture - and perhaps you should reflect on whether your amendments to the Commission 's proposals are always in keeping with what you are clearly thinking at the moment .
I sometimes think they are not , but that is something we can discuss .
So if funds are not used well , if - Mr Caudron - black holes are allowed to appear in budgets because state-owned industries are making enormous losses , then we should not be surprised if the money is not available for creating sustainable jobs .
That is a simple fact .
It has nothing to do with ideology .
If you or I , or we together , throw our money down the drain , it cannot be used for sensible purposes .
That is what benchmarking is .
It is not an end in itself , but a tool for achieving goals in the interests of combating unemployment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Driving licences
The next item is consideration of the second submission ( A4-0087 / 97 ) from the Committee on Transport and Tourism regarding the Council 's directive on amendment of the directive 91 / 439 / EEC on driving licences ( C4-0011 / 97-96 / 0040 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Farassino ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have arrived at the second reading of the directive to define a system of harmonized codes for the particulars to be included in the Community model driving licence issued by the Member States .
We have discussed this proposal and the whole question of the driving licence at great length , perhaps even a little too much so .
Parliament adopted its opinion at first reading on 5 September 1996 , calling amongst other things for the extension of mutual recognition by Member States to include provisions governing the suspension and withdrawal of a driving licence following an offence committed in a Member State other than the one which issued it , as well as the creation of an advisory committee to assist the Commission .
Of the eight amendments adopted by an overwhelming majority in the House , only two have been taken up by the Council : Amendment No 1 , which adds a reference to subcodes to the text ; the part of Amendment No 5 providing for harmonized codes 02 for hearing aids and 03 for mobility aids , so as to clarify these particulars , with the addition to codes 70 and 71 of a reference to the EC / UN symbols for third countries ; and the part of Amendment No 5 concerning the addition of a code 79 to govern the equivalence between categories of licences issued before the entry into force of Directive 91 / 439 / EEC on 1 July 1996 and the categories specified in Article 3 of that directive .
In addition , the Council has amended the Commission 's proposal by making provision for the setting-up of a regulatory committee , to be known as the committee on driving licences , an amendment which the Committee on Transport has accepted .
I must say that I am not at all satisfied with the conduct of the Commission and the Council , which rejected the bulk of our amendments - very important amendments which had been agreed with the representatives of all the political groups in Parliament , in other words with the clear backing of my colleagues and the other groups as well .
On behalf of the Committee on Transport , I basically decided to retable the two main amendments contained in my report which , as I said a moment ago , had already been approved at first reading in the House , seeking to extend the principle of mutual recognition of driving licences by Member States to include their suspension or withdrawal ; indeed , it seems quite natural to me that if someone commits a serious offence against the law or human rights or a country 's cultural heritage or anything else in one Member State , then that crime should be recognized in another , and the decision of the competent authority in the Member State where the offence was committed should have legal effect throughout the European Union .
That strikes me as common sense .
All I can do , since the Council justifies its rejection of these amendments on the grounds that this question falls under the third pillar , is to repeat that I am firmly convinced - as a matter of principle - of the importance of harmonizing the circumstances for suspension or withdrawal of a licence at European level .
I believe that this is a key element if the free movement of persons within the internal market is to become a reality .
Moreover , I am encouraged by Parliament 's recommendation for second reading . All I can do , therefore , is recommend that the House should stand by the position which it adopted at first reading and hope that the Commission and the Council will review their position and accept these amendments .
Mr President , obviously we welcome this report because it serves to harmonize driving licences and develop a system of codes which can be easily understood by all authorities throughout the EU .
It is a positive step towards eliminating difficulties with translation and communication between drivers and various authorities and it will take the ' aggro ' out of many incidents .
It will also create more problem-free driving , and we hope that will happen Europe-wide .
In order to make this directive as effective as possible it is crucial that mutual recognition should also be extended - and this is important - to cases where licences have been suspended or withdrawn .
We now have the absurd situation where , for example , a driver from Italy touring the UK might be responsible for a serious accident .
He is then prosecuted and banned from driving in the UK for ten years or even for life .
But he can return to Rome , get into his car in the airport carpark and drive away as if nothing at all had happened .
This is totally unacceptable in the European Union .
Therefore , it seems logical that Parliament should support the two amendments which I have retabled from first reading .
These insist that mutual recognition should be extended to bans on driving also .
This is a logical step and one which all of us should accept as a matter of course .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Farassino for the work that he has put into his report .
The proposed Directive before us on which we must take a decision is concerned with establishing a list of categories which can be included on a Community type driving licence .
This could give information on whether the driver wears glasses for example , or the restrictions placed on a handicapped driver , or if a driver may only drive under certain conditions for medical reasons .
It could also give information on any technical changes to a car which are required in order that the holder of the licence may drive , for example reconstruction of the gear box , clutch , brakes or accelerator , an adapted control unit or other restrictions which a vehicle may have .
The proposal aims to bring about a necessary and important harmonisation .
Of course it would be a great advantage if we could have the same rules for this in all the EU Member States and by so doing make it possible to recognise a driving licence regardless of which country the driver is in and the language in which the driving licence has been issued .
This is of particular importance as people travel across ever more borders and more frequently drive in countries other than the country in which they themselves live .
These measures may seem small but they are still important to our common goal of mobility within the internal market .
But we in the PPE group feel that the rapporteur has gone one step too far in wanting to delve into the area of criminal law as well .
For this reason the PPE group will vote against the amendment proposals which have been put forward .
We do this in accordance with the position we have adopted on this throughout the work .
But we do accept the common position which is under consideration now .
The rapporteur has , in my view , made two mistakes : firstly he wants to make an addendum which in my view really has nothing to do with the core issue .
If we want EU Member States to have common rules for withdrawing driving licences , a perfectly legitimate point of view , we must work towards putting forward a proposal for this .
Simply to add a short addendum is scarcely to be recommended .
Co-operation in the area of criminal law is not that easy .
I think that such a proposal should be considered very carefully .
So it is good that the Council has rejected the proposal in this section , and it is sensible to vote against those of the rapporteur 's amendment proposals concerning this matter .
The second mistake which I think that the rapporteur has made concerns the subject matter itself , i.e. do we really want the same rules governing the withdrawal of driving licences in the EU .
As I see it , we members must one day all sit down and think about what we want to use the democratic tool of the EU for .
As members of the European Parliament it is easy to rush all over the place and propose many things for the EU to get involved in .
But we must also ask ourselves if this a desirable development .
My vision is that the EU should concern itself with a limited number of extremely important issues .
We often talk about subsidiarity .
This word should be writ large on our notebooks every day .
This subject in my view is no exception .
We must make a distinction between those things which ought to be determined by the EU and those things which should be determined by the countries themselves .
Imposing punishment is something which should be the task of the individual Member States and is really not something which the EU should get involved in .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his report , which is all about common rules .
I am extremely disappointed in the Council and , I have to say , in the Commissioner himself .
Perhaps he can tell us why the Council has come up with such an incomprehensible position , claiming that sanctions come under the third pillar and therefore cannot possibly be used here .
The Commission has put forward a proposal to introduce a Community driving licence - which was what my and Commissioner Bangemann 's old mentor , the late Cornelis Berkhouwer , always wanted - and now when we have come this far and are ready to introduce it across the Community , there are suddenly objections that if it is a licence from which points are deducted , it cannot be used on a Union-wide basis .
It makes no sense at all , and I hope the Commission can give us an explanation .
Mr President , the Council decided in September 1996 that Directive 91 / 439 / EEC on driving licences , already amended in 1994 to include a temporary derogation for Finland and Sweden , should be further amended .
It is worth noting that the Committee on Legal Affairs decided in June 1996 not to deliver an opinion .
We are now on the home straight , having come to the recommendation for second reading .
In my opinion , Mr Farassino has done a good job in achieving part of the intended objective , especially since some of the proposed amendments - though not all of them - have been accepted : at least there is a system of harmonized codes for the particulars to be included in the driving licence , such as the compulsory wearing of spectacles and the adaptation of vehicles for disabled drivers .
I should like at this point , however , to ask the Council and the Commission what has become of an amendment tabled by the Alleanza nazionale concerning driving licences for persons with mild diabetes .
That amendment should be accepted . It makes sense to me that Parliament should wish to extend mutual recognition by the Member States to include provisions for the suspension and withdrawal of driving licences , a proposal which the Council has taken on board , moreover , in announcing the setting-up of a European committee , to be known as the committee on driving licences , whose task will be to harmonize an approach to safe driving in the various Member States .
Mutual recognition of driving penalties constitutes a vital element if the free movement of persons within the common market is to become a reality .
Mr President , a driving licence entitles the holder to move freely in a motor vehicle within the European Union .
If a citizen of the EU decides to live or work in another Member State , it has hitherto been necessary for him to exchange his driving licence within a certain time limit .
With the introduction of a Community driving licence , that is now about to change , and the 1991 directive must therefore be amended .
For the principle of mutual recognition to be applied in practice , the codes for each type of check must be readable and understandable in every Member State .
That will be helpful for the officials who carry out the checks , but also for drivers themselves .
It is not enough for a document to have the word ' Europe ' printed on it : its contents must also be geared to the free movement of persons and the freedom of choice of residence .
This applies in particular to disabled driving licence holders , since the system of harmonized codes will now set out the conditions for driving a motor vehicle in a clearly non-discriminatory way .
To this extent , we welcome the Council 's common position .
At first reading , however , Parliament called - and we have just repeated that call in the Committee on Transport and Tourism - for mutual recognition to be extended to penalties , i.e. the suspension or withdrawal of driving licences .
Unfortunately , neither the Council nor the Commission took account of those amendments , and we are now retabling them .
It cannot be the purpose of freedom of movement to make it possible for road hogs whose licence has been suspended in one Member State to continue driving with impunity in another Member State with the same licence .
If the argument of subsidiarity is put forward to defend such an abuse , the people of Europe will have little sympathy for it .
They are not interested in which pillar of the Treaty is concerned , they simply wish to have workable proposals .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the Council 's common position on the creation of a standard Community model for national driving licences .
Firstly , this will contribute to facilitating the movement of persons within the Community ; secondly , to increasing road safety and enhancing legal certainty and consumer protection ; and , thirdly , to facilitating the establishment of residence in a Member State other than the one in which the driving licence was issued .
In order to achieve these goals , it is necessary for all particulars - all additional information and restrictions that must be recorded in a driving licence - to be presented in a non-linguistic form .
The proposed system of standard coding of both the notes on the conditions for driving a vehicle and the notes on the administrative procedures for the harmonization of driving licences will make driving licence endorsements easier to understand and simplify checks on national driving licences , which will continue to be valid .
So far , so good .
But I fail to understand one section of this House : how can you accept the continuation of national responsibility for issuing driving licences - even if on the basis of a standard Community model - and at the same time call for Community legislation on the suspension and withdrawal of licences ?
Clearly , double standards are being used here .
Surely matters of justice and internal security are still aspects of the Union 's third pillar , and therefore subject to intergovernmental cooperation ?
I can only recommend the rejection of these amendments , which are in breach of existing Community law and which , I am sorry to say , were adopted by a majority in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I should like to thank the Council for its common position , in which it takes over the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading and accepted by the Commission .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I assume that Mr Watts has to campaign in the United Kingdom until 1 May .
Once again , we are discussing the question of driving licences , and we must finally bring this debate to a close .
Firstly , because the Community driving licence was supposed to have been introduced on 1 July 1996 - and I have an example here of what it is supposed to look like .
Now we are talking about 1 July 1997 !
Secondly , because we now only have to decide on the codes , on which we are actually agreed .
We must therefore seriously consider whether we wish to have driving bans which are valid Communitywide , or only at national level .
I am my group 's spokesman on the design of the standard Community driving licence , and I have always supported the introduction of such a licence .
As Mr Koch rightly said , however , the individual Member States are exclusively responsible for issuing driving licences , and they must therefore also be exclusively responsible for withdrawing them .
And so it must remain !
The example of the Italian in the United Kingdom that Mr Morris just gave was very revealing .
This is the nub of the matter !
Until we drive on the right everywhere in Europe , we shall continue to have such problems .
When we drive on the right throughout Europe , we can talk about Community-wide driving bans .
This is a clear case of distortion within the European Union .
We should now accept the Council 's common position and avoid delaying further still - through a quite unnecessary conciliation procedure - the introduction of a standard Community driving licence .
Mr President . I do not contend that there should be the same legal , or criminal legal system throughout the European Union .
I do not think that is likely to happen .
But it is possible to have several legal systems within one Union or indeed , as in the case of the United Kingdom , one country .
I am an English lawyer .
I am not entitled to practise law in Scotland , and that means I could not plead before a Scottish court unless I went through special procedures .
Nonetheless , a driving ban imposed by a Scottish court is recognized in England .
And all we are saying in this report , or at least all the amendments say , is that such a ban should be recognized throughout the European Union .
I cannot believe that in the world of E-mail and computers it is not possible for there to be mutual recognition of bans and indeed of the points system .
I hope very much that the Commission will have listened very carefully indeed to the point made by my colleague Mr Morris whose amendments I profoundly support .
Mr President , since today 's debate has again revolved around the issue that featured most prominently at first reading - because otherwise we are in agreement - I should like to concentrate on that point .
It could of course be said , simply in terms of human logic , that it can surely make no difference if a person receives a driving ban in an EU country which is not his country of residence .
As you know , the proposal provides that if a person receives a driving ban in his country of residence , the ban is valid throughout the Union .
That does not apply if he receives the ban in another EU country , in other words a country that is not his country of residence .
The Commission entirely understands this point of view .
However , as the Council has repeatedly explained - and this is why it did not take over the amendment in its common position - the Member States ' legal systems are such that a constitutional problem arises , as well as other legal problems .
And the Commission cannot escape that argument .
I have to beg your indulgence .
Clearly , Mrs Schmidbauer , this will not be supported by Parliament either .
I listened very carefully to the speakers from the Liberal Group , but I was not really able to tell what they intend to do . In any event , the Christian Democrats will presumably hope to reject the amendment with the support of the Liberals .
And even if the Liberals do not side with the Christian Democrats , there will still be no majority to carry the amendment .
That is what I would assume .
We are therefore debating something at the moment which probably has only theoretical significance .
It may of course take on practical significance if the Council should agree - perhaps at the Intergovernmental Conference - to transfer the responsibility for certain matters to the Community .
Then we can discuss it again .
What Mr Ferber said is quite right : if Parliament retables these amendments - and the rapporteur , whom I wish to thank for his work , has argued forcefully for this - the whole process will remain stalled .
Not all Member States support these amendments as enthusiastically as Parliament .
Then we would not get a result .
That may not necessarily be a reason for not trying to push through Parliament 's opinion , but the fact is that then nothing would change .
Then not even the mutual recognition of bans imposed by the country of residence would be possible .
That would surely be an unsatisfactory outcome , whereas the proposal represents a first step forward , which may achieve good results if all the Member States find it reasonable in practice .
That is how the Commission sees the situation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0164 / 97 ) .
Question No 30 by Konstantinos Hatzidakis ( H-0225 / 97 )
Subject : Controls and systems of control for the detection of fraud and other irregularities in respect of various agricultural products
The Commission has invoked ' fraud ' as the reason for reviewing the COMs in cotton and , more recently , in olive oil .
However , it is strange that almost all the publicized irregularities concern Mediterranean agricultural products .
Moreover , it is only to be expected that fraud will be detected where the control structures ( control bodies , etc . ) are strongest and where particularly stringent controls are carried out , and that , by the same token , fraud will not be detected where no such controls are carried out , in the absence of the relevant structures and / or prejudice .
Can the Commission say whether over the past five years there has been a balance between the controls carried out by product and measure ( for instance , export subsidies , interventions , etc . ) in respect of northern and southern products , and whether or not these controls reveal that only the above-mentioned Mediterranean products are subject to fraud ?
A number of products are geographically limited to certain Member States .
So it is not surprising that there are irregularities on certain types of assistance in these Member States .
Olive oil and cotton are examples of products which are only produced by certain countries .
The Commission would like to stress that it is above all the Member States which are responsible for controlling the investments to be financed by the Community .
There is specific Community legislation covering controls in the agricultural guarantee section .
It is the Commission 's role to ensure that controls are applied uniformly .
This is done through our own on site investigations and through the national control programmes .
Over and above the Regulation on Financing the Common Agricultural Policy there are a whole range of regulations dealing with measures such as export subsidies .
There are also particular rules concerning particular products .
There are special inspection offices for olive oil and tobacco for example and inspection bodies for fruit , vegetables and wine as well .
One of the objectives of the Regulation governing on the spot controls is to ensure that there is a standardised level of protection for the Community budget in all Member States .
Under Regulation 595 / 91 Member States are responsible for informing the Commission of any cases of fraud or irregularities detected by their control bodies .
The Commission 's annual report on fraud clearly shows the great variety of measures taken and generally speaking - this is something we should remember - there is deception in all of the EU Member States .
So the reform of common market organisations is not just limited to olive oil and cotton , but also covers , for example , the recent amendments made in the regulations governing assistance for flax , hemp and cattle fodder .
The regulations covering export subsidies have also been considerably tightened .
Madam Commissioner , I am not saying - and I am clear about this in my question - that fraud occurs only in the northern countries .
It does , of course , occur in the southern countries as well .
However , the Commission seems to be focusing its criticism on the southern countries alone , and that is reflected in the revision of the single market regulation in the case of olive oil .
I am fully aware , of course , that Regulation 595 / 91 obliges the Member States to notify information about fraud that they detect . From one standpoint I am completely satisfied with the reply of the Commission ; with its acknowledgment , that is to say , that the information notified makes it clear that northern products as well as southern products are subject to fraud .
I must , however , make the following points . First , the Commission has given me no figures from the controls carried out by itself , rather than by the Member States , because , obviously , it is from those controls that it gets its figures for fraud .
What figures , for example , are revealed by controls carried out in respect of northern products ?
Second , if it is true that , as the Commission has acknowledged in its reply , fraud and general irregularities are also noted for the northern products , I find it very remarkable that it is not proceeding with revisions of the common market regimes for those products as well .
Why is olive oil the only example of fraud that the Commission is concentrating on ?
The Honourable Member has totally misunderstood the Commission on this point .
In the report which is produced every year both for this House and for the public we have clearly and distinctly shown that there are irregularities in both Southern and Northern States within the European Union .
And it may also be more appropriate to tackle certain products in certain areas individually .
The Commission has recently adopted a new way of tackling assistance particularly for olive oil and there have also been irregularities in this area .
I would like to put two questions to the Commission based on the fact that fraud must not only be controlled , the amounts fiddled must also be recovered . Unfortunately 90 % of Community fraud is undetected ; only 10 % is detected .
First , is the Commission is prepared to set up a single organization to detect fraud in all countries ?
Secondly , what criteria does the Commission apply to its power to reduce or provisionally suspend monthly advances under EAGGF-Guarantee ? Because money could be recovered in that way and I know it has only been applied in certain very particular cases in southern countries , but I do not know if it has been done for cattle fraud , cereals fraud or other types of fraud .
It is true that the Member States within the Union are not very good at ensuring that payments which have ended up in the wrong pockets are repaid .
We need greater cooperation in this respect to ensure that the percentage of repayments increases .
It is worth mentioning here that the Commission 's Financial Control has started to draw up agreements with individual Member States .
These agreements are intended to help find a system for following up each project , for evaluating the use of funds in each country and for achieving a general improvement in cooperation which will encourage us to take care that tax payer 's money is handled in a responsible way .
Mr President , I merely wished to repeat a question which has been asked in the past , but has remained unanswered .
The proposed reform of the COM in olive oil does indeed devote particular attention to the situation in the south of Europe .
The only reason given for this reform is combating fraud : I should therefore like to know on the basis of what data and what inspections an approach of this kind was adopted in the case of olive oil , and how many inspections were carried out in this case compared with those concerning other products , for example rice imports from the Dutch overseas territories , or bananas arriving in the port of Antwerp ?
According to Commissioner Fischler , who is after all responsible for the agricultural sector , there were a number of reasons which made a change in the form of aid to olive producers necessary , as the aid and the existing organisation was inadequate .
So now for example there is a proposal for a new way of tackling the irregularities which unfortunately also arise within the olive producing sector .
As the author is not present , Question No 31 falls .
Question No 32 by Mr Burenstam Linder ( H-0252 / 97 )
Subject : The cost of eastward enlargement
The estimated impact of eastward enlargement on the EU budget has attracted much attention , and the cost of such enlargement is often cited as an obstacle to the admission of new Member States .
The benefits of an improved security situation may be measured only in qualitative terms , but the budgetary impact of redistributing resources from existing to new Member States may be set against huge economic benefits in the form of increased growth .
Academic research has been conducted which indicates that eastward enlargement would benefit the Union greatly .
The debate would be more balanced if the Commission had soundly-based research carried out into the great economic benefits which eastward enlargement would yield for both existing and new Member States .
What are the Commission 's views on this , and is it planning to conduct such research ?
I should like to make the following points in reply to the question from Mr Burenstam Linder .
The enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is a historic challenge for the European Union .
Enlargement is a political necessity and offers tremendous new opportunities .
If we prepare for the process carefully and execute it well , we shall strengthen peace , security and stability in Europe and stimulate the European economy .
The honourable Member rightly points out that the budgetary impact of enlargement needs to be seen in the broader context of its impact on the Union 's economy as a whole .
The enlargement of the internal market with the addition of hundreds of millions of consumers will mean enormous benefits for the existing Member States in terms of greater trade and economic activity .
To be able to take full advantage of the economic benefits of enlargement , the applicant countries and the Union must prepare thoroughly in advance and tackle any post-enlargement adaptation problems effectively .
At the request of the Council , the Commission is working on a study into the effects of enlargement on Union policy and how these are expected to develop .
The Commission will be forwarding this impact study and other related documents which the Council has requested to the Council immediately after the end of the IGC .
The impact of enlargement on EU policy will be set against the expected economic effects in the broader sense , which will therefore also be evaluated .
In addition to the work being carried out by its own services , the Commission is also looking at other scientific research in this field , including research into the anticipated economic benefits .
Let me thank Commissioner Van den Broek for his answer .
The advantages of eastward enlargement have of course been discussed often but it is good that Mr Van den Broek has raised the issue again .
I hope that this impact study will provide a concise analysis and will attempt to make a quantitative evaluation of the benefits of such a step .
Even though the European Union was founded on the principle that integration promotes freedom and peace , the fact that these are indisputably great benefits is not made clear in the debate .
Today we are discussing the costs of enlargement which form a considerable barrier to that very enlargement .
There is a risk that enlargement towards the east will become harder .
So I am really looking forward to this impact study and hope that it will also contain this quantitative attempt at calculating the benefits .
I sympathize with the honourable Member 's desire to have precise information on the impact of enlargement , but I think it is rather speculative to try to quantify the broader economic benefits and costs of such a complex process , given the often very uncertain factors involved .
That is why I am rather reluctant to give quantitative estimates .
However , I am quite happy to promise to include existing scientific research in our analysis , as I said earlier , although allowance must of course be made for the uncertainty regarding economic developments in the European Union itself as a result of the impact of enlargement on certain aspects of European policy , and the uncertainty regarding future economic developments in countries which have applied for membership .
All these various factors make it difficult to give any exact figures .
I would finally point out to those who doubt the extent to which the integration of the new members will create new economic opportunities that we can already see how much trade has increased with the applicant countries since their transformation in 1989 .
There are many sectors , including agriculture , where we currently have a considerable trade surplus , and while we must hope , for the sake of the Eastern European countries , that the situation evens out eventually , at the same time the high level of imports of investment goods in Eastern European countries which are modernizing their economies is one of the positive side-effects of the current imbalance .
As somebody who is about to go to Poland next week with the joint parliamentary committee , I should also like to emphasize the very high levels of growth being achieved both by Poland and the Czech Republic among the applicant states .
Like the original questioner , I should very much welcome from the Commission a breakdown of just how much countries will contribute to the overall economy of the EU , both in terms of expanding markets for the existing Member States and the contribution of those countries to overall economic expansion .
Is the impact study being done by the Commission to consider these positive advantages as well as possible costs ?
I shall be quite brief here , because the honourable Member should find an answer to his questions in the report which the Commission hopes to submit in mid-June , and which the government leaders are to use as the basis for deciding , probably at a European summit at the end of the year , what is to be done as regards beginning the accession negotiations .
I would therefore ask you to be patient , because the evaluation and detailed research into the exact figures are already in hand , and I hope that you will be able to get a clearer picture from the reports which the Commission is currently drawing up on all ten of the applicant countries .
I would like to highlight the magnitude of the impact the integration of the eastern countries is going to have on Community agricultural policies , alongside the political importance of their joining the European Union .
But I want to ask whether this impact study we have been promised has evaluated in detail the impact on agricultural policies as regards products and payments .
Here too I must ask for your understanding .
I know that these questions are more than justified in view of the plans for enlargement , but because the government leaders have asked us to report soon , around mid-July , on how all the aspects of enlargement are interrelated , including the impact on Union policy in important areas such as agriculture and structural policy , I can only deal now with certain aspects of your questions .
The honourable Member knows that work has been going on for some time now on reforming the common agricultural policy within the Union , partly as a result of the implementation of the MacSharry proposals and partly as a result of the agreements at the Uruguay Round , and those reforms are now going ahead .
We are also expecting a new world trade round at the end of the century on the possible liberalization of the agricultural sector .
If we also relate this to the forthcoming enlargement towards the east , then it is clear that there can be no question of a radical upheaval in our own agricultural policy , but further adaptation will be needed , just as the applicant countries will be urged to adapt , first and foremost by ensuring that their farmland is privatized , where this is not already the case , and by restructuring and modernizing their agriculture so that the systems can be brought more closely into line .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 33 and 34 fall .
Question No 35 by Mr Camisón Asensio ( H-0214 / 97 )
Subject : WTO Information Technology Agreement ( ITA )
Can the Commission explain the conditions agreed on at the recent WTO meeting in Singapore with regard to international trade in the context of the Global Information Technology Agreement ( ITA ) ?
The agreement takes the form of a ministerial declaration adopted on 13 December 1996 in Singapore to which there are fourteen parties , including the European Community .
It sets out the general objective of tariff elimination by the year 2000 for a detailed list of information technology products .
Unless otherwise agreed , tariff elimination is to take place through equal steps beginning on 1 July 1997 , for completion by 1 January 2000 .
The ITA stipulated two conditions before it could enter into effect .
Ninety per cent of world IT trade had to be covered and there had to be agreement on exceptional staging , that is to say providing for tariff cuts and elimination either ahead of or beyond 1 January 2000 .
These two conditions have now been met .
On 24 March , the Council took a formal decision for the EC to conclude the ITA .
It noted that more than 90 % of world trade was covered and agreed to the staging requests of certain participants .
On 26 March , 25 participants representing 92 % of world trade information technology products met , reviewed and approved their respective schedules for the elimination of tariffs on an agreed list of IT products on a consensus basis , thus bringing the Information Technology Agreement into effect .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for that information , but I had hoped he would take the opportunity to clarify what concessions had to be made as regards customs duties on information technology products at that meeting to gain advantages in trade in alcohol , because that was not made clear .
We would like complete transparency about the real weight on each side of the scales , as well as the reaction of the national governments to this agreement , because it is astonishing to promise a three-stage reduction in tariffs on trade in semiconductors up to the year 1999 , if we still hope to achieve the planned strong increase in jobs in the European Union through exports , and if greater access is being achieved , as promised , for European industry through better quality of equipment at more competitive prices .
Mr Commissioner , I would just like fuller information on that .
The spirits drink agreement was reached in parallel with the United States while in Singapore , and amounted to the elimination of tariffs on certain spirits which had not previously been covered in the Uruguay Round .
It has , of course , nothing formally to do with the ITA , but it was reached , if you like , as a further concession to the European Union in those talks .
There was a particular problem about the application of this agreement to rum , but the detailed modalities were finalized on 1 March to the satisfaction of the European industry .
As far as the ITA itself is concerned , I mentioned that there were provisions for special staging by agreement .
An understanding was reached with the United States , within the ITA , on the semiconductor issues .
This understanding provides for an elimination of EEC semiconductor duties more expeditiously than under the general rule set out within the ITA , but also in return for that , the elimination in one step of certain US duties of interest to the European Community .
It was a hard-fought negotiation and that was the outcome .
As a result the European industry will participate in the inaugural session of the World Semiconductor Council which was originally established by the United States and Japan , which we were anxious to get into ; indeed we insisted on this as a condition for even beginning negotiations with the ITA in mind .
That objective has been achieved .
The Council will overview cooperation activities between industries .
We were extremely anxious that the Japanese and the Americans would be going ahead without us .
Now we will be there as well .
As a result of all this , the European industry warmly welcomes the ITA and thinks that it both reduces the costs for the many industries that are the consumers of imported ITI products and provides new opportunities for European Union ITI product exporters .
Question No 36 by Mr McMahon ( H-0221 / 97 )
Subject : Norwegian salmon dumping
Can the Commission inform Parliament what action it is going to take pending its investigation into unfair practices by Norwegian salmon producers and processors in the export of salmon into the EU ?
Does the Commission favour quantitative restrictions or a levy in the form of a tax on Norwegian salmon exports into the EU and will the Commission raise the matter with the EEA surveillance court ?
Two separate investigations into alleged dumping on the one hand , and alleged subsidization on the other hand , of farmed Atlantic salmon originating in Norway were initiated by the Commission on 31 August 1996 .
Both these investigations are well advanced .
Since they are governed by statutory deadlines , any provisional measures which the Commission may impose must be published by 31 May at the latest .
No final decision has yet been taken by the Commission but Parliament will be informed of the outcome .
Should there be a decision to impose measures , they usually take the form of a duty calculated on the CIF import price .
Since no request for safeguard measures has been received by the Commission from a Member State , a quantitative measure cannot at present be envisaged .
Since such action takes place under the relevant Community law on anti-dumping and anti-subsidy which is based on WTO agreements and not on the EEA , it is not considered appropriate to raise the matter in the context of the EEA agreement .
Informal discussions have taken place in the EFTA surveillance authority .
Mr President , while I thank the Commissioner for his answer I would like him to give us a little more information - if I could tease some out of him .
Yesterday , according to the press , there was a meeting of the Advisory Committee in which - it is alleged - several Member States decided not to support the Commission 's proposal for action : as a tax of about 12-15 % in particular was mentioned .
I should like to ask the Commissioner what actually happened at the meeting yesterday .
Secondly , he says that no Member State has made any representation .
Would he also confirm or deny that the Government of Norway has made representations , and would he confirm or deny that there was no representation from either Raymond Robertson , the Scottish Office Minister responsible for fishing , or Michael Forsyth , the Scottish Secretary of State ?
Has he had any contact with Mr Robertson since his abortive meeting and contretemps with the Commissioner for Fisheries , Mrs Bonino ?
I would like some answers to these questions , please .
I will do my best to give the information that can properly be given .
The honourable gentleman must have misheard me , because I did not say that we had not been approached by any Member State , I said that no request for safeguard measures had been received .
That is quite different from requests for anti-dumping or anti-subsidy measures to be taken .
I can assure the honourable gentleman that the government to which he referred has been active in advancing the case to which he also referred and has an interest .
So , in a word , there is no electoral mileage in this one at all .
I would go on to say that , as far as the Norwegians are concerned , they have made their views known .
I ought just to say , to be quite clear about it , that since fisheries were expressly excluded from the EEA , not least following a demand from the Norwegian Government , the normal provisions of the Community 's anti-subsidy and antidumping instruments apply , and we do not accept that Norway is exempt from their application because of its membership of the EEA .
Mr Commissioner , may I respectfully ask that when a question is put , I give you the floor .
I am not just insisting on doing my job , those of us who do not know your language need the interpreters to provide us with the questions and answers .
So I would be grateful to you if you would let me give you the floor , not only to justify my work and salary .
Mrs Thors now has the floor for a one-minute supplementary question .
We now know more about this issue due to what has recently been written in the World Fisheries ' Report , where it was stated that there are plans for both duties and special penalty taxes .
I hope that what is written in the newspapers is correct because it is obvious that it is not just the Scottish fish farmers who have suffered greatly .
For example in our archipelago in Finland we have not asked for a single Mark in investment assistance from the Pesca programme for fish farming because the situation is such that prices have dropped from 25 to 15 Marks per kilo .
Imports of Norwegian salmon have doubled .
I ask therefore : is there any possibility of using this penalty tax to compensate fish farmers for the damage that they have suffered as a result of imports from Norway .
The honourable lady is quite right to draw attention to the fact that - by implication - if measures are introduced , these will not be for the benefit of any one country or any one group of fishermen .
They will be measures imposed by the European Union on those who are found guilty of dumping or awarding subsidies - if measures are imposed - and they will be imposed for the benefit of all who suffer from that dumping , because the effect will be a duty which will , in future , be payable by those found guilty of dumping or providing subsidies .
Question No 38 by Mrs Kinnock ( H-0261 / 97 )
Subject : Panam Project
In view of the reservations expressed by Parliament in 1994 about the Panam project , is the Commission satisfied that our concerns in the following areas have been fully addressed under the current project proposal ?
Have NGOs been fully consulted and involved ?
Has a full environmental impact assessment taken place ?
Will the Tibetan people be the sole beneficiaries of the project ?
The NGOs working in Tibet were consulted at each stage of the project 's preparation .
Moreover , specialists who had worked previously with the NGOs contributed towards the writing of the project .
The NGOs have also been fully involved in the reappraisal of the project , which took place in September 1995 .
Since then , the Commission has maintained regular contacts with the NGOs , which have expressed their specific interest in participating in the project .
The September 1995 project-appraisal mission concluded that the project , with its specific features of river stabilization , tree-planting and pasture-growing , would have a beneficial impact on the environment .
A full environmental impact assessment study is foreseen as part of the baseline studies , which will be carried out immediately after the start of the project , to ensure that the impact remains positive .
The Commission can confirm that the project has been designed in a way which ensures that it will solely benefit the local Tibetan population .
Tibetan people were consulted in conditions allowing them to express themselves freely during the project design and appraisal phases and will also be in charge of the management of the project if it goes ahead when finalized , as long , of course , as they qualify for the different management and engineering posts concerned .
Thank you Commissioner .
I am sure you will sympathize with the fact that I have to catch an aeroplane to return to the United Kingdom .
I am interested in what you say .
I am glad that you say that NGOs have been consulted .
That is good , but of course I am aware that is a fact that some key NGOs have not been involved at all .
I want to ask the Commissioner for information about exactly which NGOs he is referring to and I would also like to know whether any contact has been made with those NGOs during the last six months .
I would also like to know why the environmental assessment will take place after the start of the project .
Surely it would make a lot more sense if it were to take place before implementation of the project because that would ensure that anything untoward or any difficulties that might occur could be avoided .
I am also pleased that you talk about the design benefiting the Tibetan people .
That is good .
But I would also like to know whether you are ensuring that the delivery of project will also benefit the Tibetan people , not just its design , I would also like to ask the Commissioner to ensure that this is a much more open and transparent process than the last incarnation of this project and that the relevant documents will be available to Parliament and other interested parties .
I am grateful to the honourable Member for her continuing interest in the project .
Perhaps I could deal first of all with the question of the environmental impact assessment study .
As I said , that is foreseen as part of the baseline studies which will be carried out immediately after the start of the project .
In a sense it will be before the project really gets under way , but of course it cannot be done except as part of the project .
In that sense it is happening at the very beginning in order to make sure that nothing happens during the course of the project which renders the situation worse than it was before anything was done on the ground .
So I think we have a common purpose in this which will be achieved in a way acceptable to the honourable Member .
I certainly agree that it is essential to ensure that the delivery of the project is for the benefit of the Tibetan people as well as its design , and the project monitoring is precisely intended to achieve that objective .
I have no interest in anything other than transparency and will continue to keep Parliament fully informed of the process .
Finally , and perhaps most importantly , the last outstanding points that have to be finalized and without which I would not be prepared to agree to give my final consent that the project should go ahead , are , firstly , that we should be really sure that the project will benefit the ethnic Tibetan population .
Secondly , the NGOs should be allowed to participate in the project implementation , so we have of course been in touch with such NGOs as Médicins sans Frontières and the Save the Children Fund in the last six months , and it is our intention that those NGOs who wish to participate should be enabled to do so . This has , I know , been of great interest to the honourable Member throughout .
I think that is now finally assured but I will not give my final consent until I am totally satisfied that is indeed the case .
Question No 39 will not be taken as it deals with a subject which is already on the agenda for this part-session .
Question No 37 by Mr Howitt ( H-0224 / 97 )
Subject : Anti-dumping duties in the textile sector
In imposing dumping duties on grey cloth , pushing up prices for textile companies in the UK including Greige in Benfleet in my constituency , how does the Commission distinguish between European importers who apply and monitor their own ethical standards against child labour and other breaches of acceptable labour practices , and less scrupulous companies who do not seek to monitor such standards in their suppliers ?
Can the Commission also explain how it ensures this measure does not inhibit fair trade access to European markets for reputable producers in less developed countries ?
Does the Commission plan further action in this respect ?
, Vice -President of the Commission . In carrying out anti-dumping investigations , including the one in question relating to the imports of grey cotton fabrics , the Commission is bound by the provisions of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 384 / 96 which reflects the WTO agreement in this area .
The instrument is designed to eliminate the trade distortion caused by imports of goods at dumped prices and does not therefore inhibit fair access to the Community market for producers in any country , developed or otherwise .
As regards the issue of child labour , the Community 's revised scheme of generalized tariff preferences , the GSP , permits us to withdraw temporarily and totally or partially the benefit of the preferential regime in respect of countries where the most degrading forms of child labour are practised , namely slavery or forced labour .
Furthermore , the scheme provides for additional preferences , that is to say at further reduced preferential rates of duty , to be granted from 1 January next year to beneficiary countries which effectively respect the standards of certain International Labour Organization conventions including Convention 138 relating to child labour .
In due course the Commission will submit a proposal for a Council decision on such additional preferences and the modalities for applying them .
I have a very simple question .
What answer would the Commissioner give to companies in my own constituency such as J.W. Wilkinson of Kendal and Stead McAlpine of Carlisle who very much fear that the imposition of such high duties on grey cloth will create unemployment , inflation and irreparable damage to the textile industry , not only in the UK but across the European Union ?
I do not agree with those who express that view although I respect their sincerity in thinking it .
We have looked into this very carefully .
We must first establish whether there has been dumping - and I think it is clear that there has been .
We then have to see whether there has been damage to the European industry that is engaged in producing the products which have been imported cheaply at dumped prices .
It is clear that there has been damage .
Then we have to look at the whole question of whether it is in the Community interest to proceed , and that means whether there are other people who are likely to suffer more from the imposition of the duties than people who are faced with this competition would gain .
It is fair to say that we have carried out the exercise of looking at the Community interest with greater thoroughness in this case than on previous occasions .
We have looked very carefully at the arguments presented by those who feel they need this protection for their own production and in our view that is a fear which is not justified .
We do not think the effect of the duties will be to deprive them of their own proper business opportunities .
If I thought the balance was the other way I would not have put forward the proposal .
Commissioner , my understanding is that this decision went to the anti-dumping committee where the vote was 7 to 7 with Germany abstaining .
Could you confirm that was the case ?
Secondly , I understand that it has now gone to the Member States for consultation .
Could you tell me how long you anticipate that process continuing ?
Will anti-dumping duties continue to be provisionally imposed during that consultation period until we finally get a decision ?
If anti-dumping duties are ultimately rejected by the Council of Ministers , is there any question of compensation for those companies who have been adversely affected ?
Finally , given that the effect of these anti-dumping duties has been to distort the market in the textile industry and the relationship between spinners , weavers and finishers and that European finishers have been put at a serious disadvantage by these anti-dumping duties , is there not a case for anti-dumping duties to be imposed throughout the textile industry and not in just one part of it ?
I do not agree with the last point .
I do not accept that it is possible to impose anti-dumping duties in relation to products about which there has not been a complaint .
That is not an available option .
As far as the procedure is concerned , it is not appropriate for me to comment on the committees to which the honourable Member has referred .
It is for the Commission to put forward a proposal to the Council by 20 April .
That will be done .
The Council must decide within one month , by 20 May , if the measures are to be applied .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that reply .
You will recall that three weeks ago in the REX Committee , I asked you the very same question based on an article that appeared in The Financial Times .
You said that The Financial Times was guilty of a piece of contentious reporting .
Do you still hold to that view or was The Financial Times quite accurate in that article ?
You say you have carried out all the tests which apply to dumping .
Included in that is that damage has to be shown .
Perhaps it would help us if we knew who had been damaged because , as my colleagues have said , the information we are getting is that certain parts of the industry could be adversely affected and , indeed , employment could be damaged .
Rather than focus on The Financial Times , admirable newspaper as it is , I would prefer to focus on the actual issues which the honourable Member raised .
We all know that the purpose of yesterday 's newspapers , however excellent they are , is to wrap up fish .
Therefore I do not think we need to hark back to The Financial Times .
But the substance of the question is an important one .
The answer is that these duties are not just arbitrarily proposed because the Commission thinks that it is a fancy thing to do , but because of a complaint made .
The complaint is made by people who are producing the product which has been imported .
They allege that this has been imported at dumped prices and that it is damaging their legitimate business .
We have no interest in interfering with fair trading .
That is why I said that the first test is : has there been dumping ?
Are the prices dumped prices ?
The second question is : has the industry been affected , or does it risk being affected , to which the answer is ' yes ' .
The third question is : are there other people , whether they are consumers or other industries , who would be adversely affected and worse affected than the people who made the complaint ?
We have looked very carefully at that third point .
The Commission finds that there is not sufficient evidence to justify a finding that there would be damage which would justify not intervening , even though the initial dumping case , both with regard to the fact of dumping and its injury appears to have been established .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
You are doubly thanked , first for your replies and secondly for your patience with the President who repeatedly broke the House of Commons rhythm you were trying to impose on the questions and answers .
But remember , working with eleven languages has its obligations .
Question No 40 by Mr Gerard Collins ( H-0246 / 97 )
Subject : Regional policy in Ireland
In view of the overall growth in the Irish economy and with a view to assessing which parts of the country will qualify for Objective 1 status after 1999 , has the Commission undertaken any research into the disparities in economic development between the different regions or sub-regions within Ireland and , if not , will it now undertake such research as a matter of urgency ?
Mr President , as far as the Structural Funds are concerned , the entire Irish national territory constitutes a single level II region under the NUTS classification system .
Because eligibility for Objective I support is decided at NUTS level II , it has to be assessed on the basis of data for Ireland as a whole , not on the strength of regional or subregional statistics .
However , the Commission recently asked EUROSTAT to provide estimates of GDP per inhabitant for the regions of Ireland at NUTS level III , using the so-called ESA method of national accounting .
According to estimates for the period 1992-94 , certain Irish regions were below the threshold level of 75 % of average GDP per inhabitant in the EU as a whole - although by 1995 , the figures in question were already showing a significant improvement , thanks to an impressive national growth rate of 8 % .
However , I would emphasize again that these estimated figures at NUTS level III are not the same as those used in the Objective I eligibility criteria , which are applied at NUTS level II .
My sincere thanks to the Commissioner for her reply .
Can she say what information she has , and can she make this information available to us , with regard to the level of development in the different subregions of the country ?
Can she say to what extent discussions have taken place with the Irish Government on the possibility of sub-dividing Ireland into a number of regions in the context of the regional policy programme expected to follow the present one which finishes in 1999 ?
Can she say what sort of time-scale is involved in arranging for Ireland - currently a single-zone territory for Objective 1 status - to be divided into more than one region so that areas in the west of Ireland , from Donegal down along the coast to South Kerry or West Cork , might be still considered for Objective 1 area status in the post1999 programme ?

Mr President , there has been no application from the Irish Government nor any attempt on its part to alter the existing NUTS classification .
Indeed , it could not be altered without corresponding changes at an administrative level , and I am in no doubt that the present system is more advantageous to Ireland as regards support in the period up to 1999 .
It is true that the figures available to us show levels of some 66 % for the border counties , 58 % for the mid-east , 63 % for the midlands and 78 % for the west , but as I said , these are figures from 1994 ; the new phase of funding from the Structural Funds begins in 2000 , and you can see that if the present pace of development is maintained , the figures will not take long to reach the 75 % level .
The Irish Government has not yet come forward with any proposals for a different approach , but should it do so , the Commission would consider them in the same way that it would consider proposals from other Member States .
Mr President , Mr Lindqvist , Article 130a of the EU Treaty explicitly lays down the goal of strengthening economic and social cohesion .
In particular , the Community commits itself to seeking to reduce disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least-favoured regions , including rural areas .
The same goal applies in the relatively affluent Member States with regard to their less-favoured regions .
Article 130b identifies the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund as the financial instruments available to the Community for supporting its actions to strengthen economic and social cohesion .
Funding for the period 1994-99 was approved by the European Council in December 1992 .
There was unanimous agreement on the goals of the Structural Funds , the tasks to be accomplished and the procedure to be followed , including the rules on financial procedure .
Part of the reason for the complexity of the administrative process and the length of time taken for disbursement lies in the need to ensure the efficient financial management , effective control of expenditure and evaluation which European taxpayers are entitled to expect .
Frequently , however , delays also result from the length of time taken for decision-making within the Commission - something we are tackling through the SEM 2000 process - and shortcomings in the administrative and budgetary procedures of the Member States , which hold up the transfer of funds from central government to regional or local level .
Given that the Structural Funds are used to cofinance national measures , it is clear from this situation that national structural policy is not , as a rule , any more efficient than its European counterpart .
Another point to bear in mind is that this Community funding is used for additional , strategic projects which would otherwise be implemented only at a later date or not at all .
The cohesion report identifies some impressive achievements of European structural policy in the poorer and less-favoured regions of the EU , but it also contains a number of pointers for the future , with a view to promoting more effective and transparent use of European money , targeting scarce resources , reducing red tape and putting more emphasis on success .
This applies to all the objectives that are promoted by the Structural Funds , not least those which you mentioned , Mr Lindqvist , of assisting sparsely populated rural and peripheral regions .
The Commission will present its proposals for the reform of structural policy as part of the Santer Package in July this year , and will spell them out in detail in its proposals for a review of the Structural Funds regulation in early 1998 .
Thank you very much for such a detailed answer .
My idea that perhaps we should not be sending money backwards and forwards unnecessarily between the Member States and the EU but should perhaps , reduce the Membership fee as I have suggested and instead allow countries to keep this money is just one idea among many .
Another suggestion would be for the EU to adopt certain fundamental positions , for example , concerning jobs , integration projects between different countries i.e. co-operation on integration and the environment : fundamental principles governing the use of the Structural Funds , with the aim of balancing regional injustices of course .
Within this framework the Member States could then decide totally for themselves how the money will be used .
A third idea would be to have better co-ordination between EU subsidies and National subsidies , for example by allowing locally elected bodies such as the County Councils in Sweden and the district authorities to decide how the funds should be used .
I would be grateful for comments on these suggestions .
Firstly , as you know , tax policy lies outside the competences of the European Union and the Commission .
Of course , tax policy can be one of the tools of regional development , but it is not part of Community regional policy .
Moreover , Mr Lindqvist , provision exists within the partnership-based approach of our structural policy for the very thing you are advocating , namely taking decisions on projects at local level .
We have monitoring committees , on which regional and local authorities are represented , and it is their job to select projects for support .
Indeed , the fact that the level of funding commitments and payments to Finland and Sweden is still below the Union average is not unrelated to the learning process that we are jointly engaged in - a fruitful process , I might add , and one that is steering us towards closer partnership .
But partnership implies an input from all the partners , and I believe that the experience of the European Union and the Commission has greatly helped the development of regional structural policy in Finland and Sweden in every respect .
That , at any rate , is the feedback we have received from the numerous local discussions that we have organized .
I have a very specific question for the Commissioner .
I have criticised one particular aspect of the Structural Funds , namely that incomes in different regions are calculated using the measure of GNP per capita and that there is no adjustment for the level of buying power .
If these were adjusted using the level of prices in the different countries the differences between regions and countries would be considerably reduced .
Is this something which the Commissioner has considered and which may perhaps be included in the improvements now being talked about ?
Mr Wibe , GDP is naturally one of the bases on which the respective purchasing-power parities are calculated , so we do already take this particular factor into account .
Generally speaking , one could of course argue all day about any of the criteria that are used .
A very important consideration , and one which is occasionally overlooked , is the fact that we are not able to gather and compare regional-level data for all the criteria throughout Europe , and this means , for example , that we have to opt for certain criteria , particularly when we are dealing with regional development , as opposed to straightforward national averages .
Question No 42 by Mr Titley ( H-0262 / 97 )
Subject : Structural Funds policy after 1999
Can the Commission report what progress has been made in its deliberations as to how EU Structural Funds will be organized after 1999 ?
Mr Titley , I should like to begin by explaining that the Commission will present its proposals , including those on the important decisions concerning the Structural Funds , in the form of the Santer Package , once the Intergovernmental Conference has concluded - hopefully in July . We are also currently engaged in internal discussions within the Commission .
I assume , however , that your question also refers in part to the problem of delays and the time factor that has characterized the funding period 1994-99 , and I should therefore like to add that the timetable which we have now set ourselves will certainly put us in a position to adopt the proposals for the new Structural Fund regulations as early in 1998 as possible , just as soon as a decision is taken on the Santer Package .
That would then give the Member States roughly a year in which to prepare their programmes as thoroughly as possible and submit them in good time .
The proposals that the Commission will make will be based firstly on the conclusions of the cohesion report and secondly on the deliberations of the so-called cohesion forum that is to be held at the end of this month , with input from the European Parliament .
We should wait until we have specific proposals before us , which can then be discussed in detail by the House .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer .
I have two questions .
Firstly , in deciding eligibility for the structural funds , unemployment figures are an important element .
Has the Commission received any representation from the United Kingdom Government to the effect that UK official unemployment statistics are an ineffective way of deciding eligibility for structural funds because they conceal real unemployment ?
My understanding is that the Commission has received such a representation .

Secondly , in deciding the future of Objective 2 regions , will the Commission take into account that Objective 2 regions which have received support have been able to deal with the problem of industrial decline in the past but are still not yet able to show value-added production , and will therefore need to have ongoing support beyond 1999 if they are to regenerate the traditional industrial areas .
You will appreciate , Mr Titley , that such suggestions are unlikely to emanate from the British Government .
I have , however , received papers from certain academic institutions concerning the usefulness of United Kingdom unemployment statistics , and you can be assured that this is one of the issues that we shall look at .
However , I would ask you to bear in mind that we do , of course , receive unemployment statistics from all over Europe , and that agreements exist as to which aspects of those figures we should take into account .
Obviously , one of the issues that we shall be discussing is whether our statistics form an adequate basis for assessing questions of support , not just now but in the future .
As regards Objective II , I would ask you to appreciate that , at this stage , I cannot give what amounts to a guarantee that specific aims will continue to receive support .
We shall have to discuss the entire package of structural support and the criteria on which we intend to base it .
Generally speaking , I certainly take the view that structural policy will have to continue not only to support the most structurally disadvantaged regions in the socalled poor Member States , but also to offer solidarity at European level in dealing with the problems of structural change in the richer Member States .
However , the questions of whether , when and in what form this should take place must be discussed in the overall context of structural reform .
I just wish to ask the Commissioner about another aspect of looking at unemployment criteria .
We have just voted in the Committee on Regional Policy on my report on the implementation of funds in the UK , and we are very much aware that employment rates are higher in the UK .
I am not talking about hidden unemployment in this case , but the fact that the UK is the country creating the highest number of low-paid , parttime jobs .
That , of course , distorts the employment criteria and , indeed , our unemployment figures .
Therefore we have voted to ask that in adopting future selection criteria , in the case of the UK the Commission should take into account industrial change , GDP and the relationship between falling unemployment rates and non-sustainable employment in low-paid , part-time sectors .
I wonder whether the Commissioner could say whether it is possible to look at those criteria in a cross-comparative way , because I fear that we will neither fall within the Objective 1 criteria on raw GDP , nor perhaps be eligible under defined unemployment statistics for Objective 2 after 1999 , in which case we will fall between both stools .

Of course , Mrs McCarthy , we shall consider carefully any information that we receive concerning unemployment trends in Member States .
Obviously , however , we have to lay down criteria that will allow us to make general comparisons , and we shall not in future be able to base the selection criteria on special quotas for particular countries .
I would therefore ask you to appreciate that we have to consider the overall applicability of the information we receive , and broadly speaking rely on EUROSTAT figures which - because they have the same statistical base in each instance - are the only ones that can ensure a fair comparison .
Mrs Wulf-Mathies , we are anxious to know what will be the criteria for the future structural funds in the context of enlargement of the Community to poorer countries , and I applaud the fact that aid to the most needy will be compatible with maintaining internal Union solidarity with those regions where structural problems generate unemployment in countries with advanced economies .
Do the studies you have carried out cover the possibility of putting some kind of limit on aid as a function of gross domestic product , in case major Community aid to recently joined countries in a deep state of poverty cannot be absorbed by their economies ?
Because this is probably the challenge of designing the future structural funds as from 1999 .
I would point out first of all that we are in the process of discussing with all those affected and involved what we have learned from previous funding periods and the decisions that we shall have to take on future structural support , and I believe that the Commission is right to begin by consulting widely , rather than leaping forward with proposals and taking decisions which could then only be changed with great difficulty .
However , you are right : of course we shall also try to learn from experience and take into consideration the capacity of future Member States to administer structural support effectively , to absorb the money they receive and provide the necessary cofunding .
Indeed , these three elements are essential if our structural policies are to succeed at all , and we shall certainly take that into account - not least in relation to enlargement towards the east - when we put forward our proposals in the Santer Package .
As the time allocated for this part of Question Time to the Commission has run out , Questions Nos 43 , 44 and 45 will be answered in writing .
I want to thank Mrs Wulf-Mathies for attending and for giving these important answers .
Question No 46 by Mr Teverson ( H-0197 / 97 ) , taken over by Mr Mulder .
Subject : BSE and the lifting of the UK beef export ban
When does the Commission anticipate allowing the export of British beef from certified herds , as set out in the submission from the UK Ministry of Agriculture to the European Commission ?
Does the Commission intend to impose equally stringent health standards on beef from other Member States ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the steps that have to be taken and the rules that have to be followed in relation to the lifting of the ban on British beef exports were laid down at the Florence summit .
Now the United Kingdom has submitted a working document to the Commission which is intended to show that the conditions laid down in Florence have been met .
It sets out the arrangements for certifying exports , and offers scientific opinion justifying a resumption of British beef exports on the basis of those arrangements .
Under the Florence agreement , three further steps are now required .
Firstly , the scientific committees have to discuss the British working paper , and the proposal must be considered by the Standing Veterinary Committee ; secondly , there must be a successful Community inspection ; thirdly , a draft Commission decision must be presented for approval by the Standing Veterinary Committee .
Clearly , the Commission would not wish to pre-empt this process of consultation and deliberation by suggesting any date for a resumption of British beef exports .
In answer to the question about other Member States , the Commission has already approved BSE control programmes for France and Portugal .
A similar procedure is under way for Ireland .
Although the risk in these countries is substantially less than that in the United Kingdom , stringent measures are being taken to ensure that public health is protected .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his reply to the question by my colleague , Mr Teverson .
I have a supplementary question on control methods .
Certain countries where the disease has occurred have elected to slaughter individual animals or animals displaying symptoms of the disease , while in other countries whole herds are being slaughtered .
Has the Commission assessed these various control methods and , in particular , what are the implications for the payment of compensation , which is partly to come from European funds ?
Excuse me , Mr Commissioner , but the interpreters need to finish informing the various Members in the eleven languages .
So if you reply immediately we will not have heard part of the question .
Now that the interpretation is complete , please reply to Mr Mulder .
Mr President , it would undoubtedly be a great pity to lose part of the question .
In answer to the point raised by Mr Mulder , I would say this : firstly , there are of course measures being taken in a number of Member States which could to some extent be regarded as additional precautions , and some of which also go rather further than the Commission requirements .
As regards compensation payments , the question also arises as to whether such compensation should be paid under the heading of health protection measures , or whether it falls within the scope of market regulation .
There are examples of both approaches , and obviously each Member State must reach agreement on possible forms of compensation , and indeed on whether the Union should offer compensation at all in a given case , before it embarks on any activities .
That is the arrangement at present .
There is no clear-cut scientific opinion to indicate that a single specific measure is the right one .
Clearly , the decision also depends to a very great extent on the objective that a particular measure sets out to achieve .
Even as regards the cases that have come to light in your own country , Mr Mulder , there is no single , adequate scientific explanation .
You will also appreciate that in some areas we still lack information , quite simply because not enough progress has been made in terms of scientific research and findings .
On the other hand , this creates a demand for precautionary measures which do have a positive effect , it must be said ; but with the best will in the world , it is impossible to say if they are really necessary from a scientific point of view .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to go back to the original question from Mr Teverson - the first part .
He set out a number of guidelines and stages to be gone through but did not actually give any timescale .
Can the Commissioner give any idea of dates when possibly cattle could again be exported from BSEfree herds in the United Kingdom ?
I have already stated clearly that no date for a decision can be given at this stage , simply because various procedural steps have yet to be completed .
But I can say this much : first of all , we need inspections to demonstrate that all the agreed conditions have now been met which form a prerequisite for any move towards a lifting of the export ban .
We recently sent an inspection team to the UK whose principal task was to convince us of the extent to which the additional slaughter programme was being implemented .
The inspectors ' conclusion on that occasion was that the slaughter programme was only really being implemented in Northern Ireland .
We therefore agreed to send a further inspection team : that is the first point .
As for the specific British proposal , it will now have to be examined by the committee which takes over from the multidisciplinary committee , and that body will also decide which experts should be assigned to consider the matter .
We cannot impose a rigid deadline on the scientists for completing their evaluation of the proposal .
But as soon as they reach a positive conclusion , we in the Commission will lose no time in bringing forward a proposal , and at that stage the normal decision-making process will begin - in other words , the Commission will submit a proposal to the Standing Veterinary Committee .
If the Standing Veterinary Committee takes a decision by a qualified majority , the matter will be settled .
Otherwise , the Commission will have to submit a formal proposal to the Council , and it will then depend on the Council 's reaction to that proposal .
If there is a qualified majority of Ministers in favour , then the proposal will be deemed approved by the Council .
But if a majority of Member States are against the proposal , it will fall and cannot be tabled again .
If there is a simple majority of Member States in favour , the proposal will go back to the Commission , which will then take the final decision .
That is the agreed procedure , and that is why it is very difficult at this stage to set any definite date .
Question No 47 by Mrs Thors ( H-0209 / 97 )
Subject : Export aid for live animals for slaughter
Despite new provisions on the transport of animals , the cruelty is continuing , especially in connection with the export of live cattle for slaughter .
Finnish television recently showed an appalling documentary film on the subject .
On the basis of Commission Regulation 3846 / 87 , the figures showed that a total of ECU 296 million ( about FIM 1.8 billion ) was paid out from the Community budget in aid for the export of live cattle between 16.10.1995 and 15.10.1996 .
This was one fifth of all export aid for bovine animals .
No such amounts of aid are paid for sheep or pigs .
The most logical way of bringing the cruelty to an end would be for the EU to stop paying aid for the export of live animals for slaughter .
When and how does the Commission propose to bring this aid to an end ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by assuring you that the Commission shares the European Parliament 's growing concern for the welfare of animals that are traded between the Union and third countries , and it has already expressed that concern in answers to numerous written and oral questions .
For example , at Question Time in December last year , I promised to consider how export refunds for live cattle might be linked to compliance with the transport directive , even where animals were being transported beyond the borders of the European Union .
I am pleased to be able to tell you today that these preparations have been completed , and a proposal will be submitted to the Council and Parliament before the end of this month .
For its part , the Commission has already begun discussions with the Member States with a view to cancelling refunds to exporters who have manifestly failed to comply in full with the rules on the welfare of animals in transit .
However , measures to this effect will require an amendment to Regulation No 805 / 68 on the common organization of the market in beef , and certain amendments to implementing provisions .
I am pleased to hear that the Commission shares Parliament 's concern for the welfare of animals .
The programme to which I referred in my question is in fact an updated version of the same programme which was shown on the continent last Autumn and which caused much discussion even then .
Unfortunately the update shows that no improvements have taken place since then .
For this reason , the majority of the Finnish members of the European Parliament are proposing in a letter to the Commission that export subsidies for live animals outside the Union be stopped .
I ask therefore : has the Commission fully discussed the issue which we raised ?
Secondly : Is it possible for the executive committee through a separate decision to stop export subsidies as well ?
Has such a proposal for beef been put to the executive committee ?
When we talk about cancelling refunds in respect of live cattle or cattle for slaughter , then as I see it we have to deal with two separate issues .
The issue that I addressed in my answer was that of seeking to cancel refunds in cases where we can prove that a shipper of live cattle has breached Union rules , in particular those of the transport directive .
In the longer term , we might also have a second and possibly more effective sanction in such cases , because as you know , the new transport directive requires anyone trading in or shipping live cattle to hold a licence .
It would also be quite feasible , in cases where the rules are repeatedly broken , to withdraw licences from offending shippers , thereby preventing them from transporting cattle again at all .
The other issue that you raised is whether all refunds in respect of live cattle ought not to be cancelled .
We know from practical experience that various third countries prefer to import live cattle .
For those European Union operators involved in this trade , a blanket cancellation of refunds would mean that live cattle destined for the countries in question would no longer be purchased in the European Union , and would instead be procured overseas or in other third countries .
Already - to offer you a practical example - a significant proportion of the live sheep that are imported into Egypt no longer come from the European Union , but from Australia and New Zealand .
I am sure no one would try to suggest that such a long sea voyage could be less stressful for the animals than the much shorter crossings that would be entailed in importing sheep from countries of the European Union .
I think we should also be clear that even if we are not paying refunds , we need rules to ensure that animals are properly treated in transit , whether or not refunds are involved .
That is why the approach that the Commission has chosen - that of making transport subject to conditions - is the right one to take in the first instance .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his answer , which suggests that things are moving in the right direction .
Nevertheless , I personally fear that these continuing instances of cruelty and these repeated contraventions of the rules will have an impact on consumer opinion and lead to a further reduction in beef consumption .
These problems could be avoided only by halting the live transport of animals for slaughter and slaughtering them in Europe .
For that reason , I should like to ask the Commission whether it intends at least to examine the possibility of halting these shipments and creating the requisite slaughter capacity in the European Union , taking into account religious slaughtering methods ?
Can nothing be done to halt the shipment of animals and arrange for their slaughter on the territory of the European Union ?
Why precisely must animals be transported alive ?
Mr President , Mrs Anttila , we need to be clear about something here : when we talk about slaughter capacities , we have to realize that slaughter capacity in one location is not simply equivalent to slaughter capacity in another , because many countries that import beef from the European Union demand very particular slaughtering procedures .
The European Union has a number of abattoirs which are equipped to carry out the rites prescribed by certain religions , but such facilities do not exist in every part of the Union , and this means that some transportation is still necessary .
Let me also mention a specific case in which I was involved . A substantial proportion of our live cattle exports are to Lebanon .
The Lebanese argued that they depended on live imports because they lacked adequate refrigeration facilities , so under the MEDA programme we have now offered to build cold stores , and just three weeks ago I received a positive initial response from Lebanon .
But if we do not also put in place the logistics which are necessary to ensure that there is no break in the chain of refrigeration there , Lebanon will go on importing live cattle , because conserving meat obviously poses no problems so long as the animal is alive .
Clearly , therefore , these aspects also have to be borne in mind when we are considering solutions .
I welcome the Commissioner 's announcement that a new proposal is to be put forward this month making the granting of Community aid conditional upon compliance with the existing directives .
Then , of course , there are the rest periods , journey times and so on .
What I would like to know is how the Commission intends to monitor whether a transporter is obeying the directives ?
This has always been our biggest problem : we have no system for checking compliance .
Will the Commission employ extra inspectors to check whether transporters are obeying the rules ?
If they are not , they should not be given any further aid .
Yes of course , Mr Eisma , we must also monitor how the rules are observed .
And in cases such as those you mention , i.e. exports to third countries , we depend on cooperation from the Member States .
For example , as regards facilities on the ships which are used to transport animals , these can very well be inspected during loading in the port of departure .
At the same time , inspectors can ensure that the animals are being handled properly during loading and carry out health checks and so on .
Another question is how to inspect the way the animals are handled during unloading at the port of arrival , and we considered this problem when we were drafting the directive to which I have referred .
I would also remind you that two years ago , when the transport directive was being adopted , the Commission asked for three specialist inspectors to be employed exclusively to pursue this matter in third countries .
Unfortunately , to the best of my knowledge , the promise to appoint additional staff has not yet been kept .
Finally , I would also point out that we are in the process of drafting rules that would allow us to involve nongovernmental organizations - in particular animal protection organizations - in monitoring shipments of livestock .
This would require us to put in place an appropriate legal framework .
Question No 48 by Mr Harrison ( H-0211 / 97 )
Subject : Antibiotics in pig feed
In the opinion of the Commission does the Swedish system of banning the use of antibiotics in pig feed represent a better approach to food safety than the current EU system for which Sweden has a derogation up until the end of 1998 ?
Does the Commission agree that the use of these antibiotics could be seen to be like the application of growth promoters , where emphasis is laid on maximising productivity at the possible expense of consumer safety ?
Is the Commission further concerned that some antibiotics are no longer working to destroy bacteria and that proposals for genetic modification could intensify the problem ?
Mr Harrison , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is not yet in a position to answer your question conclusively .
However , it will very soon be looking again at the whole question of the use of permitted antibiotics in feed .
Under the Treaty of Accession , Sweden has a derogation which allows it to retain its own national legislation , banning the use of antibiotics in feed , until 31 December 1998 .
Sweden has also been asked to supply the Commission and the other Member States with the scientific data on which it is basing its application for this ban to be extended throughout the Community , and for Community legislation to be amended accordingly .
However , the Commission can assure you , Mr Harrison , that permission for the use of additives is granted on the basis of a very stringent assessment procedure which puts the safety of consumers first .
The Commission recently took an extremely thorough look at the problem of resistance to antibiotics in animals , the possibility of that resistance being transferred to humans and the loss of effectiveness of certain antibiotics , in connection with a particular antibiotic named Avorparcin , and it decided on 30 January this year , on the basis of its findings , to prohibit Avorparcin .
This is a precautionary measure , and it will be reviewed before 31 December 1998 , in the light of new test results .
But it should be pointed out that no conclusive link was established between the use of Avorparcin and resistance to similar antibiotics that are used to treat humans .
Nonetheless , the Commission intends to initiate a number of studies on this question , and it has also asked the industry to carry out a programme of surveillance for antibiotic resistance in animals .
I can assure you that the Commission gives careful consideration to the problem of resistance when it is granting authorizations for genetically modified products .
I am not sure your answer will satisfy my constituent , Mrs P. Adams of Nantwich , in several respects .
You did not answer the very last question about genetic modification , whether that will intensify the problem of bacteria which is possibly not destroyed by weakened antibiotics .
I also learnt from you that you were intending that industry should undertake these studies .
Could I have your assurance that you will monitor what the industry itself does in these studies ?
Thirdly , you talk about banning Avorparcin .
We could do with more details about that particular precautionary measure as you describe it .
Finally , you talk about the onus being on Sweden to give the scientific evidence as to why it should be allowed to continue to ban the use of antibiotics in pig feed .
Surely it should be the other way round .
Until the case is proven we should be following the Swedish model .
Perhaps in the brief time available , I did not adequately explain what we intend to do , Mr Harrison .
I did say , however , that we are not relying on the industry at this stage : the Commission is initiating its own studies , but we have also asked the industry to be vigilant .
Secondly , it is surely in everyone 's interest that the Commission should ask Sweden to inform us of the grounds on which it decided to introduce such a ban , just as it is in Sweden 's interest that the ban should apply throughout the Union .
Since the Council of Ministers will take the ultimate decision on the matter , it seems sensible to me that appropriate contacts should also be established with the Member States in relation to this issue , so that the ground can be prepared for presentation of the Swedish case .
I think that this is only logical .
As for the question of genetically modified organisms , another argument which is put forward here is that crosscontamination may have a role to play in the case of one particular product , namely genetically modified maize .
However , I am convinced that , rather than straying into the realms of speculation on this point , the important thing is to carry out the necessary tests or to seek the advice of experts on the basis of tests which have already been carried out .
In my view , it would be a mistake to venture away from tried and tested scientific opinion in this field , and to start taking arbitrary decisions .
Firstly I would like to say that I agree with Mr Harrison that the burden of proof should lie with the Commission and that we should apply a general principle of caution to all artificial food additives .
Then I would like to ask the Commissioner if they are prepared to extend the Swedish exemption for antibiotic additives , so that if the Commission is still reviewing its regulations once the time limit has expired , Sweden can be allowed to extend its ban until the review is complete .
I would also like to ask another question in this connection .
There is also another ban on food additives in Sweden which has been in place for a few years .
This is a total ban on all carcass meal in fodder .
Can you here this evening promise that the Commission will never call into question the total Swedish ban on carcass meal ?
Mr Sjöstedt , in my view , the right course of action is to keep to the agreed procedure for achieving the objectives that were set out at the time of the negotiations on Sweden 's accession .
It was in the context of those negotiations that Sweden requested this ban , which will apply until 31 December 1998 .
Sweden has agreed to that .
The first consideration in making such an arrangement was not that the ban should be extended beyond the agreed date , but that sufficient progress might be made in the meantime for the ban to be applied not just in Sweden , but throughout the Union .
So it is with a view to facilitating a decision on the lines which Sweden seeks that I have submitted my proposals .
And I still see no reason why Sweden should not make its findings and arguments available to the other Member States .
That is why I tend to regard debate at this stage about whether the Swedish derogation will be extended beyond 1998 as counterproductive .
As I see it , that question will arise if it proves impossible , within a reasonable timeframe and before the end of 1998 , to achieve the main objective of a lasting , Union-wide ban on certain substances .
I believe , therefore , that we should stand by the agreed approach .
As the time allocated for this part of Question Time to the Commission has run out , Questions Nos 49 to 91 will be answered in writing .
Question Time is closed .
On a point of order , Mr President , I regret the fact that although Question Time is clearly divided into three parts , you fail to keep to this and the third part keeps disappearing .
I think we should be able to rely on having the last 20 minutes of Question Time for the third part .
Mr Eisma , I have been keeping an eye on the time , but if one of the parts ran over time , I will be more careful in future .
The remaining questions will be answered in writing and in future I will apply what you have said scrupulously .
If there was any mistake , I assure you that in future we will take care that it does not happen again .
Ladies and gentlemen , the sitting will resume at 9 p.m.
The sitting is adjourned .
( The sitting was adjourned at 7.28 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Settlement finality and collateral security
The next item on the agenda is the report drawn up by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on settlement finality and collateral security ( COM ( 96 ) 0193 - C4-0306 / 96-96 / 0126 ( COD ) ) ( A4-0097 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the title of this directive is somewhat obscure .
The Commission is proposing a European Parliament and Council Directive on settlement finality and collateral security .
Exactly what is it all about ?
The difficulty is that in Europe today , there is a whole raft of what are known as interbank payment systems .
The purpose of these systems is to process and settle all the transfers of money between banks .
As we move towards the introduction of the single European currency , the euro , we shall have a major European interbank payment system - the Target System - operating alongside the systems that already exist , and this may in turn lead to the introduction of even more such systems .
The problem which this directive sets out to address is one that has surfaced repeatedly , namely the possibility of a bankruptcy at one bank and the adverse consequences this could then have for interbank payment systems , affecting in turn the ability of those systems to function and , in a worst-case scenario , dragging down other banks as well - in other words , the possibility of one bankruptcy leading to others .
The proposed directive sets out to avoid such a situation .
Basically , therefore , this is a proposal for a directive that seeks to put interbank payment systems , and ultimately also banks , in a privileged position as creditors of a bankrupt institution in certain specific circumstances .
At this point , the main area of conflict which we have to deal with here becomes clear .
On the one hand , the concern is to protect payment systems - and therefore also banks .
But on the other hand , one has to ask how far such measures can go without unduly damaging the concept of creditor protection in possible bankruptcy proceedings .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , for which I was the rapporteur , took the view that it made sense in principle to have such a directive .
Overall , however , we felt that the systems of protection and the measures being proposed were too strongly bank-oriented , and that it would be useful if the legislation included certain restrictions with a view to giving creditors greater protection .
The main additional elements that we have proposed are as follows .
Firstly , not every payment system that is agreed between banks should automatically fall within the scope of the directive ; only those systems deposited with or notified to the authority responsible for supervision should be covered .
A second modification which we have proposed concerns the fixing of the decisive moment that determines when the protection offered by the interbank payment system , and the insolvency protection , should take effect .
The Commission had originally proposed that the relevant moment should be that of the opening of bankruptcy proceedings .
In the Committee on Legal Affairs , we regarded this as an unsatisfactory solution because , in effect , decisions on the opening of bankruptcy proceedings are often taken in the privacy of a judge 's chambers and no one outside knows the precise moment of the decision , so problems of the retrospective settlement of transactions which had already taken place would not be avoided , but would inevitably continue to arise in every case of insolvency .
Finally , the Committee on Legal Affairs decided to choose a different point in time , namely the moment when the banks participating in the payment system are informed of the opening of proceedings .
In recent weeks , we considered this question again within the PPE Group , and the view there was that this moment may also be less than ideal , because there could then be a requirement for proof to be furnished that individual participants in a payment system had been notified .
With several thousand banks participating in a European payment system , that could be very difficult .
We have now tabled a further amendment on this point , Amendment No 21 , which we would ask you to support , identifying the decisive moment as that when notification is given to the supervisory body - the central bank or a supervising authority - which then has an immediate duty to inform all other participants in the banking system .
A further unresolved question was that of which law should apply in cases of dispute where there was a conflict of legislative provisions .
On this point , the Commission had originally proposed that the applicable law should always be that of the country where the payment system was located , rather than that of the country where the bankruptcy took place .
Our view in the Committee on Legal Affairs is that this arrangement increases the likelihood of a conflict of laws and we believe , therefore , that where there is any dispute , the law which should apply is that of the country in which the bankruptcy occurs .
These are the three main elements covered by the amendments that have been tabled here .
One final aspect is also important : we are talking here not simply about payment systems - we have also proposed that the protection of the directive should extend to all securities clearing systems .
That is all I wish to put before the House in my capacity as rapporteur .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not one of those who is enchanted by the idea of subsidiarity .
Nevertheless , I have to ask the question : who stands to gain here ? The rapporteur had to refer back to an incident that happened in 1974 in order to make any sort of case for the necessity of this directive .
The Commission has provided no facts whatsoever to demonstrate why it is necessary ; instead we are referred to a theoretical danger .
I have some difficulty with this , because there is surely something problematic about sitting down at a desk to think up dangers and then taking steps to prevent them .
That , however , is a very big subject , and I can be brief in what I have to say .
We are in agreement with the rapporteur .
We accept the amendments that have been tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and the new Amendment No 21 .
But this brings me to what is a basic problem for the Commission 's legal policy .
The difficulty to which the rapporteur referred so diplomatically is a real one .
In both the instances he mentioned , the effect of the Commission proposal is to grant the banks considerable latitude .
In other words , the banks are being excluded from the normal provisions of the law so that they can retain a substantial degree of discretion .
This is a problem , and it applies in relation to the applicable law as well as the question of when a payment system has been agreed .
I share the rapporteur 's view that this is an area where we need clear legislation within which the banks will have to operate .
They cannot be allowed to stand outside the law .
And I would call on the Commission , when it is making proposals in future , to ensure that the law applies to everyone .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , it is an honour and a pleasure for me to take the floor to express the unalloyed support of the Group of the European People 's Party for the guidelines established in this report by Mr Lehne , rapporteur for the main committee .
This solid support from my group is merited by the rapporteur 's excellent approach to his work . Not only has he done an impeccable job technically , he has also succeeded in explaining the need for the directive and the reason for the amendments in terms everyone could understand , when the importance of both is only equalled by their complexity .
So the Group of the European People 's Party will vote for all the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Economic Affairs , and for Amendment No 21 which we have tabled .
Today , Mr President , I want to stress the need for this directive , but above all the importance of the modifications , expertly piloted through by the rapporteur , which Parliament will no doubt approve tomorrow .
In particular , the inclusion of the securities settlement systems in the scope of its application , as well as the block of amendments which respond to the concern of Parliament for the primacy of the principle of legal validity - which is the ultimate guarantee of the proper functioning of the market - and which relates to the law applicable on the dies a quo , and to the need to establish the obligation to lodge agreements on settlement and securities systems with the authority responsible for supervising them .
Finally , Mr President , obstacles to the task of completing the internal market are currently arising from all sides and creating pessimism and the temptation to accept weak solutions , by their nature often poorly defined , which lead to fictitious harmonization and serious distortion when it comes to incorporation into national law .
So this firm initiative from the Commission , with its high quality and wealth of consequences , encourages Parliament to act in fulfilment of its co-legislative function .
Mr President , it is a bad sign that the rapporteur and the Committee on Legal Affairs have already had to table an amendment to the title of the directive , which is incomprehensible .
Settlement finality and collateral security does not mean anything to anyone .
Fortunately , the rapporteur has come up with an amendment that we should all vote for , which at least makes it clear what the directive is about .
The impenetrable fog surrounding this proposal , which the rapporteur has done his best to disperse , merely symbolizes the sceptical approach which the lawyers working on this have adopted , Mr Monti .
However , I do not wish to go into that .
The rapporteur has done his work well and the Commission has reacted accordingly , so let us hope that something good comes out of it .
The main thing - and I am always glad to see the Commissioner here so that I can pass on my thoughts in person - is that all directives dealing with bankruptcy , such as this one , show just how urgently we need to harmonize bankruptcy law .
Mr Rothley has rightly pointed out the theoretical nature of the risk provided for in this directive , but it is high time that we had harmonization in the interests of our businesses .
I know that it is difficult , I know what the problems are , Commissioner , and they are not easy to resolve .
I am also well aware of the problems with the priority list of debtors , which is also not an easy matter .
But every time we deal with issues like this , we come up against the fact that differences in national bankruptcy legislation mean problems for businesses at international level .
And even though I assume we all support the rapporteur and his report , I still wonder if we are giving sufficient attention to the position of the banks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to compliment the Committee on Legal Affairs and in particular its rapporteur , Mr Lehne , as well as the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and its rapporteur , Mr Katiforis , on their substantial contributions to our examination of this proposal - a highly technical proposal , and a difficult but important one .


Indeed , this proposal represents an important step towards the greater liberalization of capital movements in the European Union .
Whereas in principle the free movement of capital is fully guaranteed , in practice a number of obstacles still remain , such as the fact that payment systems and securities settlement systems are still not adequate to ensure true freedom of movement across borders , because of the existence of different legal systems in the various Member States .
A minimum of legislative harmonization , which is the purpose of this directive , will eliminate the most significant barriers and allow for the creation of real cross-border highways for capital movements throughout the European Union .
I am particularly pleased that the committees responsible have proposed the inclusion of securities settlement systems within the scope of the directive , having obtained a favourable opinion from both the European Monetary Institute and the Economic and Social Committee .
We note , turning to the individual amendments , that this is the thrust of Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 15 , 16 and 17 .
Amendment No 1 seeks to modify the title of the directive : although such a change is acceptable to the Commission , its effect would be to indicate in the title that the directive relates to these systems in cases where institutions participating in them are involved in insolvency proceedings .
However , this directive does not concern bankruptcy as such , but only deals with it to the extent that it creates systemic risk .
Perhaps the following title could be adopted : ' proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the systemic risk inherent in payment systems and securities settlement systems ' .
Amendments Nos 2 and 3 - which the Commission can accept - add some useful information about the directive : the addition of a provision on a notification procedure , as through Amendment No 6 ; and another change aimed at improving legal certainty , thereby helping to achieve the goal of the directive , namely the avoidance of systemic risk .
However , the depositing of the agreement on which the system is based with the authorities responsible for supervising the institutions participating in the system , followed by the publication of a notice announcing the fact , strikes us as unnecessarily complicated .
What is more , in several Member States , the authority responsible for supervising such institutions is different from the one in charge of supervising the system itself , which would lead to an artificial division of powers and create confusion .
The Commission therefore has some difficulty in accepting this amendment .
The same applies to the addition of the words ' rules for clearing balances in connection with settlement ' in Amendment No 10 , since such a wording could detract from the clarity of our definition of a payment system .
For the purposes of the proposal , a system is called an EC system if the law applicable to the agreement on which it is based is the law of a Member State .
That is the criterion which underlies the Commission 's proposal , and it would not seem possible to apply a geographical criterion .
Amendment No 11 does nevertheless seek to introduce such a geographical concept by suggesting that a system is located in the Member State where the book entry takes place .
However , for a given operation , more than one book entry may be made with different institutions , such as the clearing house and the settlement agent .
In my view , it would therefore be necessary at least to clarify which book entry is meant ; in the absence of such clarification , we find it difficult to accept this amendment .
Amendment No 12 expands the original definition of a third country payment system by using the more general term ' third country system ' , so as to include securities settlement systems .
In principle we can accept this modification , but we need to complete it by adding the words ' securities settlement systems ' .
Since the central banks carry out transactions in financial derivatives , these must indeed be included in the definition of monetary policy operations , as proposed by Amendment No 13 .
Amendment No 16 contains three paragraphs , the first of which gives us no cause for concern .
The second replaces the words ' contracts entered into ' with the words ' contracts entered in the EC system ' .
But the Commission is using the term ' entered into ' to mean ' concluded ' , and is not referring to the registration of contracts in payment systems .
As for the unwinding of the settlement and of securities transactions , the amendment appears to be saying that once payments or securities transactions have been settled , they can no longer be unwound .
But the aim of the directive is to protect remittance orders from the risk of unwinding solely while they are within the system , because that is when systemic risk exists ; once the settlement has been made there is no longer any systemic risk , so there is no reason to prohibit the unwinding of sums relating to payments already settled .
The effect of paragraph 3 of Amendment No 16 is to delay the opening of insolvency proceedings against an institution participating in the system until the moment when the competent authority formally notifies the other participants that proceedings have been opened .
This seems to be an excessively cumbersome procedure , because news of the bankruptcy of a participant in a system tends to spread very quickly through the financial markets ; moreover , such a procedure would extend the preferential regime , as established under the directive , beyond the moment when the participants in the system actually learn of the insolvency in question , which cannot be justified in terms of attempting to avoid systemic risk ; we therefore have difficulty in accepting Amendment No 16 , and the same applies to No 21 .
Amendment No 17 states that payment orders or orders for securities transactions may not be revoked after the opening of insolvency proceedings .
It would seem obvious , however , that if a participant in the system becomes bankrupt , that participant 's assets are frozen and revocation is therefore impossible .
I do not see any need for further clarification here .
The Commission 's proposal had a different aim , namely to prevent third parties from revoking any remittance order which has been entered into the system , given that such third party institutions cannot do so on the basis of the legislation of the other Member State concerned .
It is clear , in fact , that if this were to happen in respect of a substantial sum , systemic risk could occur : the reference to third parties must therefore be preserved .
Amendment No 18 is acceptable since it helps to clarify the text .
No 19 proposes the deletion of the article whereby , in the event of the insolvency of a participant in the system , the insolvency law applicable is that of the country where the system is located .
That deletion would run counter to the directive 's goal of reducing systemic risk , and for two reasons in particular : the need to guarantee legal certainty , and the need to avoid conflicts of legislation .
All of which leads to the conclusion that the directive can achieve its goal of protecting systems from systemic risk only if Amendment No 19 is rejected .
On the other hand , the Commission welcomes No 20 , which clarifies the meaning of the text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that my attempts to clarify matters might cause you to reconsider the advisability of those amendments , in particular Nos 17 and 19 , which the Commission does not find acceptable .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The voting will take place tomorrow at noon .
Simpler legislation for the internal market ( SLIM )
The next item on the agenda is the report drawn up by Mr Crowley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on & # x02BC ; simpler legislation for the internal market ( SLIM ) : a pilot project ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0204 - C4-0446 / 96 ) ( A40108 / 97 ) .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for being here for our deliberations on what I consider to be a very important and urgent topic .
The idea behind the single market was one of dynamic movement in the European Union and in 1985 when the Commission set out its idea in the White Paper for the single market programme , there was a belief that this would all be completed by 1992 .
Unfortunately we have not been as successful as we set out to be .
However , our optimism and desire to succeed and to go further remains and we should not be diverted from the task of trying to achieve what is ultimately the finest and most efficient goal for the European Union .
The pilot programme SLIM , simpler legislation for the internal market , came about because of the recognition of the need to ensure that the legislative acts which the Commission , Parliament and the Council adopt and ask the national authorities to transpose into national law should be as effective as possible in tackling the specific issues with which they are concerned .
It has always been a downside of the European Union that the format used for the legislation makes it inaccessible to the ordinary European citizen .
Despite the fact that I have been working in the system for three years and have a legal training , on a number of occasions I have been unable to follow the sequence of events which goes to make up the final legislative document .
It is essential that , when we pass laws , there is a definite basis in fact that can be understood by each and every individual , whether a practitioner , a business person , a government official or the individual citizen .
To look at another couple of examples , I would point out that in the Paternoster there are sixty words , in the Ten Commandments there are 128 words , in the American Constitution there are 457 words with 142 added through amendments in the past fifteen years .
In a recent EU directive on the presentation and sale of certain types of products there are 29 , 547 words .
Is it necessary for us to have so much verbiage in our legislation .
I think not .
I have put forward some very simple and basic suggestions in my report which could help to overcome this problem .
Firstly , looking at the whole area of codification , we can bring together previous legislative acts that deal with the same topic and combine them all into one single individual legislative act .
This could make it easier for the practitioners of law , for the people in business and the employees who have to comply with these laws to find the exact reference they are looking for .
Secondly , as from now we should start to make our new legislation simpler .
Let us lead by example .
Let us set down the yardstick which must be followed by ever Commission and every Parliament after us to ensure that we have a proper , simpler legislative process .
In that regard I would draw the attention of all Members to the length of my report .
There are ten paragraphs in the conclusions .
In a report we dealt with this morning there were 178 paragraphs .
We must lead by example .
Make it simple , make it plain but make it so that no doubt can be cast on its accuracy or leaving it open to different interpretations .
We must encourage Member States not to use the European Union as the whipping boy when they want to bring in bad legislation at national level .
They should not abuse directives by including things that they do not have the courage to bring in under separate national legislation as they should under the rules of subsidiarity .
We must also ask the national governments to ensure that they have a simpler legislative process where individual citizens can understand the whole process .
Finally , I should like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to the fact that I am very disappointed with the new projects which the Commission hopes to follow under this SLIM project .
I ask that we make them more relevant and immediate to the task of the single market , in particular focusing on intermediation and distribution of financial services , public procurement , the machinery directive and the directive on the marketing of dangerous substances .
We can make it real , we can make sexy and we can make it understandable to the European citizen .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commission for its proposals regarding SLIM , and also Mr Crowley for his excellent report .
Simpler legislation for the internal market , I believe , has key potential to improve the competitiveness , profitability and , most importantly of all , the job creation potential of businesses the length and breadth of the European Union .
Speaking as somebody from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , this is a key area for us to look at in regard to SLIM .
But success in this area will only come about if we have an inclusive approach .
There are fears and concerns that certain key actors , in particular SMEs and , to a lesser extent , trade unions , have not been fully involved in the SLIM process .
I would stress that for this to work everybody has to feel confident .
What we are trying to achieve is something quite radical and something we ought to be trying to achieve .
I would like briefly to touch on two or three areas which are of key concern .
Firstly , we need to introduce our legislation in such a way that it is impossible for national governments to gold-plate the legislation .
Gold-plating European legislation actually harms the single market , harms competitiveness and the ability of companies to create jobs .
Secondly , we must accept quite clearly that national legislation is far more the enemy than the legislation we generate at European level .
We ought to be taking the challenge of national legislation head on .
The Commission produced an excellent document in February of last year called ' National Regulations Affecting Products in the Internal Market : a Cause for Concern ' .
It was never formally adopted by the Commission , yet it shows clearly how it is national legislation as well as our own legislation that creates problems .
The SLIM process , I believe , can be excellent news for small companies in my area of the United Kingdom , the industrial Black Country , and throughout the whole of the European Union .
But we must have this inclusive approach and we must highlight the dangers of gold-plating and the dangers of national legislation .
I would just like to welcome again the Commission 's proposals and thank Mr Crowley for his report .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on having succeeded , with such a slim subject , SLIM , to be brief .
That being said , who would not subscribe to the idea of simplifying Community legislation ?
But what strike me on this matter , are the superabundance of means and , somewhere , the modesty of results .
Four subjects were chosen by the Commission .
On Intrastat , it is a matter of bringing the number of commodity codes down from 10 , 700 to 7 , 000 , which is no doubt laudable .
On the subject of construction products - I quote our rapporteur - the situation is not very clear .
On the subject of the recognition of diplomas , you are going to make some proposals .
And on the subject of ornamental plants , it is complete blockage .
At this rate , Commissioner , what prospects does this exercise offer ?
That is the question I would like to put to you .
Is the SLIM exercise an experiment , an experimental mode of legislation called to become a method , or is it already a method of legislative reform in itself ?
And at the rate it is going , what then is the perspective of this reform ?
Will it require ten years , one hundred years or even more ?
Of course SLIM does not represent the whole of the strategy of simplification and codification of European law implemented by the European Commission .
But I would like you to give us some indication as to the rest of the strategy , as to the general framework , because once again , even if the method is quite remarkable , the superabundance of means turns out with some rather modest results , if you consider the whole of the portfolio for which you are responsible .
Mr President , it was Montesquieu who urged legislators to be guided by a spirit of moderation .
The rapporteur certainly gave a practical example of that spirit , and it is clear from the Commission 's pilot project , which is before the House today , that the spirit of moderation is now to be taken seriously in the process of enacting European legislation .
Following on from the Molitor report , the SLIM initiative represents a further important step towards improving and simplifying Community law , and for that reason it is to be warmly welcomed .
However , I should like to make a number of observations .
The Commission ought to have clearly explained the basis on which it selected the sectors that the SLIM teams have considered .
Such an explanation would have been particularly welcome given that the topics selected were not exactly burning issues for the public .
Suffice to say that one of them was ornamental plants .
The fact that one Member State was keen to have this sector included is surely not sufficient justification .
We need more than that . Sectors which merit urgent consideration in the future include public procurement and financial services , because these are areas of particular importance to our national economies .
However , the Commission ought to begin by focusing on sectors where extensive legislation has actually been adopted .
For that reason , issues such as those of migrant workers and taxes are not particularly appropriate priorities for the SLIM initiative .
The composition of the teams should be transparent and balanced so that they can operate with maximum efficiency .
It is particularly relevant in the context of the SLIM initiative that the Commission should base its approach , in a comprehensible way , on the checklist that was drawn up by Parliament when it presented its response to the Molitor Report .
This should become a compulsory part of the process of drafting new laws or reviewing existing ones , so that tendencies to over-legislate can be exposed .
The whole idea behind the SLIM initiative is to reduce the costs to national economies and business which arise from over-complex legislation .
The aim is to make Europe more competitive and above all to improve the potential for job creation .
But the SLIM initiative will only serve to achieve that aim if its conclusions become a basis for making legislation genuinely more readable and straightforward in practice , and if that effect works its way through to the Member States .
The Commission should pull out all the stops to achieve that aim , and then demonstrate its achievement to the public .
With that in mind , I would encourage the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to push ahead with this project .
Honesty compels me to admit that the Commission often puts forward perfectly clear and comprehensible proposals which national bureaucracies subsequently make such a muddle of that no one can understand them .
That was the first thing I wished to say .
The second point I would like to make is that we unfortunately had the wrong idea about the monitoring report .
It was not the solution we wanted , which is why I am particularly pleased that the Commission has come up with this initiative , and I wholeheartedly support what the rapporteur has said .
The main thing is to ensure that those who deal with the law should find it comprehensible and readable .
Mr Monti , if you could find a way to have the Maastricht Treaty rewritten without changing its substance but producing a text which professors of law could understand , you would be taking a great step forward and I would wish you every success with it .
It is absolutely vital that lawyers at least should be able to understand the legislation we produce .
The examples which the rapporteur gives are very good ones , but our work on simplifying texts and making them more readable must focus on both existing and future legislation .
It is a very laudable project , and I wish you every success .
Mr President , at the beginning of the 1990s in my homeland we had a campaign to simplify legislation , a campaign which was in fact quite successful .
It was particularly good for getting rid of regulations at a lower hierarchical level than laws .
I think this is also important in connection with the SLIM project .
It is not really the legislative work in this House which is affected .
When we succeeded in simplifying things at National level there were cynics who said that it was like carting away standards in a wheelbarrow - then in comes a lorry from the EU .
This comparison has indeed been shown to have some truth in it .
So I also have a desire for the SLIM project to succeed .
As many earlier speakers have already said , it has not produced many results so far .
We have really only seen any form of result in two of the pilot projects .
Those of us in Parliament who have not been so closely involved are asking ourselves : Why did they start with that particular area ?
This is something which the rapporteur also touched upon .
Why did we start with building products when we know that the Community has tried for years to simplify this sector ?
As part of a more open spirit in the work I would also like to see a fair participation from different parts of the region .
As we mentioned in the committee report the area of public procurement is crying out for simplification and there is a need for procedures in several Directives to be standardised .
Why do we continue to have different methods of procurement ?
The legal committee would like to see procurement subjected to a method of slimming which is more lasting than the slimming methods found in women 's magazines in the spring .
We also know that many suppliers and the public sector would like to see a simplification .
The fact that application of the legislation must be safeguarded , something which I understand the Commission has said in another context , is no real answer .
There are examples of situations where Directives have been amended before they have even come into force .
I hope also that the management of the Commission pay attention to the fact that there can be considerable opposition at a lower level from Commission staff .
We could decide , for example , within this sector and other sectors , that from a particular time onwards a regulation is valid for five years unless it is renewed .
I think this is one way to really speed up legislation .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , I hope to congratulate the Commission on the SLIM initiative which can only meet with approval in its principle , even if the pilot project looks , especially in its state , like an operation of aesthetico-legal surgery .
Indeed , I am sorry that the four sectors chosen are so far removed from the daily concerns of European citizens .
What is more , the simplification of legislation relating to the internal market must not in the future at any event , become the Trojan horse of European deregulation , of which you can measure daily the social divisions it creates and the increases in unemployment which it feeds .
Finally , I note with disappointment , as it relates to the future of the SLIM initiative , the total absence of common vision between the Executive Committee , the ' Internal Market ' Committee and the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Let there not be any doubt , Commissioner , working less but working more effectively for the well-being of European citizens is the only common challenge which can be taken up to enable the completion of the single market .
Since I only have a minute 's speaking time , I shall begin by offering my brief congratulations to the rapporteur .
First point : accessibility .
We have tabled an amendment on this , because we feel that the kind of language and the complicated constructions used are often the result of compromises between the Member States and were not in the original Commission proposals .
Second : consolidation .
There are now so many different types of legislation on various subjects and in various places that these should be consolidated and brought together .
Thirdly , we feel that it is extremely important to include simplification and accessibility in the work being done on fiscal harmonization .
It is precisely these kinds of discrepancies in fiscal treatment that make the internal market so difficult and lead to more unemployment .
Finally , I would point out that the Member States are far more to blame than the European institutions for producing too much complicated legislation .
Commissioner Bangemann made the point here in the House that 80 % of the 440 new pieces of legislation introduced in 1994 were initiated by the Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank Mr Crowley and the committees responsible for their work and their support for the SLIM initiative .
Let me tell you briefly what stage we have reached and what we are proposing to do next .
Firstly , as far as the first phase of the SLIM initiative is concerned , comments have been made regarding the four pilot sectors chosen and the fact that they are somewhat remote from the lives of our citizens .
I would remind you that the idea of the SLIM project originated at the end of February 1996 ; I believe that we have carried it out , albeit as a pilot project at this stage , in a far shorter space of time than is customary for the European institutions , with whose pace of work you are familiar .
In a true spirit of simplification , we even persuaded the Member States that they need not all be represented in each of the SLIM teams , which was no easy matter ; the Member States divided the work among themselves , and we were therefore able to set up streamlined teams capable of deliberating fairly rapidly .
However , the choice of sectors was influenced by the speed with which we wished to carry out this initial pilot .
Are these sectors remote from our citizens ' lives ?
I would say not .
Perhaps ornamental plants might raise a few eyebrows , but INTRASTAT is something that firms were finding very burdensome in their day-to-day operations ; as for the recognition of diplomas , please do not tell me that this issue is remote from the lives of our citizens , and the subject of construction products is linked to one of Europe 's leading economic sectors , but I am sorry to say is the area in which we have made least progress .
How far have we come in the first phase ?
On ornamental plants , a large majority of Member States are in favour of simplifying the directive and opposed to an optional directive system .
There is also a consensus on the degree of simplification and the aspects of the directive to be simplified .
The Commission intends to present a detailed proposal by May , in keeping with the timetable which has been drawn up .
As regards INTRASTAT , it might - I repeat - appear to be remote from citizens ' lives , but it is extremely close to the day-to-day concerns of firms , in particular small businesses .
In this sector too , rapid progress is taking place : efforts have been made to reduce the number of data to be collected and to alter significantly the INTRASTAT nomenclature .
The Commission is to meet regularly with representatives of industry between now and June , when it will submit a proposal which it hopes will be adopted in November .
Turning to the recognition of diplomas , here the Commission intends to bring forward proposals by the end of the year to establish a simplified method of updating the lists of diplomas benefiting from automatic recognition and to streamline the advisory committee procedure : this provides a partial reply to Mr Cot 's question , and in some cases it is a matter of establishing a method , a kind of blueprint , to be used on a case-by-case basis .
The recommendation that the provisions on education and training in the sectoral directives should be re-examined , with a view to laying down competence-based criteria giving more weight to education and training outcomes , rather than to rigid rules on content , is currently being looked at by the advisory committee in the context of nursing education .
As for construction products , I do not deny that this is the sector in which we have encountered the greatest difficulty .
Of the proposals on how to improve this directive , the Commission has opted for the one combining short-term action to lay down the standards needed if the directive is to function properly with an appraisal of necessary modifications to the directive in the medium term .
In the committee responsible for this sector , the Commission came up against vigorous opposition from the Member States to any amendment of the directive .
Here I would make one comment : we are all , in principle , in favour of simplicity and simplification , but what I hope is one of the merits of this procedure is that it demonstrates how difficult simplification is in practice , and how many calls for simplification encounter resistance from those in the Member States who would be affected by simplification .
I therefore hope and believe that this is in itself a useful undertaking and something of a learning exercise , which shows the gap between talking about simplification and putting it into effect .
I should now like to say a few words concerning the second phase and the choice of sectors which Mr Crowley also mentioned .
In the light of internal discussions and requests put forward by the Member States , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and representatives of the sectors concerned , I intend to propose to the Commission very soon that the next phase of the SLIM programme should be based on the following sectors : certain aspects of the present VAT system , financial services - Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn - beginning with the banking sector , the combined nomenclature for foreign trade and a commodity sector yet to be defined .
I have no time to explain why we have pursued this approach or why I intend to propose these particular sectors to the Commission .
Some of you referred with good cause to public procurement : I would point out that simplification in this area is already being considered within the Commission , and is the subject of consultations following the publication of the Green Paper which deals specifically with public procurement .
I would end by thanking you for your support and your understanding of the difficulties , and I would ask you to see this as a practical and pragmatic exercise which will enable us all to move on from the easy matter of talking about simplification to the difficult task of putting it into practice .
Thank you very much , Mr commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The voting will take place tomorow at noon .
Capital adequacy and investment services
The next item on the agenda is Ms Oddy 's recommendation for a second reading on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 93 / 6 / EEC on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions and Council Directive 93 / 22 / EEC on investment services in the securities field ( C4-0005 / 97-95 / 0188 ( COD ) ) ( A4-0093 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the substantive issue in this report is fairly simple .
It is just a question of setting up a committee in accordance with Decision 87 / 373 of the European Economic Community .
However , it raises enormous questions of procedure , and in particular comitology .
In its original proposal , the Commission proposed a Type III ( a ) committee .
Parliament , in its first reading , recommended a Type II ( b ) committee .
The Council , in its wisdom , decided to ignore both the wishes of the Commission and of Parliament and has put in the common position a recommendation for a III ( b ) committee .
Nor does the common position include a reference to the modus vivendi which was agreed between the three institutions in 1995 .
All three institutions are bound by that agreement and that is what should govern this situation .
The common position also includes a number of unusual features such as the committee in question would adopt its own procedure which is not in accordance with Decision 87 / 373 and the Commission may consult the committee on any new situations .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is quite unanimous that this common position is not in the interests of parliamentary democracy or transparency and it is not democratic .
It simply undermines the position of Parliament .
Consequently , the Legal Affairs Committee voted unanimously to restore the original amendments in the first reading and to return to these in the second reading .
The Legal Affairs Committee is quite adamant that the Council should not seek to undermine Parliament in this way and we wish to go to conciliation to sort out these difficulties .
Since the vote in the Legal Affairs Committee , a number of further concerns have come to my attention .
The declarations made in Council have only just become available and I would criticize this delay .
The Declaration 1 runs counter to the modalities set out in Decision 87 / 373 , as it is the Commission which is assisted by the committee and not the chairman as is usual .
Further , the Member States should have the possibility to convene meetings and have items entered on the agenda of the committee .
In this case , however , the declaration states that it is the Commission and no one else which should submit draft measures to be taken , contrary to Decision 87 / 373 .
The declaration concerning Article 1 ( 6 ) talks about the practice followed , systematic use and consulting the securities committee when it plans to submit new proposals .
These are illegal under Decision 87 / 373 and it would be extremely detrimental to Parliament to agree with this pseudo-legal and possibly illegal practice .
The Commission is supposed to be the guardian of the Treaties .
I maintain that the guardian of the people of the European Union is the Parliament .
We are the thin line .
We are the organization which protects the public of Europe .
If the Commission and the Council flout the wishes of this Parliament , then we will have dictatorial bureaucracy .
That is not acceptable to the people of this European Union .
The Commission and Council must think again and must listen not only to Parliament but to the people of Europe who are entitled to have transparent and open decision-making and legislation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in fact I hardly need to take the floor here .
I would just say that the PPE Group entirely supports the report by Ms Oddy , and therefore agrees with all the amendments which have been retabled .
We also endorse the criticisms which the rapporteur has just expressed in the debate .
We too believe that this is first and foremost a question of transparency .
We are once again having to deal with this tiresome issue of comitology .
Of course , it is quite legitimate and , to some extent , understandable that each side should choose the system which suits it best and gives it most scope to bring its influence to bear .
However , the Commission and the Council should in fact consider that one of the reasons for the negative attitude displayed by our citizens towards Europe is that many people disapprove of these secret negotiations which remain unknown to the outside world .
Simply for the sake of making Europe transparent and comprehensible for our citizens , we should opt for the procedure being proposed here , namely a management committee of Type II ( b ) , and not a Type III ( b ) regulatory committee .
Type III ( b ) is the so-called contre-filet procedure .
I have to say that just at the moment I would prefer a faux-filet !
We are opposed to the contre-filet procedure , and we believe that the modus vivendi should be adhered to , as set out in the Oddy report .
Unless we settle this whole comitology issue once and for all , and so as to bring about transparency , then the process of comitology will eventually become one of criminology , and that would not be a good thing for the Commission or the Council , nor indeed for Europe and ourselves .
In conclusion , I would repeat that we entirely support the Oddy report .
Mr President , I am only here to say bravo , Christine !
We support you .
Get on with it !
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The voting will be held at noon tomorrow .
Resale rights
The next item on the agenda is the report drawn up by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the resale right for the benefit of the author of an original work of art ( COM ( 96 ) 0097 - C40251 / 96 / 0085 ( COD ) ) ( A4-0030 / 97 ) .
Mr President , I should like to say that our committee approved the principle of the artists ' resale rights unanimously .
It is important to bear that in mind .
Personally , I consulted widely with artists ' organizations , galleries and auction houses on this .
Although , as Mr Cox may perhaps say , when he contributes to the debate later , if you wanted to help artists you might not begin from here , we recognize the political reality of Europe : eight Member States already have the legislation , eleven have agreed it and there is a qualified majority in the Council .
The job of Parliament here is to try and modify and produce the best result possible , which is what I hope we have done in our report from the Culture Committee .
I hope that by voting tomorrow - on a first reading , it is worth remembering - Parliament will actually establish a position which we can then negotiate with the Council and the Commission to make sure that we improve the Directive and then test its impact in the market place .
Mr Cox 's amendment is a wrecking amendment suggesting that we have an impact analysis before we have the directive .
It seems to me difficult to envisage how you could do that other than by using some economic model .
It is just a method of delay .
If he was honest , he would admit that .
The arguments of the British Government are well known , but the arguments of the British Government are largely those of Sothebys and Christies .
I should point out that Sothebys has recently been found guilty of international art smuggling on a large scale .
Therefore , perhaps their word is to be taken at less than face value .
They are also owned by an American billionaire , so their European nature is also to be questioned .
It is also worth pointing out that the major auction houses have auction houses in New York , Geneva , Hong Kong - they can sell paintings wherever they can get the best return .
Again , we should be sceptical of that .
The key , it seems to me , is that the artists themselves want this ; a quarter-of-a-million artists in Europe want this Directive for a number of reasons , not least to get back part of their heritage and to understand the nature of their market .
We , in Parliament , should be on the side of the artists , not on the side of the auction houses .
Mr President , I want to start by congratulating the Commission on this initiative .
I think the time has come for the Commission to harmonize artists ' intellectual property rights in their work through resale right .
Parliament has done serious work on this proposal for a directive in the Committee on Legal Affairs , and the rapporteur , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , has done an excellent job , achieving a very high degree of approval .
I think the twenty-odd amendments passed by the Committee on Legal Affairs , and others presented by the Socialist Group , are aimed at improving the text presented by the Commission .
I would draw attention to some of them , in particular Amendment No 4 , which refers to the international conventions .
It is a good thing to harmonize Community law , but if Community law is harmonized and there are countries outside the Community which still fail to grant the authors their intellectual property rights , we will be facing cases of real piracy .
At a time when the whole of commercial and services law is being harmonized , consideration must be given to the appropriateness of drawing up an international convention which removes the reference in the Berne Convention to resale right as a purely optional right .

I also want to draw the Commission 's attention to Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 18 - as well as part of Amendment No 9 - which define the scope of resale right to exclude manuscripts , but deal with resale right in a work which has a certain originality and is intended to be viewed .
So we are talking about a work which is an expression of creation and therefore the intellectual property right is protected .
Finally , Mr President , I hope that the amendments from the Committee on Legal Affairs and some of the socialist amendments , which we hope will be approved , can rely on Commission support at the second stage of approval by the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the stamina and patience which she has shown in drawing up her report .
With this report , she has presented a very balanced and practical final document .
In the light of the closing discussions in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I should like to emphasize in particular once again that resale rights are a matter of copyright in favour of the artist , and not a tax to benefit the Member States .
I think this is a very important point to make .
The discussions revolved around two issues in particular : whether we need to harmonize resale rights at all ; and , if so , how these rights should then be expressed in terms of percentages for each band .
The first question - do we need to harmonize resale rights - can clearly be answered in the affirmative .
Where art is concerned , the European internal market is characterized by extremes .
We have some Member States where there are no resale rights , and others where there is a right of 5 % .
We need this harmonization .
The main arguments against are as follows . Resale rights or administering them would consume the proceeds .
The response is that this can be countered by the rapporteur 's balanced proposal that the rights should apply only from a threshold of ECU 1000 . Also , many of the systems currently in operation serve to undermine this argument .
Another argument which is repeatedly put forward , namely that the art market would migrate to the United States , cannot be sustained .
There are already resale rights in California , and efforts are in fact being made in the USA to introduce them throughout the country .
Turning to the bands and the percentages for resale rights , there are major differences in the Member States .
We spent a great deal of time discussing where to draw a line that was justified on practical grounds , but came to the conclusion that the threshold of ECU 1000 is one which is justified , taking all the counter-arguments into account , and it should be maintained .
The upper rate is also in keeping with the realities of the art market and the interests of the artists involved .
Mr President , this proposal for a directive aims to eliminate major legal disparities between the States , from the absence of resale rights in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , to the highest rates in Portugal .
The Commission , using this disparity , has attempted an average proposal forgetting that , in certain States , the resale right appears in texts , but has no application in fact , forgetting that in some countries in the Union no true art market exists , or exists any longer .
The Committee on Legal Affairs , through the impetus of Mrs Palacio , has attempted a more realistic approach .
Certainly , there is no question of depriving the artist of a genuine resale right over his work : the resale right is a way of letting the artist benefit from the added value which his work gains over time and providing him with an appropriate and uniform level of protection .
But the reality of the figures is implacable : less than 10 % of resale rights benefit artists who are still alive .
What is more , far from favouring young artists , the resale right has a perverse effect .
It lowers the price which the potential buyer is prepared to pay and , for the work of contemporary artists who are already highly rated , it encourages sellers to go abroad .
Today , they go to London or Geneva , but once harmonisation has been achieved under the current conditions of the proposal , it could be feared that the market will move to New York , thus eliminating any art market worthy of the name in the Union .
So , the objective of social protection which the European legislator has set itself will not be achieved .
It seems to me equally important to put in place a significant resale right for the works of artists who are starting out or who are little known , as it is to set the resale right for internationally renowned artists close to zero , insignificant , since the cost of relocating the sale is derisory in comparison with the right which may be earned .
In this domain , as in many others , let us refrain from an excess of zeal , the better being the enemy of the good .
Mr President , I would like to see young artists given good opportunities to work in Europe .
I would like to see the results of their work here .
I would like to see a smoothly functioning art market which offers returns which can then be used to benefit the artists .
This will be achieved if we have many different art dealers and galleries and through reliable art dealers .
If we were to have internationally binding regulations and resale rights which applied in every country which had signed the Copyright Convention the situation would be different .
Then we could support this Directive , but that is not the case today .
I can assure Mr Kerr that experience from countries other than Great Britain has shown the consequences of the introduction of resale rights .
This was introduced in my country and now it can now be seen that art dealing does not take place through reliable art dealers and auction houses i.e. it takes place on a grey market which is not a good situation .
Another consequence of resale rights is that the galleries have started to experience an even tougher time and are finding it difficult to operate , which means that the prices which they are able to offer young artists have gone down .
As we have said , it is not the young artists which will benefit from this , a point which was made very well , I thought , by Ms Schaffner .
We in the liberal group want to see the principle of subsidiarity respected which is another reason why many of us are critical towards this proposal .
We want to see a critical examination of whether the proposed Directive really will lead to an improvement in community principles and if there really are ' dysfunctions ' in the market which require regulating .
After all there are no international binding standards which force us to adopt this legislation .
We do not think that the Commission has demonstrated the need for a Directive convincingly or that the lack of a Directive would cause serious disruption .
Let me say - even if Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn has said that this should not be compared with a tax - that those who maintain that resale rights are required for the internal market should also demand a standard income tax in the Union .
For our part , we do not think that the Directive should be introduced until the Commission has drawn up and presented a thorough impact analysis of how the art market really functions and how it functions with respect to third countries .
Such a study I hope would also give an insight into how the diversity of the art market would be affected .
It is as much in the interests of the buyer as of the artist to ensure that there is diversity of players and that there is true competition .
At the same time it is obvious that the proposal will not lead to improvements for artists in those countries where resale rights already exist .
Mr President , the lack of legal harmonization in artists ' rights to participate in the benefits generated by their work is currently distorting competition and undermining the proper functioning of the internal market .
This proposal for a directive should be understood as an attempt to put an end to this perverse situation , and it is high time to do so .
The Commission is seeking to regulate transactions which give rise to payment , the threshold for the application of the right and the type of resale right .
We agree with the choice of issues that require regulation and also with the generic proposal which inspires the directive .
What we are not convinced about is whether it adequately matches the requirements of the internal market and the protection of the artists ' living and working conditions .
We harbour these doubts because of the method of regulating practical aspects of the exercise of resale right .
We disagree with some of the measures put together to regulate this , like the minimum thresholds and the percentages to be received by the artists when their work is resold .
On the first point , we think the minimum threshold is extremely restrictive , and if it is not reduced artists whose works are less well known or valued and give rise to modest economic transactions will remain outside the scope of resale right .
This would enshrine an exclusion which we think should be put right by reducing the minimum threshold to extend the exercise of resale right to the greatest number of artists .
As regards the percentages , it is claimed that these measures give the artist a share in the profits earned by his work .
It seems common sense to increase the percentages , otherwise the redistribution will be more symbolic than real .
So we support the amendments proposing an increase in the percentages .
Finally , I want to point out that the objective of the directive should be cultural as well as economic .
We believe it must aspire to strengthen artistic creation , which is and always has been one of the identifying marks of European culture .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since this proposal for a directive has been the object of sometimes violent criticism , I should like to return to the question of the legal basis - not the one contained in the Union Treaty , which the rapporteur has explained adequately tonight , but rather two urgent legislative needs which this proposal seeks to meet .

The first - and here I agree with the previous speakers - is the ending of a market distortion based on legal differences originating from markets which have a privileged position because of national legislation , since they do not have to take account of resale rights .
There was only one way to correct this false situation , namely to introduce a resale right throughout the Union , with all the consequences that entails .
An area without internal borders must also be a market without privileges .
The other urgent need lies in the unequal treatment of creative artists , as opposed to writers and musicians .
While the latter are protected by copyright against economic fluctuations and the vagaries of the market , creative artists are at the mercy of the marketing strategies of the art trade , if they do not yet have a personal reputation and the influence that goes with it .
In this context , resale rights serve as partial compensation , and as acknowledgement of a right which cannot be denied to these artists .
I should like to make one further comment on the amendment on resale rights which I have tabled , together with other Members .
Our purpose here is to follow as far as possible both the Commission 's proposals and the ideas from the artists ' associations .
Finally , I should like to thank the Commission for its bold initiative , the rapporteur for the determination and the caution with which she has approached the issue , and the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture for his contribution .
This proposal on the resale right sends out a very clear political message , and that is quite simply the European Union 's insatiable desire for expansion , or to put it in EU speech : the proposal violates both the principle of subsidiarity and the principle of proportionality .
What is at the forefront of the debate , and what gives weight to the proposal - looked at in rational terms - is a concern about the distortion of competitiveness in that some countries have this resale right , and others do not .
But the existing research shows that the resale right has effect firstly on sales in the country of sale when the work of art in question has a sale price of at least 50 , 000 ECUs .
When it comes to less valuable works of art , due to transport and insurance costs , it may simply not be worthwhile selling elsewhere in order to avoid the resale right .
The existing reports refer to an examination of the sale prices of works of art which indicate that 95 % of works of art are sold at prices under around 20 , 000 ECUs , that is to say $ 25 , 000 .
In other words , the attempts at harmonization contained in the proposal are targeted at under 5 % , probably only 2-3 % , of combined sales .
In all essential respects the resale right is a national matter and that is what it should remain .
For Scandinavian artists , where we have had the resale right - in Denmark 's case for several years - the proposal simply means a significant reduction .
Scandinavian artists have , in a joint statement , protested against the proposal and this reduction , which Marianne Eriksson will be addressing in a subsequent speech .
My conclusion to this is that , speaking for myself and for the group , I am able to support Mr Cox 's amendment which is aimed at simplicity and seeks an assessment of the need , particularly amendment No 40 .
Mr President , I want to pay homage to the Commission which has introduced this necessary draft and especially to Mrs Palacio , who has invested a great deal in this matter and has shown evidence of remarkable qualities , even if hers was at times a thankless task .
I think our Commission has produced a profound piece of work .
It has held hearings , consultations and long debates .
The conclusions I would draw from it are as follows .
Firstly , there must be a harmonisation of the resale right .
This right exists in certain States ; it does not exist in others .
This situation distorts the internal market .
It is important that the result of our deliberations is an agreement on the principle of the resale right , even if the rate may be modest , or even minimal where the lowest rate is concerned .
Secondly , the need for the legitimate remuneration of artists , and particularly young artists , must be recognised for works of art which are not of very great financial importance .
Thirdly , we do not have the right to misjudge the globalisation of the art market and the effects of relocation , today to London , tomorrow to New York , Tokyo or elsewhere .
The socialist group has taken these elements into account , which have led it to propose a wide range of rates , going from 5 % for modest works to ensure the adequate remuneration of young artists or works of art by nature not very commercial , to 1 % for more important works .
I would like to make it clear that the rate of 1 % has not been accepted , but it has not been disputed in principle , Mr Kerr , by the representatives of the large British houses you have cited and who were present at our hearing .
So , we think there should be a wide spread as far as rates are concerned .
In the same way , we think that thresholds should start at 500 Ecus and go up to 250 , 000 Ecus , that is , to widen the range put forward by the Commission .
I note that there is some difficulty over agreement - including within my group - because of the diversity of traditions and interests .
I will put the question which we will have to ask ourselves at some point : do we , or do we not , want a directive ?
I hope , for my part , that a substantial majority of you will stand out for the proposals presented .
Otherwise , I am afraid that by letting things go we will see worse relocations , to the detriment of artists as well as to all the intermediaries and other active parties in the art market in Europe .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work she has undertaken .
The fact that I disagree with her in no way detracts from the hard work she has put in on this report .
My starting point is simply this .
Article 108 of the Treaty is an erroneous Treaty base .
This is not a harmonization measure .
Indeed , the case for harmonization has not been proved .
If the objective were to be harmonization then both the Commission directive and the Palacio Vallelersundi report would fail to hit the mark .
The actual effect of a measure such as that before us tonight will clearly be to drive this art business out of Europe completely and into the welcoming arms of Switzerland and New York .
In any event , as Mr Krarup has said , these proposals lack proportionality .
I would remind the House that if you look at the market in France alone , 75 % of the droit de suite raised goes to only six families .
In my view the principle of subsidiarity should clearly apply here .
I would draw the attention of both the Commission and the House to the fact that three Member State governments are clearly against the application of this directive .
These are Ireland , Holland and the United Kingdom .
There are several reasons for this : the principle of subsidiarity to which I have already referred ; the fact that harmonization in this case is simply not justified ; thirdly , there is no convincing evidence that the absence of the right in some Member States and the difference between other Member States creates barriers to trade .
Artists ' resale rights should be left to national law .
I would also add that the main international copyright convention - the Berne Convention - to which all Member States are party , gives freedom whether or not to apply this right .
This freedom must be respected .
The costs and risk involved far outweigh any conceivable benefits .
Before the present proposals and Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report enter into force , the Commission must conduct and report on a complete evaluation of the impact on the market of resale of the works of art in both the European Union and between the European Union and third countries .
This report should be examined by the Council and the European Parliament should be consulted on it .
I would like to make a forecast .
If this directive and the amendments tabled to the Palacio Vallelersundi report were adopted , it would result in a net loss to the European Union - a loss of earnings and jobs in the European Union .
We simply cannot afford to let that happen .
So , in the words of Mr Kerr , I conclude by saying : Let the market decide and let the market be .
Like a previous speaker , I commend to the House the amendments tabled by Mr Cox , in particular Amendment No 40 .
We should vote these amendments through and not those tabled by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and other colleagues or indeed the Commission report .
There are huge potential job losses and a huge loss of income to all Member States and I regret that while Mr Kerr said that he conducted a very full inquiry , in fact he did not go to all the art galleries in the United Kingdom so they could have benefited from his contribution tonight .
Mr President , in my opinion it is undeniable that the current situation with regard to resale rights in respect of works of art is unsatisfactory and is causing distortions of competition on the modern art market .
However , the main problem stems from the differing legal positions of artists in those countries where they sell their works .
A further cause of inequality is the situation of visual artists by comparison with other artists whose right to payment of royalties for repeated uses of their works is guaranteed everywhere .
The consideration of the directive gave rise to a justified criticism of the so-called threshold level .
There is a risk that only established artists or their heirs will benefit from the rights in question .
This is why I support the reduction in the threshold value to ECU 500 , as proposed by the Committee on Culture , and a higher level of compensation in the lowest price category , since this would help and encourage new young artists .
The elimination of red tape and the application of the subsidiarity principle must be encouraged everywhere where such measures are justified and feasible .
However , the harmonization of resale rights is justified precisely because it will help bring about more equal treatment of artists . This harmonization must be carried out in such a way as to encourage artists and the arts in general .
Mr President , unfortunately I cannot pass on my congratulations for this report although I know that a great deal of hard work has gone into it .
But it is our view that this proposed Directive contains regulations which are more far-reaching than required to achieve the stated objective .
If this Directive is adopted it will be necessary not only for the three Scandinavian Member countries of Sweden , Finland and Denmark but also for Norway and Iceland to amend their existing legislation .
This change will bring about a marked deterioration in the rights which Scandinavian artists in the five countries enjoy under existing National statutes .
The Directive , in its current format , takes no account of small national markets .
It has been drawn up with no regard for the conditions in the Scandinavian countries .
If the Directive is adopted in its current format it will mean , in the case of Sweden , that working artists will not for the most part be eligible for remuneration and that instead this will be a benefit to well known foreign artists .
Total remuneration would be halved while administration costs would rise considerably .
As I am running out of time to speak , I refer you to my proposed amendment and would unfortunately , as we say in Sweden , ask that both the Commission and the Committee do their homework again .
Mr President , the European Union 's cultural policy is marking time : it is not experiencing a happy period , to put it mildly ; there is insufficient will to promote it , and a lack of funds to implement it .
So it is crucial that the legislative framework , which is necessary if there is to be a real single market , should at least take due account of the particular nature of artworks - plastic artworks , in this case - and should actively support all forms of creativity .
Moreover , our enthusiastic support for the extension , judicious harmonization and proper application of resale rights stems from a policy line which we have always vociferously advocated .
Mrs Palacio 's fine report records the outcome of intense debate within the Committee on Legal Affairs , and expresses full approval - which I endorse - of the proposal which the Commissioner has been bold enough to present .
It is quite proper to recognize the rights - and we are not talking here about a hand-out - of those who produce works for which they often receive an initial payment that is out of all proportion to their subsequent market value .
So the practical fruits of their success should not result in the exclusive and far superior gain of dealers and large galleries , but should also benefit the original authors on an appropriate scale , be they young or not-so-young .
We are therefore hoping for a broad consensus in the vote in Parliament , and we particularly support Amendments Nos 53 , 54 and 55 , which are key ones .
We shall struggle hard to defeat the specious arguments which will undoubtedly be put forward to block a long-awaited directive which is both necessary and useful , in order to ensure that a significant part of the market is governed with due regard for original , unique , unreproducible artworks that are an essential reflection of the imagination and traditions of the Europe which we hold so dear .
Mr President , I too would like to pay my compliments to Mrs Palacio : I am not complimenting her merely for the sake of form , but because I am in full agreement with her report .
Like Mr Barzanti , I too hope that it will be widely supported in the House .
I believe that everything has already been said , in particular by Mrs Palacio , so I shall confine myself to just one comment .
Ultimately , the difference of opinion seems to me to relate neither to the details , nor to the threshold , nor to the percentages , but to whether or not resale rights should exist at all .
And therefore , since mention has even been made of markets , competition and a possible shift of sales outlets from the European to the American continent , I feel duty bound to say that , above all else , this is a question of justice .
We are talking here about intellectual property , in other words the ownership of something intangible and imponderable - ideas .
And a figurative artist 's idea has one specific characteristic : the idea cannot be cloned , to use the latest jargon .
A novelist 's idea can , in a sense , be cloned , in that hundreds , thousands or even hundreds of thousands of copies of a book can be produced and marketed . The same also applies more or less to a musical work , but a figurative artist produces one copy only .
The idea remains in that form and the owner , the holder of the intellectual property , always remains the same because the idea cannot be sold .
There then arises the question as to the usage of that idea , of which at least two features differ from that of a novelist , to stay with that comparison .
The initial sale of a book involves high production costs , and its author receives a percentage , whereas the creator of a figurative artwork receives almost the entire proceeds of the first sale .
But whereas , at a later stage , the sale of multiple copies of a book enables the author to benefit further from its value , an artwork gains in value by being passed from person to person , by becoming known and being seen ; in other words , the original has to move about , and its value is linked to its circulation .
It therefore seems to me that it is a question of elementary justice to give the owner of the idea , the artist , an equivalent economic advantage , and that is precisely what resale rights do .
I do not believe that , beyond the threshold percentage , it is legitimate to deprive artists of these rights .
I do not intend to dwell on the detailed objections which have been raised , since some of them strike me as relatively unimportant ; the basic issue as I have explained it is , I think , a convincing argument for the adoption of Mrs Palacio 's report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to make a point of thanking the Commission for taking this initiative .
I think that what is happening here is very important .
This directive is a very important one .
The differences between rules in the EU are obstructing the internal market and the equal treatment of artists in the Union .
It is completely unfair if a British person who sells a work in Germany or Portugal obtains resale rights , but a Portuguese or German person does not obtain such rights in the United Kingdom if they sell a work there .
This injustice must be eliminated , especially in such a sensitive area .
What is actually the point at issue here ?
It is to involve artists in the resale of their work .
That is not too much to ask , when one considers that in Germany , for example , artists have an income of around DM 2000 .
People cannot live on that .
The market and market conditions are extremely tough for artists .
Half the sale price goes to the gallery owner or art dealer , and it is not asking too much for these dealers or owners to hand over part of the proceeds when they resell these works .
Particularly important here is the fact that this contribution is especially high for the young artists who are not yet well known and do not have so many opportunities .
That is why it is so important for us as socialists and social democrats that the 5 % rate for resale rights should apply to the lowest band .
We set great store by this , and by having this band begin at ECU 500 .
There is another problem with Amendment No 57 .
This concerns these narrow price bands which are being envisaged .
There are in fact only a few works involved here , and the auctioneers in France have worked out for us that all of 120 works are sold for more than ECU 250 000 each year .
So this means that in general terms there cannot really be enormous sums of money involved , but it is of course a great deal of money for the individual artists .
I also think that the Commission 's proposal is a very good one .
If we take a work which costs ECU 110 000 , then under the Commission 's proposal or our own , the artist would receive ECU 3300 ; under the rapporteur 's proposal , it would be all of ECU 1100 .
Is that fair ?
And do you believe that for the sake of ECU 3300 , works will migrate to the United States , when you think of the cost of insurance and transport ?
I hardly think so !
I would therefore call for this generous scheme to be adopted , without too many disadvantages being created for German artists , who are in fact used to always receiving 5 % .
Mr President , copyright is one sector in which subsidiarity demands - rather than allows - Community intervention .
Only if copyright is harmonized will it be possible for all forms of art to circulate freely .
I am referring both to a single original work of art , as in the case of the plastic arts which we are discussing today , and to works which are reproduced such as books , records and audio-visual material .
We should not however forget that multimedia communications are opening up new avenues for the reproduction of works within the plastic arts .
Resale rights are particularly important in relation to artists in the field of the plastic arts , who are the least protected of creative artists in this matter owing to the unique and un-reproducible nature of their works .
The Palacio Vallelersundi report is a serious and balanced piece of work , since it tries to reconcile the various conflicting interests - those of the dealers and those of the artists .
The Berne Convention leaves it to the discretion of the signatory states whether or not to adopt this resale right , so instead of being a right recognized by eleven signatory states , it is in practice applied badly in practically all of them .
The United Kingdom , which together with the United States has an eighty per cent share of the international art market , is one of the four states which never incorporated this right into its legislation .
There are two reasons which make it urgent to harmonize laws in this field .
First when the internal market becomes fully operational equal conditions for purchase and sale will be required throughout the Community territory , even to prevent the art market from shifting to non-member countries .
Secondly but no less important , the recognition of the social role of the arts as a force for development which should take the form of the setting up of support mechanisms for artists .
Since the law in Portugal is considerably more severe than the present proposal for a directive , I should like to stress the clear advantage of giving consideration to the following amendments proposed by the Committee on Culture which reflect the unanimous concerns of artists : the lowering of the minimum threshold for the application of the provisions of Article 3 ; the amending of the sliding scale of percentages provided for in Article 4 ; the promotion of the joint administration of the right provided for in Article 6 .
I should also like to point out , as I have done on so many occasions , that it is again clear that Article 128 should be amended so that it can be used as a basis for any texts with a bearing on culture .
This is the only way to bring coherence and uniformity to cultural policy in the Union .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteur , who has done an excellent job as always .
After the compliments , let us now get down to the facts .
It is only too easy to take up the cause of artists , but out of all the resale rights , just 9 % goes to living artists , 9 % !
The other 91 % goes to holders of rights and successors in title , and 9 % to living artists !
No mention has been made of this .
Nor does the Commission mention it in its proposals .
Furthermore , the dealers naturally also make money out of this system , between 10 and 20 % in fact , and that is why they are campaigning so vigorously as well .
The people who receive the least are the living artists .
That will be reinforced by the Commission 's proposal .
Clearly , harmonization is required .
To get down to the facts , I should like to give an example of how what the Legal Affairs Committee is proposing would actually have worked out over the last 25 years .
I should be glad to provide details of the source on which this is based , but that would take too much time now - it is a very thorough piece of work .
So , let us go back to 1970 and the market in the United Kingdom , where 3072 works have since been sold for more than ECU 100 000 .
In the same period , 1970 to 1996 , 3630 such works were sold in the United States .
So this is a very tight market , with very tough competition .
If we had had the proposal from the Legal Affairs Committee - let alone the incredible proposals which go beyond that , just the Legal Affairs Committee 's proposal - then these 3072 works which were sold for more than ECU 100 000 would have cost the European market ECU 1 033 856 359 .
Do you still seriously think that this would not have led to a relocation of the market ?
Do you still seriously think that with such a cost to the market , sales would just have carried on cheerfully in Europe ?
Such an idea is madness !
You will ensure that no more works by Picasso or Van Gogh are sold in the European Union , that nothing at all is sold , and that art is no longer talked about in the EU .
That is what will happen !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to compliment the rapporteur on her report and to offer her my support .
Harmonization of the resale right for the benefit of authors in the European Union seems to me a very good and justifiable initiative .
Unfortunately , it is encountering strong opposition .
On the one hand , this opposition stems frequently from ignorance about the actual underlying basis for the right and , on the other , from worry about a major movement of sales of art works to other countries in which the right is not applicable .
The underlying basis for the right is the desire to lessen the injustice suffered by the authors of certain original works of art which are destined to become objects of viewing .
As things stand , such authors , unlike other authors , are not able to benefit from revenues accrued through reproduction rights and the renewed presentation of their work .
We should appreciate that the resale right is actually a right of the author and not a tax , as the opponents would have it .
It is a right which is exercised for the benefit of the author and not for the benefit of some public authority .
Furthermore , it is recognized as such in Article 14 of the Berne Convention .
As regards the danger of a transfer of art work sales to countries which do not recognize this right , it does not appear to be very acute .
In actual fact , the situation should not change very much , given that the regressive scale of percentages applied to successive categories of the sale price makes export of little interest when , for example , transport and security costs are taken into account .
It also has to be said that the existence or otherwise of this resale right is not a definitive factor as regards the movement of transactions , but rather one factor among others .
As far as the United Kingdom is concerned , the danger of a move by the market is small , because what the world is looking for when it goes to London is the experience of professionals in the field and their traditional technical expertise , and it knows that it will find guarantees of quality and security there for its transactions .
That said , I draw attention to the fact that the proposed harmonization can only fulfil its true role if it can be ensured that the Member States will implement the resale right down to the last detail , which in many Member States is not done at present .
In finishing I would like to stress that the international dimension of the art market must of necessity be taken into account .
If the European experience in this field proves positive for the development of the art market generally , and for the promotion of new artists in particular , we must direct our efforts to making this right obligatory in all countries , given that the Berne Convention at present provides only for the possibility of the Member States introducing it into their legislation .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the British European Parliamentary Labour Party .
I wish to make it clear that we are not against artists .
We are just not convinced that the case has been made for this specific proposal and that it will actually help artists .
We are concerned that the art market may move to New York and to Switzerland .
We are concerned about potential threats to jobs .
We are worried about the burden on smalland medium-sized businesses .
We are concerned that small antique and art shops in tourist areas may have difficulty as a result of this proposal .
Consequently , my group will be supporting Mr Cox 's amendment , requiring an impact assessment on the art resale market .
I am particularly concerned that the Commission has not fully thought through the definition of plastic arts and the extent to which extra-territorial effects will affect this proposal .
My group is not in favour of reducing the threshold to 500 because of the burden on small- and medium-sized businesses , nor are we in favour of increasing the percentages .
My group will be abstaining on the final vote as we are simply not convinced that the Commission has properly made the case for harmonization in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission , I would commend Mrs Palacio and Mr Kerr on their hard and meticulous work in presenting to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media such a comprehensive report on a matter which is crucial to the completion of the internal market in the art sector .
As the many speakers have indicated , the aim of this proposal for a directive is to eliminate distortions of competition by extending and harmonizing resale rights throughout the entire Community , and to put an end to the discriminatory treatment suffered by the authors of modern artworks .
The Commission therefore attaches considerable importance to this initiative , which does not stand alone but is connected with other measures adopted by the Commission to liberalize the art market .
The Commission can accept nearly all the amendments tabled by the Legal Affairs Committee .
The only substantive amendment which , on grounds of principle , it intends to reject at this stage concerns the percentage rates of resale rights laid down in Article 4 of the proposed directive .
Nor can the Commission accept certain other amendments , from various political groups and individual Members , which are designed to modify the minimum threshold for the application of resale rights , reducing or increasing the percentages to be applied and changing the proposed price bands .
The same applies to the proposal to calculate resale rights on the basis of added value , in other words the difference between the resale price and the sum paid to purchase the work .
The few cases in which attempts have been made to apply similar systems in the past - ones based on added value - have proved unsuccessful as a result of practical problems .
Furthermore , the Commission cannot agree to refrain from harmonizing the categories of works or transactions to which resale rights apply .
To leave such matters to the discretion of the Member States would conflict with the goals of the internal market in the modern art sector .
I would point out that , generally speaking , art galleries should be subject to resale rights in exactly the same way as any other commercial trader in twentieth-century art .
The proposed derogation in favour of commercial transactions taking place within three years of the trader having acquired the work is similarly unacceptable .
I regret that , on grounds of constitutional law , it is not possible after the artist 's death to restrict the benefit of resale rights to his or her legitimate heirs .
Finally , the Commission has to reject various amendments seeking to insert in a Community act recitals which state that this same act should not be adopted .
With regard to Amendment No 40 , which would make the directive 's entry into force contingent on a further assessment by the Commission of the impact on the art resale market - an assessment to be validated by the other Community institutions involved in the legislative process - I must point out that this does not accurately reflect the institutional balance established by the Treaty on European Union .
I am convinced that in a second phase we shall be able to reach complete agreement on this proposal , taking account of all the potential risks for the future art market in Europe .
I thank you once again for a discussion which I personally have found very interesting , because it has highlighted both the complexity of this proposal and the gap which the proposal is designed to fill .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The voting will take place at noon tomorrow .
Masses and dimensions of motor vehicles
The next item on the agenda is Mr Barton 's recommendation for a second reading on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on the masses and dimensions of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers and amending Directive 70 / 156 / EEC ( C4-0632 / 96-00 / 0348 ( COD ) ) ( A4-0102 / 97 ) .
Mr President , thank you for that very catchy introduction to this report .
Some years ago we set out to get a Europe-wide agreement on the masses and dimensions of certain vehicles and their trailers in order to create free movement and the single market and all the advantages that will give the citizen .
We have to note that much progress has been made in this whole area .
A clear agreement on this item would have completed that process but to this day the final stage eludes us .
Unfortunately the Council has not been able to bring forward specific measures that would finally complete the process .
Some five years after our first reading all that is now available to us is a common process as to how the national authorities should go about deciding these limits , the maximum permitted values .
The hope and expectation is that this will eventually lead to harmonized results because of using the common process .
It is regrettable that we cannot yet achieve that full agreement .
This report has to reflect that reality .
It is no use our dreaming about these items .
We make two ' friendly ' amendments in the report .
These require that when national authorities are using this procedure they give high regard to the safety factors .
I would remind the Commission and Council of the concerns the European Parliament expressed in this regard at first reading , particularly as regards the use of trailers up to 750 kilogrammes without the need for those same trailers to have braking systems .
Parliament has very real concerns about that .
We have not tabled an amendment because the procedure dictates that should be decided at national level - at least in the intervening period .
I sincerely hope that the Council and Commission can also take on board our constructive amendments in this regard .
Hopefully , the Council and Commission will be able to inform the House that the matter will be kept under review , and if this process is not seen to be producing the required results within two years or an indication that it will be successful , we would expect the Commission to bring forward fresh proposals to accelerate that process .
Some Scandinavian MEPs have rightly raised the matter of their concerns about specialist vehicles , especially in the forestry industry .
The question they raise is will European harmonization jeopardize their right to operate their specialist vehicles ?
The simple and short answer from this Parliament is that no such danger exists .
Whichever procedure we use to decide the European standards , they in no way stop the national authorities from approving the use of specialist vehicles as they see fit .
The only restriction is that those vehicles do not have the right to free movement to operate in the rest of Europe .
In conclusion , I hope we can now proceed with this proposal and that citizens will soon get the benefits of a safe single market in vehicles and their trailers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mr Barton for his excellent report on this proposal for a directive on the masses and dimensions of certain categories of motor vehicles and their trailers .
The Commission welcomes both of Mr Barton 's amendments , subject to a few minor changes of wording .
I would also inform the House that the Commission is prepared , if necessary , to re-examine the situation regarding vehicle safety in two years ' time .
I must thank the House for its work on this directive , which is an important step towards harmonizing the legislation of the Member States on the type-approval of vehicles and their trailers , with the exception of motor cars , in respect of their masses and dimensions .
There is every likelihood that the proposal will be adopted and can thus be ready to be applied by manufacturers prior to the entry into force of the directive , which is scheduled for two years after the adoption of the proposal .
I very much hope that Parliament will adopt the proposal at second reading , as Mr Barton has said .
Mr President , I am very happy with the Commissioner 's response .
I hope that the textual changes referred to do not mean that we have to take the matter into conciliation .
I would remind the Commissioner that we discussed these matters previously and amended the wording to try and accommodate the Commission .
I am sure it is not the intention of the Commission that we should have to activate the conciliation procedure .
If the textual changes that you now seem to believe would be necessary can be agreed without activating that procedure , I have no problem .
If it would activate the procedure I would ask the Commission to think again .
I will now read out the proposed changes .
I hope the rapporteur will agree on the definition of ' minor ' , that I took the liberty to use .
We would like to see changed in Recital 6 - let me read the last four lines which at present say : ' ... and to pursue the constant improvement of safety , in particular regarding to the use of certain categories of carriages or trailers ' . We would like it to read : ' ... and to pursue the constant improvement of safety , in particular regarding certain categories of trailers ' .
This would imply deleting the words ' to the use of ' and the words ' carriages or ' .
I hope this is considered to be minor .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The voting will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.27 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I do not see my name amongst those who voted for the final resolution on maize .
I would like it shown that I intended to vote in favour , like my group .
That will be corrected .
( Parliament approved the Minutes . )
Budget discharge
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0124 / 97 by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control on the Commission report ( COM ( 97 ) 0048 - C4-0108 / 97 ) on the measures taken to follow up the observations contained in the European Parliament 's resolution accompanying the discharge decision in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1994 financial year ; -A4-0120 / 97 by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1995 financial year - Section III ; -A4-0125 / 97 by Mr Dankert , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1995 financial year - Sections I , IV , V and VI ; -A4-0071 / 97 by Mr Blak , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the management of the European Coal and Steel Community for the 1995 financial year ; -A4-0121 / 97 by Mr Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the management of the sixth and seventh European Development Funds for the 1995 financial year.I should like to extend a warm welcome to Mr Friedmann , the President of the Court of Auditors .
Madam President , it is nice to see so many people here for the discharge debate .
I am amazed at how many people have an interest in this .
No doubt in two minutes ' time the room will be nigh on empty .
There are two reports in my name , hence the ten minutes .
In theory I have five minutes for each but for the first report - the follow-up to the 1994 discharge - I can be extremely brief and spend the majority of my time on the 1995 discharge .
On the follow-up to the 1994 discharge , I just want to say that I expect the Commission to keep Parliament informed on our requests in the resolution , not least concerning the few outstanding actions relating to the 1994 DAS .
We will follow the follow-up with interest .
I move on now to the 1995 discharge , which has in the report a motion for a resolution with 89 articles .
It should have been 90 , but I will comment on that in a moment .
What is different about this year 's request is that at least eleven of those articles call on Parliament to do the work rather than simply asking the Court of Auditors or the Commission , as is normal .
We want to see Parliament play a greater role within budgetary control matters .
The motion for a resolution covers all those areas where Parliament either has concerns or has proposals to make .
I have to say that the main philosophy behind the report lies in the explanatory statement .
We do not vote on the explanatory statement - that is we do not amend it , it is just put there as part of the report - but if one would care to read it , then one would see quite clearly the reason for the proposals .
For example : on the DAS , Article 14 of the resolution is , in effect , a condensed version of Paragraphs 9 to 23 of the explanatory statement .
It is in these latter paragraphs where the problems of the DAS are outlined in specific detail .
This is also where you will find the reasons why discharge can be given , even with a negative DAS concerning payments .
I recommend reading it , especially to those who simply take the Court 's annual report on the DAS and reach a perception of events that is not quite in tune with reality .
But , then again , in general people do not react to reality , they react to their perceptions of reality .
Another example relates to olive oil .
This is , indeed , a problematic area because the one vote that I , as rapporteur , lost in committee on Monday concerned olive oil .
Paragraphs 31 and 32 of the explanatory statement spell out the problem .
The Commission itself in its recent options paper of 12 February this year clearly shows the continuing problems of this sector .
Do not forget that we are talking about a discharge for the year 1995 and here we have a report in February 1997 saying things like : ' There are inherent defects in the common market organization in olive oil which have become increasingly apparent over time and which mean that efficient control is not always possible ...
The inherent defect in the system remained , namely the common interest of producer and mill owner to declare high figures .
Fraud has been detected in the operation of the consumption aid .
Fraud has also been detected in quantities exported with the export refund .
Unfortunately , and particularly in years when olive oil prices are high , it is extremely tempting to mix olive oil with seed oil and make a profit at the expense of the consumer . ' And so it goes on .
The report also says : ' Unfortunately , the Member States have not followed the advice of their agencies regarding sanctions with sufficient vigour .
For this reason amongst others the efficacity of the controls made by the agencies is compromised . '
The paragraph that was voted out on Monday night was trying to take action on that particular subject .
My problem is that the article that is missing - the one rejected by the committee - was going for the jugular , so to speak , of the olive oil section .
I have a problem on this .
Were I not the rapporteur - and , as the rapporteur , I am the servant of the committee - I would openly say that the decision on Monday night was a daft decision .
I would also say that here we have a regime riddled with fraud .
I would then go on to say that the Commission , pursuant to Article 13 of the Council Decision of 31 October 1994 on budgetary discipline , should initiate proceedings forthwith to suspend or reduce monthly advances in this sector .
However , I am the rapporteur so , of course , I cannot say those things .
Let me give another example from the report : Article 74 of the resolution calls for ECU 2m to be spent on sports development in the townships of South Africa .
This has been put in because it was part of the remarks to budget line B7-5070 , which we , in Parliament , voted on in December 1994 and here we are now , in April 1997 .
The reality is that very little , if anything , has happened in relation to that request .
When you look at Paragraph 52 of the explanatory statement , you will see that for that budget line in the year 1995 there were ECU 125m on the line .
ECU 123m were committed , with about ECU 2m being left over , and Parliament 's request for sports development never materialized - it was forgotten .
Thankfully , when we discussed it in committee the Commission said , in effect , that it had made a mistake .
In English you could say : ' It 's a fair cop , Guv 'nor , you 've caught us ; we should have done it and we didn 't ' .
Well , I hope that the remark within the discharge will produce results .
It matters to Parliament , and I can assure the Commission that particular article will be monitored with diligence on my part .
Now , good as the explanatory statement is , it does not say it all .
If it said it all it would read like a book ; in fact it would be as long as the Court 's annual report .
So , the reference to grants for whisky-makers in Article 35 may leave some people confused , because that is not touched on in the explanatory statement .
It is an item which Parliament has followed with great interest and some of us have a theory of how that came about - how the wheelings and dealings within the Council of Ministers and the horse-trading that goes on brought about this ECU 40m for the whisky-makers .
The defence by the Commission in the answers to the Court 's comments makes interesting reading .
I would only say : ' Watch this space as Parliament determines whether the ECU 40m is justified or not , because we want to know a lot more about it and to see whether that ECU 40m should be given or whether it should cease . '
In a similar vein , Article 50 asks Parliament to make its mind up over the issue of advanced television .
We have the Court recommending that no more money should be paid and , within Parliament , we have a difference of opinion between the various committees .
Once again , I hope Parliament can discuss it in depth and before the next budget make some concrete proposals on where we stand .
The sectional rapporteurs will each deal with their own areas .
It only remains for me to thank those people involved in drawing-up the report , especially the members of the secretariat .
I commend the report to Parliament and look forward to the results of this comprehensive report being carried out .
Madam President , Parliament has always dealt with the discharge in respect of the budget for Parliament .
It is something new that we now have to deal with the budget for the Court , the Court of Auditors , the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee as well .
And it is also the intention of the Committee on Budgetary Control that the Council budget too should be added to the list next year , since it is of course out of the question that a budget of more than 300 million ECU should not be subjected to public scrutiny .
Compared with the problems which Mr Wynn has raised in connection with the general budget , the budget problems we have with the smaller budgets are of course minor and transparent .
But here too one constantly comes up against the problem of inefficient implementation .
For example the fact that in the European Parliament 's budget many of the appropriations earmarked for information were axed simply because the necessary decisions were not taken in time to have those appropriations made .
In this House , partly because of our constant need to use translation and interpreting services , it costs a lot of money when both the parliamentary groups and other bodies of Parliament are obliged to cancel meetings .
We have the problem that it has been not totally impossible but almost impossible to get Parliament 's inventories and lists drawn up .
Only in the last few days has a first report been received .
This has been going on for years and no sooner has one list been completed than one has to start work on the one for next year .
In the case of the Court we found that it was all too ready to shoulder financial consequences of problems to do with buildings , which were the responsibility of the Luxembourg Government .
So there is room for the smaller institutions to clean up their act a little .
But compared with the main budget these are relatively minor matters .
A few words more on the main budget .
As Mr Wynn has indicated , a number of rapporteurs have been busy on the various parts of the budget and I have addressed the whole issue of the structural funds .
We in the European Parliament are extremely happy that the Commission , in the interests of sound and efficient management , is striving to improve things as regards implementation of the budget .
But to my mind sound and efficient management should not have to wait till the year 2000 .
The interim result is , happily , that agreement has been reached meantime between Commission and Council on the improved subsidiarity rules .
These must now be applied , and we need to complete an evaluation of these rules and how they are applied before we embark on the new programme for the structural funds .
But this improvement of the subsidiarity rules is not yet visibly in place .
Parliament has been calling for years for better legislation to enable irregularities to be rectified effectively .
The Commission regularly replies that nothing is currently being done on that front .
The Committee on Budgetary Control asked the Commission at the beginning of February for a memorandum on the legal means of redress currently available for recovering monies improperly used .
Commissioner Liikanen finally helped me out on that after I had waited one and a half months , though that was not his fault .
If you read the legal texts it is obvious , even giving a very broad interpretation to the existing articles and using judgments of the Court of Justice on agricultural matters where other and far stricter rules apply , and where compliance with obligations is a sine qua non for the receipt of aid , a requirement not imposed by the structural funds , it is obvious that the legislation is inadequate .
In practice the Commission is thus close to the legal line in seeking to recover money under the existing legislation and to my mind it is actually crossing that line if it blocks large sums of money from the European Social Fund for longer periods of time .
Nevertheless it is not proposing to change the relevant legislation but is trying within the framework of SEM 2000 to tighten up the scheme via an implementing regulation on Member States ' obligations and the introduction of a system of net reductions .
But the Commission is doing that under the present deficient and thus in my view inappropriate legislation .
The European Commission is trying in this way to get right on its side .
I do not think this is good policy on the part of the Commission which , as guardian of the Treaties , is the body responsible for ensuring that the rules are properly adhered to .
And I think this is happening because the Commission is too timid vis à vis the Council .
That is a grave matter .
It is all the graver in that the European Union keeps telling the outside world how serious it is about combating fraud and irregularities .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Liikanen most heartily .
For five years I was the rapporteur for the Coal and Steel Union , and each year I had a substantial text on my computer regarding the Bagnoli case .
This is now concluded .
Just think , we have completed a case which took only ten years .
This is quite amazing .
I feel as though I almost miss it , and I hope we will soon have another one so that we have something substantial to put on our computer .
I also think that Mr Liikanen is an incredibly clever man because he runs the Coal and Steel Union for nothing .
It is rather a small sum which we are offering .
It is only 5 million kroner and it costs perhaps 10 or 50 times that amount to run the Union .
But OK , I can quite understand that when we need to spend the money on other areas , where we might get into difficulties , it is obvious that we must cut down on administration .
What I would like to talk about is two separate matters .
One of these is the Channel Tunnel .
We have really come unstuck here .
I have received many fine-sounding papers on what we are doing and what we might get out of it .
I am in fact anxious to hear whether Mr Liikanen is going to give me the answer which is the most accurate one , namely that we are using up all the money .
We have now had to convert 10 % of our capital into shares which may not be redeemed for 70 years , and we all know that that money has been wasted .
This represents ECU 25m .
But it is possible for everything to change and for the whole situation to improve , because one of the problems with the Eurotunnel is that the British Government will not grant a licence for 99 years .
But now a new and hopefully better government is on the horizon , which may change this situation and contribute to ensuring that Europe 's taxpayers see some return on the money they have sunk into the earth .
I think I have good reason for asking how things are going in the steering group .
We are also participating in this .
There are four banks , the European Investment Bank and the Coal and Steel Union .
As rapporteur I would like to have a report on how things are going , since we get more information from the newspapers than we do from the Commission .
I would like to have an answer to this here .
When we turn to the next separate matter , this is of particular interest to me as a Dane .
Because we have built a large , impressive link , the Storebæltsforbindelsen , and we are very proud of this .
It is become something of a tourist attraction and it means we can cross the water a little faster , though not perhaps cheaper .
But for this Denmark got a loan .
We obtained a loan of ECU 353m .
When the Court of Auditors examined these matters , it pointed out to the Commission that it had actually been provided with a loan which was double the amount justified for the project .
There was in fact only justification for ECU 170m .
I do not know whether this was an uncharacteristically generous gesture towards Denmark that we should have been given double the amount .
But I am a rather upset about this loan because it was used for the provision of transport which , according to the regulations , is absolutely out of the question in connection with this type of ECSF loan .
This has meant that an Italian company won the order , had the work done cheaply in Portugal , transported it to Denmark , paid for by coal and steel money , with the result that in my own electoral district we lost the opportunity of 300 jobs , all due to the hanky-panky that took place .
This is upsetting .
It is particularly upsetting in an area of Denmark where we have the highest unemployment rate , but it is possible that we will be compensated some way or other when there is opportunity .
The Commission has made a fool of itself in this matter .
And we have all recognised this , including when we produced the report .
Normally in Denmark we would say to people who made such a fool of themselves , as in this case , that one was forced to fire them .
We also removed the former leader of the Coal and Steel Union .
He has now gained a higher position in the Commission .
But I would have preferred it if people had said : You have not done particularly well here , so we thank you for the time you have been with us .
But now we are faced with a new link , between Denmark and Sweden - the Øresundsforbindelsen .
In this connection I would urge that a full inquiry be carried out regarding all the loans Denmark has received in this connection , so that we avoid repeating what happened with the Storebælt link .
For this reason it is my earnest hope that , as rapporteur , I will be given an answer , either by you , Mr Liikanen , or by you , Mr Friedmann , from the Court of Auditors .
Another matter which is of great interest to us is the payment of interest .
We have found out that the system operating in the Coal and Steel Union operates incredibly badly .
We have been told that 8000 jobs were created , but we do not know whether these are real .
However , it is possible that the figures have been fiddled with , since it is the banks and companies themselves that have reported .
We would rather give consideration to the EIB facilities and to the Copenhagen facilities which have created 45 , 000 new jobs in Europe , because these figures are verified and properly recorded .
So here are a couple of questions for you , Mr Liikanen , but I am quite sure you will give me a satisfactory answer .
We recommend discharge , despite these areas of concern .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the particularly explosive aspect of the discharge in respect of the sixth and seventh Development Funds for 1995 is certainly the fact that this House refused to give discharge to the Commission in this area for 1994 .
Today I am recommending the House - on the basis of a unanimously approved report by the Committee on Budgetary Control - to give discharge to the Commission in respect of the development funds for 1995 , and I would like to explain this recommendation briefly .
First , although the legal framework for the development funds has not changed since last year , the Commission has given repeated assurances that it still supports the principle of budgetization of the EDFs .
The Commission has tabled a formal proposal in the Intergovernmental Conference that Declaration No 12 annex to the EC Treaty be deleted .
This deletion would remove the legal obstacle to budgetization and , at least formally , clear the way for it .
Secondly , another reason for the refusal to grant discharge in 1994 was the matter of the ACP Cultural Foundation .
This problem seems to have been resolved .
Thirdly , the generally positive Statement of Assurance from the Court of Auditors represents a substantial step forward as compared with the situation in 1994 .
The Court of Auditors has found that a number of improvements have taken place since 1994 . For example : disclosure of the principles of accountancy applied and improvements to the stocktaking and final accounting procedures , enhancement of the analytical account-keeping system for the monitoring of resources , and improved explanatory notes in the financial returns , as a result of which the actual status of implementation of Community aid is easier to assess .
The object of refusing discharge in 1994 was to make the political point in the strongest possible terms that this House could no longer tolerate the loss of democratic control .
Parliament 's decision has clearly been taken to heart by the Commission .
Other matters may perhaps arise during the debate .
For the present , however , I shall concentrate on two particular points .
In principle , when one comes to deal with this subject for the first time - even as the rapporteur of the Committee on Budgetary Control - it is very hard to understand how one can continue to operate with instruments like the Development Funds , that have already expired , and at the same time have to operate them in parallel .
This is obviously an art in itself , and it may not advance the cause of the citizens ' Europe desired by all institutions of the European Union .
I believe that the Commission , too , should try to find a more intelligent solution than the present system for future Development Funds .
This year , once again , it has to be said that the outflow of funds is unsatisfactory .
Since we are an institution with a political discharge function , I am of course fully aware that special situations in the individual recipient countries have to be taken into account .
We must of course welcome the policy of structural adjustment aid , and the fact that the Commission selected priorities here such as education and primary health care seems indicative of a more far-reaching policy on development aid than those of other financial institutions .
Although we found that the allocations were not always used in a satisfactory manner , we should stick to this policy and continue developing it .
The macroeconomic policy enshrined in the structural adjustment programme must be geared to ensuring the provision of basic social benefits for those living in poverty .
We call upon the Commission to take greater care to ensure that the funds do benefit the most disadvantaged groups among the population and the sectors that are in need of support , to achieve a more efficient distribution .
I should like to emphasize the importance of the Commission 's making an even clearer distinction between those recipient countries which are transparent in their use of the allocations and those where their use can no longer be traced .
We can hardly expect European taxpayers to accept a situation where money finds its way to various countries where we can no longer trace what use is made of our tax revenue .
One final point about personnel , which I have added to the motion for a resolution .
I am somewhat wary of the fact that the Commission occasionally gives Parliament a raw deal , for example when it comes to personnel cuts in the ACP countries .
We know that a very high commitment of human resources is necessary in various countries , and we hope that the Commission will come up with a clearly structured human resources plan which will also cover the delegations in the recipient countries .
Madam President , on behalf of the Committee I can say that we are extremely positive about the implementation of the 1995 budget , with one exception to which I shall return in a moment .
I would like to suggest that the appropriations should be spent more evenly throughout the year ; if the balance is tilted too much towards the end of the year there is the risk that carefulness and thoroughness may suffer .
As regards the exception I mentioned : this concerns spending on tourism under budget line B5325 .
There have been grave mistakes over this in the past .
The Commission told us last November that it had set up a task force which would carry out a special accounting operation to scrutinize measures for tourism funded by the Community since , I believe , 1990 .
My question to the Commissioner is whether this work will be finished by June as promised .
I think this is most important since the ' millstone ' around the neck of the Directorate-General in question has to be got rid of .
And I am confident that the measures taken will get things back on track .
My request to the Council President now is that he should help to agree the right legal basis so that the funds agreed in the 1997 budget for tourism , namely Philoxenia , can indeed be disbursed .
This is a sector extremely important for tomorrow 's jobs , especially those of young people and women .
It is a priority for all of us .
So will the Council President please give us a clear assurance on this point ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is my pleasure to present to you the Council 's recommendation to grant a discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the 1995 budget .
I am very happy to use this opportunity to brief you on the main points of consideration and the reactions prompted within the Council by the Court of Auditors ' comments .
I am sure that you share the view of our presidency and the Council that our two institutions must cooperate in this area too on the basis of good understanding .
Madam President , in making its recommendation on17 March the Council was anxious to stress once again the fundamental need for all players involved in implementing the Community budget to ensure that the spending of Community money goes hand in hand with rigorous compliance with the rules and principles of good financial management , thrift and transparency .
And how can it be otherwise , especially now that our Member States face the financial and budgetary problems which are familiar to you all .
In the Council 's view , not one single measure involving Community funds can be taken unless the utmost discipline and sound financial management are practised both beforehand and whilst the measure is being implemented .
By regular checking of whether or not ongoing measures are truly justified , one can guarantee that the economic benefit of the funds freed up is as large as possible .
Implementation of the measures forming part of the SEM 2000 initiative ( sound economic management ) is a major step in the right direction .
The Council is glad to see that the Court of Auditors fully endorses the efforts being made by the Commission and Member States together to remedy many of the serious shortcomings it has regularly pointed out .
Regarding the position of the Council , I shall confine myself to the most important subjects .
For the details of the recommendation I would refer you to the accompanying remarks and explanation which the presidency gave to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Concerning own resources the Council shares the Court 's concern over the functioning of the Community Transit System in the Member States and stresses the need to improve the reliability of the system of information on intra-Community trade .
On expenditure , and specifically agricultural spending , the Council deplores the absence of responsible spending on measures to counter fraud and irregularities .
Given that there has been no costbenefit analysis of this , the Council would like to see this done in a subsequent audit by the Court of Auditors .
Concerning the structural funds the Council agrees with the Court that more transparency is needed in the rules , specifically regarding subsidiarity , and that the working of the supervisory committees and the procedures for certifying spending need to be improved .
The Court 's criticism , also expressed in its special report in support of its statement of assurance , will encourage us to continue along the path chosen , specifically as regards subsidiarity and the specific financial corrections required , though a number of improvements have in fact already been made .
More specifically , Madam President , with regard to the European Fund for Regional Development , the Council thinks it is absolutely vital that the Commission and Member States should continue to work together to ensure that the budgetary appropriations set aside for programmes are managed better .
Above all to ensure that sums awaiting disbursement do not build up too much and that there is not a build-up of operations to approve and pay them at the end of the year .
The Council will be asking the Commission to investigate which improvements might be made when the structural fund regulations are next revised to ensure that the use of loans and subsidies is co-ordinated better .
As regards the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund , Guidance Section , the Council is asking the Commission to implement measures to improve the management of this Community initiative and the procedures for recovering appropriations paid in error .
Concerning the Court of Auditors ' comments on the implementation of the PHARE and TACIS programmes , the Council is aware of the problems inherent in work in this particular area .
Nevertheless it is calling on the Commission to comply fully with the Community rules on the conclusion of agreements and to apply the procedure of registration without compromise .
Like last year , it is calling for better coordination of participants , a clear description of the experts and simplification of the programmes ' organization and administrative procedures .
Regarding co-operation with developing countries , Madam President , the Council would point to the importance it attaches to the powers of the financial comptroller and the court of Auditors to scrutinize the use made of Community funds paid over to outside beneficiaries .
Concerning the budgetary appropriations for the institutions , the Council has taken note of the Court of Auditors ' comments on a number of weak points of management concerning the staff of external delegations and buildings .
It notes that the Commission is in the process of carrying out the Court 's recommendations on the matter .
In the light of all the comments of the Court of Auditors and following thorough deliberation of these , the Council has resolved to recommend that Parliament grant a discharge to the Commission in respect of its implementation of the1995 budget .
Madam President , may I make one further remark on the statement of assurance , which the Court of Auditors issued in accordance with Article 188c and further to which the Council made the statement which has now been forwarded together with the recommendations .
The Council finds that the accounts provide a correct picture of the Union 's income and expenditure , even though in terms of the information they provide there is room for improvement .
The Court identified no major errors as regards the regularity of the underlying transactions relating to income .
It did , however , point out errors in the underlying transactions relating to payments so that the Court of Auditors cannot confirm the legality and regularity of operations as a whole .
The Council is worried by this .
Consequently it warmly welcomes the announcement of the SEM 2000 programme to improve the Commission 's financial management .
The Council wishes to see this programme implemented speedily and in full so that the various errors in the underlying transactions relating to payments can be significantly reduced .
Madam President , these essentially are the reports which the Council presidency wished to make to you on behalf of the Council .
In conclusion , I should like to take this opportunity of thanking your Committee on Budgetary Control for the substantial work it puts in every year as part of the discharge procedure , and consequently not only on behalf of the European Parliament but of the whole of the European Union .
It now remains for Parliament to exercise its powers and reach a decision on the discharge .
Madame President , Mr Cornelissen asked me a specific question about the Philoxenia programme .
Mr Cornelissen knows as well as I do that the legal basis for the Philoxenia programme and others is Article 235 of the Treaty of the European Communities and that unanimity is required for this .
To date that unanimity has not been reached in the Council , which is why there is no legal basis for the Philoxenia programme .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a discharge decision and a discharge debate are naturally concerned with the past .
We are discussing and evaluating things that have already happened .
I think that any evaluation that deals with the past only serves any purpose if it also indicates what lessons that past can teach us for the future .
It is from this angle that I should like to comment on this discharge on behalf of my group .
What does the future hold for us , then , and what lessons must we learn ?
We hope for the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
We hope for a positive conclusion , so that we can start discussing enlargement .
An enlargement which is not only a political decision but also calls for the celebrated strategy of the pre-accession phase , a strategy that was announced to us by Commissioner Liikanen and one where , we hope , we will be involved in the discussion and in the budgetary procedure .
But enlargement is not all that lies ahead . We can also look forward - with or without enlargement - to a reform of the agricultural policy , a reform of the structural funds in general , and we are going to have to conduct a highly political debate on the financing of the European Union beyond the year 1999 .
From this standpoint , the evaluation of the implementation of the budget may take on a dimension that overrides matters of detail .
The resolution which I hope will be adopted tomorrow is , much more than past resolutions , addressed to this House itself .
There were specific instructions to the Committees of this House to be stricter in supervising expenditure and the implementation and efficiency of the budget , and to make critical proposals where improvements are possible - from own resources through fisheries policy to development co-operation .
But we should not lose sight of the fact that the largest areas are the ones that cause us the most concern : the programmes , the Structural Funds , PHARE , TACIS , MEDA , development co-operation .
Strangely enough - and I now turn to Commissioner Liikanen and the President of the Court of Auditors - we are not at all worried about the fraud that takes place , or even about the possible lack of efficiency as such , but what does worry us is the fact that certain funds are not being distributed .
This is the big political problem , the problem we are going to have to examine very carefully in the future , I can tell you that on behalf of my group - that is something we have learned from this debate .
Because it is unacceptable that we appropriate monies to a budget line for political objectives which the Council and Parliament have decided upon , appropriate resources in the budget , and argue about how much money to earmark , and then a year or two years or three years later we find that those resources were never distributed at all .
That is unacceptable !
The Court of Auditors , too , criticizes precisely this same point .
Let me just give you a few figures : ECU 1.9 billion in the case of PHARE and ECU 0.6 billion in the case of TACIS at the end of 1995 -that 's a lot of money .
You could really achieve something with that in the context of the strategy of the pre-accession phase if you were to spend it then .
And until such time as that money is distributed , we cannot form any opinions about efficiency and we have no need to concern ourselves with fraud .
But there is one thing that should not be forgotten : undistributed money is not a sign of economy as such .
We should not think - and the ladies and gentlemen listening in the gallery should not think either - that if we haven 't distributed money it means that we have been frugal with the money they have paid in taxes .
What we have really done is to betray the political objectives that we set ourselves .
That is why we are going to press for that money to be distributed , efficiently of course and in line with the funding commitments .
But to split it up and then pay it out to the Member States in a few years ' time is a game that we are no longer prepared to play .
I believe it was a German minister who said that the EU had too much money for development co-operation and not enough administrative capacity to make the best use of it .
If that is true - and in principle anyone might have said the same - then I see a very great danger here : if people think we have too much money and that we lack not just the administration but even the political ability to distribute it , then the result will be renationalization not just of finance but of politics too .
And with that in mind , there is one conclusion we are going to draw from this discharge : we expect that money to be distributed , efficiently and frugally , yes , but distributed as this Parliament resolved .

Madam President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , this is an important day for the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control . Today we have the opportunity to ask for clear accounts in the Union and the proper use by Community institutions of the resources granted to them .
Today is the day to send a message to the citizens of Europe : a message of transparency and reliability in Community accounts .
If we were to send this message and the accounts were not really clear , we Members of Parliament would be failing in one of our fundamental duties .
That is why the decision on giving discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget for 1995 is so important and so significant .
And that is why the opinions of the rapporteurs and the full process of debating the amendments are so important .
This is not a report that can be approved without a high degree of consensus across the political groups .
So the flexibility shown by the various rapporteurs - starting with Terry Wynn - in accepting amendments which modified their original statements must be highlighted .
In this respect , and with reference to olive oil , I have to say that if Mr Wynn had not been the rapporteur , I would have thought the author of the disgraceful paragraph on olive oil was probably someone who knew nothing about olives or the real situation in the oil market or the irregularities or the frauds .
But as the rapporteur was Mr Wynn , I can say he is a reasonable Member of Parliament who is capable of listening to the arguments of others and achieving a text acceptable to all parties - even if I recognize that he probably does know something about the market for olive oil .
Furthermore , it is clear that the current balance between obligations and resources means the Court of Auditors is at risk of being unable to continue to meet its commitments effectively .
We have an obligation to draw up a more ambitious framework of collaboration between the Court of Auditors and the national control institutions , and the European Parliament should take the political initiative to achieve this framework .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , we are still faced with a political problem in recommending discharge with a Statement of Assurance which , in the rapporteur 's own words , is unlikely ever to be positive in its current form .
The political fact we accept with discharge is that the irregularity figures detected are not an indicator of fraud .
We expect the Commission to make a significant improvement in its auditing and we call for the Member States , managers of 80 % of the Community budget and responsible for 90 % of the irregularities , to be increasingly involved in the improvement of financial control of Community expenditure .
We should denounce abuses and uncover all irregularities . But we should not give in to the temptation of crying ' fraud ' to pander to a demagogic populism .
That approach would devalue Parliament and every Member of Parliament .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 1995 was the first year of the mandate of the new Commission headed by Mr Santer .
At the same time the Commission also embarked on an ambitious programme , SEM 2000 , to improve budgetary management .
So our decision today to give the Commission discharge therefore involves evaluating the initial results of the process of budgetary reform , applying the yardstick of the implementation of the budget for the 1995 financial year .
The figures tell us that expenditure has been kept 13 % below the ceiling agreed for payment allocations .
Of an available amount of ECU 76.89 billion , only ECU 66.91 billion has been spent .
This shows that the European Union is far less extravagant than some try to make out .
However , overall control of the budget package does not necessarily mean proper implementation of the appropriations .
Economic management of expenditure is not enough .
It is also necessary to achieve the objective of carrying out the agreed policies .
I believe it is an elementary truth that policy is not built on a budget , a budget is built on policy .
A budget is a management tool , but it should also be a factor for progress .
We cannot avoid the truth : if savings were made in the 1995 budget , it was because certain essential policies were not properly implemented .
The most striking example is surely the European social fund : ECU 6.7 billion was available in payment appropriations but only ECU 5.1 billion were actually spent , leaving 24 % of the appropriations unused .
There must be a gross error of judgement somewhere .
The second important failure to be highlighted in the implementation of the 1995 budget relates to fraud .
At ECU 1.14 billion , 1.7 % of expenditure , identified irregularities have hit a new record .
The measures for combatting fraud are still completely inadequate , because fraud has become general , virtually an economic attitude , as the temporary committee of inquiry into Community transit made very clear .
The problem is alarming .
In three years , the volume of fraud has been multiplied seven times .
In 1992 identified irregularities amounted to ECU 204 million ; in 1995 they were assessed at just over ECU 1.1 billion .
Responsibility for this endemic evil in the European Union is shared , and it should be remembered , as Mr Wynn rightly states , that 80 % of appropriations are implemented and managed by the Member States and they therefore have an obligation to ensure proper use of Community money spent on their territory .
The situation here is still not satisfactory and , quite rightly , these difficulties have not escaped the rapporteur , Mr Wynn .
Madam President , I shall confine myself to Mr Wynn 's report and I should like to begin by expressing my appreciation of his customary enthusiasm and dedication in completing his task .
There are a number of positive things in this discharge report .
First of all we find that the number of irregularities has declined considerably compared with 1994 .
A fraud level of 23.5 % in1994 was cut in 1995 to 10 % of that .
That is certainly encouraging , but the percentage is of course still far too high .
The problem is , of course , that it is usually the Member States which pay out the money and we have to improve our cooperation with them .
It is unfortunate too that this year again a statement of assurance could not be given .
I think above all the Commission and Court of Auditors need to agree on the right method , the statistical method , which will allow us as Parliament to make a proper appraisal of the facts laid before us .
One thing I should say is that I do not agree with Mr Wynn 's conclusions on agriculture and specifically point 24 .
The Commission implemented precisely the policy agreed in the MacSharry reforms of 1992 .
If spending was higher , then it was , but we cannot insist on a return to the 1992 levels , because that certainly was not agreed .
A last word on own resources , Madam President , is the current estimate of GNP really too high beyond any doubt , or is a more accurate method still possible ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our committee has dealt separately with the experience of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , on the basis of the special reports by the Court of Auditors on EU administration in Mostar and election observation in Palestine .
Unfortunately , we were able to confirm the desolate situation regarding the administration and control of the funds distributed there .
When I say desolate I am not thinking so much of the ultimate destination of those funds as of the institutional blurring of structures and responsibilities between the Council and the Commission which mean that any rapid organization is still impossible and those with local responsibility , such as Hans Koschnik , are encountering serious difficulties .
This is another area in which the Commission must be given complete responsibility , so that Parliament is in a position to give a meaningful discharge in the first place .
An obvious precondition here is that spending under the Common Foreign and Security Policy should remain non-obligatory in future .
Anything else would be a retreat into the obscurity of ministerial decisions , at a time when the need is for greater transparency and democracy .
I would like to ask Mr Friedmann , as a matter of urgency , to give us the opinion on the Common Foreign and Security Policy that we have been promised since 1994 and which was supposed to assist us in our deliberations at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Secondly , I should like to draw attention to the last section in the Wynn report , which refers to the publication of a list setting out all refusals of approval .
As far as this House is concerned there was a dramatic increase here in 1995 and 1996 , especially in connection with the equipping of the new Parliament building .
These refusals focused on breaches of the budgetary regulations and of the rules for awarding contracts .
What happened here was that when invitations to tender were issued , deadlines were not observed , the requirement was not quantified , excessively high tenders were awarded the contract , tenders were added to after the event without new invitations being issued , etc .
None of this does anything for the credibility of our own institution , and it stands in urgent need of correction .
In order to counter the proliferation of refusals of approval , it would be of great assistance if the Court of Auditors were to publish them in future in its annual report .
Transparency is the first and most important condition for doing away with this mismanagement .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in my turn I cannot but congratulate the rapporteurs for this package of resolutions on discharge , particularly Terry Wynn , because I will mainly be speaking on his report on the discharge for the 1995 financial year , on the quality of his work , the range of issues covered and his skill .
I think Parliament is fulfilling its role in the procedure of discharge to the Commission extremely well .
All the same , I would personally like to take this opportunity to make one small criticism : with such a vast document , we have ended up by going a little outside the strict framework of discharge .
It worries me to see certain paragraphs , often introduced through amendments .
One example is the staff appropriation for TACIS - a problem which has apparently been settled in the meantime . It worries me when I see that we are asking for an inquiry into the benefit received by women from the development programmes , and when I see that the Wynn report on the 1995 discharge is being used to ask for funds to be held in reserve for the CERI in Florence after a visit by the Committee on Budgets a few weeks ago .
The same goes for olive oil , where highly topical measures are being recommended .
I think we must be careful to ensure stricter demarcation between documents , but that does not detract in any way from the excellent quality of the Wynn report .
Madam President , I shall devote my speech to Mr Wynn 's report on discharge to the Commission for the 1995 financial year .
Let me say straight away that my group cannot support this report .
I certainly agree with the rapporteur when he expresses satisfaction with the spirit of constructive cooperation which has been established between the Commission and the Court of Auditors , and when he notes that the Court of Auditors ' control of the consolidated income and expenditure account has improved since 1994 .
But I find that , once again , the rapporteur and the Committee on Budgetary Control fail to draw the right conclusions from the Court of Auditors ' analysis . In fact , just as it did for 1994 , the Court of Auditors felt it could not give positive global assurances on the legality and regularity of the operations underlying the payments for the 1995 financial year .
1995 will be a record year , because irregularities have reached the staggering figure of ECU 1.14 billion , or 1.7 % of expenditure .
The Auditors further indicate that accumulated substantial errors relating to the operations underlying payments are of the order of ECU 4 , 000 million , or 5.9 % of the amounts involved , far more than the 1 % considered acceptable by the Auditors .
Despite this , as in 1992 , as in 1993 , and as in 1994 , the Committee on Budgetary Control proposes that we grant the Commission discharge .
How much longer will Parliament feel obliged to express its confidence in this way , while waiting for an eventual SEM 2000 ?
Furthermore , the report comes to the wrong conclusions .
First , by including provisions which have nothing to do with the discharge , as Mr Dell 'Alba has just mentioned , and then by proposing ideological measures of ' communitarization ' : ' communitarization ' of national management and control systems , ' communitarization ' of customs services .
These ideological measures are an escape from the real measures the irregularities require .
The latest innovation , the new panacea , is to propose discharge of the Council for the budget .
Madam President , Mr Wynn 's report on the execution of the general budget for 1995 confirms the worrying developments noted in previous years .
First , the amount of identified irregularities : ECU 204 million in 1992 , 403 million in 1993 , 1.08 billion in 1994 , 1.14 billion in 1995 .
Above all this demonstrates the poor functioning of the single market , the inadequate customs control at the frontiers of the European Union and the muddle of Community transit .
Errors of legality and regularity are increasing too .
In 1994 they represented 4 % of expenditure , and in 1995 nearly 6 % .
This is explained in particular by excessive generosity in the budgets , which leads to lax implementation .
Next , there is the underspend of the appropriations : some 20 % for the structural funds and 24 % for the European social fund , in particular .
But the appropriations for foreign policy have also been underspent .
Here the underspend was essentially due to initial overestimation of expenditure .
It is obviously regrettable that Parliament did not take account of these facts during the budgetary guidelines for 1998 to revise the expenditure on structural funds and foreign policy downwards .
Clearly , where there is underconsumption of appropriations , we must not persevere with pointless expenditure , but cut excessive budgetary estimates and take account of these facts , these observations repeated year on year , during the revision of the financial perspectives for 1999 .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the four rapporteurs , Mr Wynn , Mr Dankert , Mr Blak and Mr Bösch for their reports .

I want to address remarks to each of the players in the discharge procedure , first of all to Parliament .
Today is quite depressing . What we have in this Parliament , which ought to be taking seriously its responsibilities for discharge , is in effect a meeting of the Budget Control Committee with a few other Members .
They are very welcome but there are far too few of them .
It is depressing to consider the speed at which Members of Parliament rush to propose amendments for additional expenditure to the budget but do not begin to take seriously their responsibility for controlling it in terms of either quality or quantity .
I hope that we can continue to hammer away internally at our own responsibilities .
Secondly , I want to say a few words to the Commission .
They are words of encouragement along the lines of Mr Wynn 's report ; encouragement by supporting the work of SEM 2000 .
That is not just an encouragement in words .
There has been a very practical manifestation of encouragement from the very valuable work of Mr Colom i Naval in supporting the SEM 2000 process .
But of course in saying that to the Commission we are also acknowledging that there is a long way to go .
I want to reiterate in that long way ahead one or two of the things that were said last year and , in particular , remind Commissioner Liikanen about the commitment he made at this stage last year to the policies of greater concentration ; what he last year called ' policies of critical mass ' , so that we actually have more coherent , more easily identifiable and more readily controlled policies .
I want also to say a couple of words to the Court of Auditors .
Another thing that depresses me this year was referred to by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , namely the statement of assurance .
I am not quite sure that is the correct use of language because it seems to be an abuse of language to call it a statement of assurance .
I am not sure it has not turned out to be a non-statement of assurance or a statement of non-assurance .
But it certainly is not a statement of assurance .
What we are finding is that the message is getting confused .
We have seen a major argument between the Commission and the Court of Auditors about statistical methodology which is detracting from the whole value of the statement of assurance process .
I must say to both institutions : sort that statistical row out and assure us , assure the Member States , assure the citizens that we have an agreed basis for a statement of assurance where we can all have confidence in the methodology .
Unless we have it , in terms of the audit effort that is going into it , we are seriously wasting our resources .
We have to be assured that the statement of assurance is a document well worth having .
I turn briefly to the Council for the last quarter of this precious five minutes .
The Council and Parliament share a common language but I am not quite sure that we yet share a common philosophy .
We share a common language when we all genuflect to words like ' efficiency ' , ' sound financial management ' and ' proper budgetary discipline ' .
I can applaud the President-in-Office of the Council when he says all of those things .
I would value the words even more if I was assured that the effort made by the Council at high ministerial level for the recommendations of discharge equalled as that made in the Budgetary Control Committee .
Mr Wynn has pointed out that 80 % of the expenditure goes to the Member States .
And yet it is the same Council that talks about efficiency and sound financial management that largely makes a mess of the agricultural regulations that make it possible for the fraud and irregularities to take place .
So I ask them , when they talk about Sound and Efficient Management 2000 , to not only say this to the Commission but to make sure it is put into practice in the administration of the 15 Member States who are controlling the 80 % .
The very final point is to pick up one thing that Mr Dankert said about his aspiration for giving discharge to the Council .
I just reflect that if we had that power , this would be the year when we would be giving discharge to the Council for that Stalinist look-alike mausoleum known as the Council building , the one that they chose to build by designating it as compulsory expenditure .
That would have been a very interesting contribution to our discharge debate had Mr Dankert 's aspiration been available to us retrospectively .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it was no easy matter on this occasion for the Committee on Budgetary Control to submit the report for the discharge in the time laid down - laid down , indeed , by the Financial Regulations .
This was no fault of the Committee .
The Committee worked very hard and very quickly , and I would like to add a particular word of thanks to the rapporteurs , Mr Wynn , Mr Dankert , Mr Blak and Mr Bösch , and to Mr Kellett-Bowman , and also to all members of the committee and to the secretariat .
The reports that are now before the House also reflect good cooperation with the Commission and the Court of Auditors , and my thanks are also due to Mr Friedmann and Commissioner Liikanen .
So why have we had so many problems in the finishing straight ?
The main responsibility lies with the Council .
Year in , year out , we receive the Council 's opinions on the discharge , which are required by the Treaty , at the very last moment .
And this time was no exception !
We received it one day before we were to vote in Committee on Mr Wynn 's long report on the budget .
The opinion on the Development Fund reached us on Monday this week , and the opinion on Mr Kellett-Bowman 's reports has not yet reached us at all .
I cannot help wondering what the Council has in mind with this un-cooperative behaviour .
Is it really so uninterested in the correct expenditure of the money received from the taxpayers ?
Does it believe that giving discharge to the Commission is a mere formality ?
However , the Council recommendation does strike a note that consoles me somewhat . This time the reference to the responsibility of the Member States is clearer than it has been in the past .
Four out of five ECU in the Community Budget are spent by the Member States on a decentralized basis .
So the Member States are also responsible for the proper administration of these resources .
The Commission 's task is to monitor that .
This becomes clear in the motion for a resolution .
We will see when autumn comes how far the Commission has complied with the requirements imposed here .
Let me at this point say a word of praise for the Commission , and especially for Mr Liikanen and Mrs Gradin , because I believe that the SEM 2000 initiative launched by them did prompt a change of course by the Council .
Parliament is doing everything it can to support them here .
I need not emphasize , though , that the results of the examination by the Court of Auditors do make it difficult for us to give the Commission discharge .
Once again , the Court 's Statement of Assurance is not very encouraging .
Although more than 90 % of expenditure is in order , the remainder is not .
We must reduce this high percentage of error .
It is a good thing that the Court intends to define the errors , and therefore their avoidance , more clearly in the future .
This applies particularly to the agricultural expenditures , where the final accounts for past years have enabled us to identify excessive advance payments and also monies paid in error , which absolutely must be brought back into the Community budget .
The fact that the ' 95 budget fell 13 % short of the limit of the intended payments may initially look like economy .
On closer study , however , it is apparent that political objectives have not been met .
For example , in the Social Fund , about 24 % of the resources are still unused , and yet unemployment is continuing to rise .
Another worrying example : of the ECU 580 million or so appropriated since 1990 for the safety of nuclear facilities in central and eastern Europe , the Court of Auditors tells us that only 140 million had been spent by ' 95 .
This has to be put right !
If we are recommending giving discharge to the Commission despite this , we are doing so as a kind of downpayment on trust , because we want things to be put right , and we expect to hear in the autumn that a great many of them have been .
Madam President , with reference to the working document on PHARE , I would like to say that I am very satisfied with the conclusion that has been reached in the joint report from Mr Wynn and I am grateful for that collaboration .
That our work is not useless is clearly demonstrated here , in that the Commission has accepted the single recommendation and modified the strategy for the PHARE programme , so that the objective and priorities are geared towards expansion .
We have thus been able to contribute to the preparation of countries seeking accession for EU membership .
I am pleased we now agree that the role PHARE should play is to contribute to a development which will ensure that Eastern and Central European countries can become members of the EU .
As the same time the Commission has acknowledged the wish to improve administration , simplify the decision-making process and to make things more transparent .
I am glad to have these messages , but I can announce that we will follow this up , determine when it is to be set in motion and carefully monitor developments from the committee 's side so that it is not just empty talk , but that real change occurs .
If we look at the reports that have been produced over the years , it is the case that we have repeatedly had the same criticisms .
I note that the council is also aware that many of the criticisms are the same from one year to the next , and this also encourages me to urge the Council to do something to change this situation .
It is indeed irritating that one is never able to get the Council 's assistance for the necessary decisions to be taken .
My complaint concerning PHARE is that the Commission has not been willing to carry out a combined analysis .
It is important that we know what we are getting out of the different projects , whether we are actually changing anything and whether we are making a positive contribution to improving conditions in countries seeking accession .
Of course we should have used the budget resources Mrs Wemheuer has referred to , but the important thing is to ensure that they contribute towards positive development , and that we get something for our money .
In this connection I find it alarming to hear such stories as the money given to Albania which has disappeared into thin air .
We do not have a clue what has happened to this money .
Finally let me earnestly encourage the Commission to arrange for a thorough overall evaluation so that we can find out what benefit we have from the money we spend and so that we can be sure of support from EU citizens for continuation of the various programmes .
Madam President , I would like to return to the report by Mr Blak on the European Iron and Steel Community and the Court of Auditor 's report .
I think that the report is excellent and it is good that three individual issues have been raised as tangible examples so that everyone may understand what this is about .
Above all I would like to concentrate on the issues concerning the Great Belt and the Öresund Bridge .
It is obvious that the Commission has made a mistake here .
Not that this mistake has cost a lot of money but , as a matter of principle , the decision to provide a loan of 353 million ECUs to the Great Belt project instead of 170 million ECUs is a mistake .
This is a very important issue as these funds could have been used for other investments in the infrastructure and to create jobs in other areas instead of merely in the area around the Great Belt .
Above all , with regard to the huge new bridge between Sweden and Denmark , it is important that the money is used wisely and that this project is not favoured over other infrastructure projects which may be necessary .
Unfortunately I do not share Mr Blak 's view that the bridge between Sweden and Denmark will be as beautiful and attractive as the one at Great Belt .
On the contrary we do not really want the bridge between Sweden and Denmark .
Madam President , the size of the sums that have gone astray and the obviously out-of-date expenditure structure cannot fail to cause anxiety , to say the least , among the taxpayers in the Member States in the attitude they take to the European Union .
Here we are in a time of drastically rising unemployment in a situation where about 24 % - ECU 1.6 billion - of the Social Fund has not been used , a policy that can only be described as cynical .
At a time when European industry is becoming less competitive , the total expenditure on research is a mere ECU 2.9 billion .
Yet in the same year expenditure on cereals and arable crops alone rose by 22.6 % to over ECU 15 billion , in defiance of the declared objective of keeping costs down in the agricultural sector .
Irregularities in spending on animals and land alone amount to ECU 1.7 billion , or two-thirds of the total sum spent on research .
Discrepancies of this kind prove , first and foremost , the need for the expense structure to be reformed in a way that reflects economic and social reality .
Madam President . First I would like to thank all those who have presented their reports to the House this morning , but especially Terry Wynn ; his expertise shines through yet again .
In Wales he would be known as ' Wynn the Discharge ' .
There are just two points I want to make .
The first is that , at Maastricht , the European Council , in its wisdom , instructed the Court of Auditors to produce this certificate of assurance - the DAS .
In 1994 it produced one which gave us an extrapolated figure of what seemed to be going wrong , and for 1995 , we have had another .
It is that end statistic which seems to be what everybody is interested in instead of all the work behind it .
The fact is that the Council did not will the resources , or the means , to the Court to do all this extra work .
I do not think that the discharge report or resolution or debate is the right arena for commenting on the procedures used by the Court in producing this certificate .
We have squeezed out some amendments to that effect in this report and I think that was right .
I look forward to the meeting to be held shortly with the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control to see what we can do to assist each other in this joint exercise .
Again in its wisdom , the European Council has set up what I like to call a ' constellation of satellites ' .
In the report they are referred to as decentralized Community agencies and these second-generation agencies are going to cause us problems .
We are going to cause the Council and Commission problems unless Parliament gets what it has asked for , namely the right to grant discharge and the right of the Commission to do the full financial control job on these agencies .
I have had some good news from the financial control services in the Commission lately to the effect that some interesting work is going forward to remedy this situation which has been the subject of comment year after year from the Court of Auditors regarding the two ' old ' agencies , as we may call them , in Dublin and now Thessaloniki .
I want to thank the Court for its work in producing these extra reports on the new satellite agencies , covering their beginnings sometime in 1994 and then 1995 .
It was very helpful and encourages Parliament to proceed on the lines which we have laid down .
So I want to thank the Court particularly and look forward to further cooperation between the Court and the Committee on Budgetary Control in doing this interesting work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have been holding these debates on the discharge for many years now , and yet we still find that the procedure leaves room for improvement . We are going to have to go on working on that .
I am thinking , for example , about the incorporation of the so-called Statements of Assurance into the discharge debate .
And I am also thinking about the fact that the Council has failed to complete at least part of its homework on time .
It is only gradually dawning on public awareness , or the awareness of those involved , that 80 % of the expenditures are administered by the Member States .
So it is a step in the right direction if the Council itself has noticed the fact .
But the Member States must also react to the report of the Court of Auditors .
And the Commission must obtain reports on the reactions of the Member States and pass the information on to us ; this is something that should be done in future .
But Parliament itself can certainly do something to improve its own work , for example in the co-operation of the other Committees with the Committee on Budgetary Control in connection with the discharge .
In terms of content , the subjects we address are very often the same , especially the shortcomings in the implementation of the budget .
There may be changes from time to time between this area of policy and that , but the problem is fundamentally the same .
Mrs Wemheuer and Mrs Theato have already drawn attention to the political significance of these shortcomings .
There is another matter , though , that concerns me most of all - the need to take more account of own resources .
I am grateful to Mr Wynn for doing so already in his report .
But I regret the fact that the Committee did not support the call for a separate report on this .
Even so , I am hoping that the Court of Auditors will supply us with some additional material on this , particularly with a view to the new 1999 Financial Regulations .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Wynn , all the rapporteurs and Mrs Theato and to say that they are a group of people dedicated to the whole business of getting the Community 's finances in order .
The most remarkable thing about the budget for 1995 - by contrast with national budgets , which are plagued with overspending - is that we turn out 13 % below our commitments .
It is not necessarily a good thing , but it is certainly a lot better than the problem of overspending , which we hear so much about at national level .
In the case of the structural funds - which are the one instrument of economic and social cohesion , and which represent a relatively modest amount of money bearing in mind that they transfer between 2 and 3 % of GNP to the Objective 1 regions - the fact that they have been underspent by 19 % is some cause for concern , because they are a rather precious instrument that should be utilized to the full .
Mr Wynn concentrates , of course , on control and recovery of money that is overspent , and on evaluation but , in relation to the structural funds , there is another problem .
My own experience of Ireland , which has done particularly well and is held up as an example , is that the money we have transferred over 15 years - which peaked in 1992 , before the present programme - went to public sector pay and social welfare rather than to economic infrastructure .
Anybody who examines closely trends in public spending will find that , and the fact that this has not been identified by either the Commission or the Court of Auditors means that there is some weakness in our system of evaluation .
Although Ireland has made great progress , the lessons to be learned apply in all parts of the Community - because you will probably find the same thing has happened in other areas - and they are that we need to redefine our strategy , narrow our objectives down and harmonize our policies with the individual Member States and regions , rather than trying to have a global regulation for everybody .
If we had done that , Mr Wynn 's control and recovery would be less of a problem .


Mr President , the Wynn , Blak and Bösch reports propose to give the Commission a discharge in respect of the implementation of the general Community budget for 1995 , as well as for the budget of the European Coal and Steel Community and of the European Development Fund .
The Commission is committed to a careful follow-up to the items raised in the reports and in the resolution .
In fact , considerable work is in progress to address Parliament 's major preoccupations .
I would like to mention some of this work .
First , on progress made in the context of the SEM 2000 initiative .
The Member States are now gradually accepting the need for a joint approach to tackling the financial management issues which the Commission launched in SEM 2000 , in large part at the insistence of Parliament .
A number of Member States have , for example , already accepted the invitation to respond directly to points made in the Court 's reports .
The contributions will be reflected in the follow-up report later this year , as requested in the Wynn report .
That will give you an opportunity to have the information for which Mr Bardong asked .
On the consistent application of eligibility rules for the structural funds , an acceptable solution has now found unanimous approval in Council .
The adoption of the definitive decision is on the agenda of the Commission next week .
In the future , clear guidelines on recurrent eligibility problems will be included in all programming decisions .
This will represent a major step towards the improvement in financial management .
It represents an effective response to repeated criticisms by the Court and the European Parliament .
The second key question concerns possible financial corrections in the structural funds , to which Mr Dankert made reference .
I want to reply to some of your comments .
On this question progress still needs to be made .
The Commission proposes to proceed with a twin-track approach .
Firstly , we are tabling a draft Commission Regulation to clarify Member States ' responsibilities for financial control ; this will be based on Article 23 of the present Council Regulation on the management of structural funds .
Secondly , we shall clarify our internal guidance on the circumstances in which net financial corrections should be made under the terms of the existing legislation .
This will be based on Article 24 of the above Council Regulation .
With regard to the method , I would like to be a little more precise because I know Parliament 's great interest in this issue .
I want to mention the following four points : firstly , the Commission 's approach involves the clarification of the application of the existing structural fund regulations using existing legal powers ; secondly , it is not seeking to impose new administrative structures on the Member States .
The intention is rather to introduce adequate minimum standards of control which should be applied consistently throughout the Union ; thirdly , the Commission is not proposing any fundamental change in the programming approach under which Member States are generally free to switch finance between eligible projects ; fourthly and most importantly , it is appropriate to clarify those circumstances in which net financial corrections should be made without the possibility of substitution - for example where there has been a systematic failure in financial control or a refusal to cooperate with the Commission .
Our intention is to apply this fourth position which means net transfers back .
I see that the resolution before you invites the Commission to make a proposal to amend Article 24 of Council Regulation 4253 / 88 to ensure that effective corrective action is taken in the event of irregularities .
I can confirm that we have not ruled out this option for the future .
We have already undertaken to review the relevant provisions of the Council Regulation before the start of the next programming period and we will take full account of Parliament 's views in that context .
I find it quite natural that when we make new proposals for structural fund programmes after 2000 , a new regulation is also a part of this global package .
We are not talking about the very distant future .
It is the year 2000 that they enter into force but proposals must be made before that .
However , I agree with Mr Dankert that we cannot afford to wait for this change in 2000 to take action in this area .
Improvements can be made within the scope of the existing regulation , as I said , and it is for this reason that the Commission intends to proceed in the short term with the aforementioned twin-track approach .
In the context of SEM 2000 , efforts are being made to improve cooperation with the Member States on budget forecasting and execution .
The tight budget constraints in the run-up to the third stage of EMU reinforce the importance of obtaining the most up-to-date and realistic estimates of budgetary requirements .
We need to take this forward urgently , with a view to the preparation of the 1998 budget .
Actually , this issue was discussed yesterday in the trialogue between the Council and Parliament .
We had a problem with the forecasts in relation to agriculture .
We must make our budget proposal in April .
That is very far in advance of 1998 .
If we have a chance to take a further look later this year and perhaps to send an amending and rectifying letter to Parliament that would give a more solid basis for next year 's budget decisions .
Parliament 's rapporteur on SEM 2000 , Mr Colom i Naval , has been invited to attend the next meeting of the Personal Representatives Group in May and then we will try to conclude the issue of the financial corrections .
I shall touch briefly upon two other points .
Firstly , the statement of assurance or DAS .
As last year , Terry Wynn 's report describes very clearly the results and the difficulties .
I share his unease about the numbers and their interpretation .
I would like to emphasize that the problem is that there is a considerable lack of experience .
The results from the first two DAS exercises have differed without good explanations on the ground .
This underlines the experimental nature of DAS of which we were all aware from the beginning .
It will take a few years before it is sufficiently mature to provide assurance not only for the auditor but also for the auditee .
Until then all the numbers and especially conclusions resulting from a DAS exercise should be treated with prudence .
Of course when we have discussions next summer with the Court of Auditors on the basis of the DAS for 1996 , we will take your wishes into account and we hope as far as possible to arrive at a common language while respecting , of course , the independence of the Court of Auditors in the exercise .
Secondly , on PHARE , the difficulties described by the Court and underlined by the Wynn report can only be acknowledged .
As a first reply , the Commission decided on 19 March new policy guidelines for PHARE .
They re-orient PHARE to two main priorities - institution building and investment support .
The management of PHARE is also to be reformed .
There is to be a simplification of procedures , decentralization of implementation and an increased role for the EU delegations .
Mr Tomlinson mentioned my remarks last year about concentrating on bigger projects which are easier to manage , to have a sufficient critical mass .
PHARE re-orientation is a good example of that .
We are trying to go further in some other areas in the budget .
It is not easy in the Commission but you know as well as I do that it will not be easy in Parliament either .
We must remember that we are now running a budget in a Union of 370 million people .
Small budget lines with a very minor critical mass are actually impossible to execute in the way which would be efficient .
The administrative costs are often higher than the budget sums concerned and there are no possibilities for control .
So we should take a critical look at what can be implemented and how we implement it .
I heard the comment that we have not executed all the budgets .
Sometimes there are sums in the budget lines which cannot be easily executed .
We should not only discuss the political priorities but also how these can be translated into budgetary language which can be implemented .
Coming back to PHARE , further elements will become clearer when the Commission presents its pre-accession strategy after the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
This work will be undertaken in close collaboration with Parliament .
It should also facilitate the preparations for the 1998 budget .
Mr Blak asked me two or three very detailed questions .
I hope I can come back to them after consulting my services .
Perhaps next week we can have bilateral contacts on these issues .
Finally , I would conclude by thanking the rapporteurs , Terry Wynn , Freddy Blak and Herbert Bösch , the chairman of Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , as well as all the Members who made a great effort to analyse the report of the Court of Auditors and to identify the key measures to be taken .
Your support is crucial for further progress towards sound Community financial management .
There is a long way to go but we will remain firm and we will not turn back .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Euro-Mediterranean Interim Association Agreement with PLO- Middle East Peace Process
The next item is the joint debate on the recommendation by Mr Alavanos ( A4-0103 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion of a Euro-Mediterranean Interim Agreement on trade and cooperation between the European Community and the PLO for the benefit of the Palestinian Authority of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip .
Mr President , in normal circumstances this debate on a Euro-Mediterranean Interim Association Agreement on trade and cooperation between the European Community and the PLO would be just a formality .
It is supported , anyway , by all of the political groups , as was shown in the discussions in the Committee on Foreign Affairs a few days ago and also in the vote .
Today , however , amidst the storm that has broken out in the Middle East following the irresponsible decision of the Netanyahu government in Israel to proceed with settlement of the eastern areas of Palestine , this debate on the agreement takes on special significance and should send a clear signal from the European Parliament to the Council of Ministers of the European Union to embark on decisive action and , also , to the protagonists in the Middle East crisis .
There are a number of things that I wish to say about this agreement .
Firstly , it is a singular type of agreement . It is not an agreement between the European Union and one country , one state .
It is not , even , an agreement between the European Union and the Palestinian Authority , whose legal status does not permit it to negotiate international agreements .
It is an agreement between the European Union and the Palestine Liberation Organization , a novel and singular agreement which is , of course , based on the Interim Israel-Palestinian Agreement , on the basis of which the PLO is empowered to conclude international agreements .
So , one way or another , the Palestinian territories are viewed as regions of the area covered by the Meda programme and the Union 's Mediterranean policy .
Secondly , it is an interim agreement with a duration corresponding to the transitional period extending up to 1999 established by the Oslo peace agreements .
Thirdly , it is not a mixed agreement .
It does not presuppose the consent of the Member States and therefore does not require ratification by the national parliaments .
Fourthly , it is an agreement which , literally , has emerged in record time .
The Council adopted the directives on the conclusion of the agreement on 1 October of last year , and the agreement was initialled on 10 December and signed on 24 February of this year .
Of course , when the negotiation process began the circumstances were entirely different from the situation that prevailed when the process was concluded and as it still is now when the European Parliament is being asked for its approval .
As regards the content of the agreement , it is along the lines - specific features apart - of that of the other EuroMediterranean agreements . So I do not need to go into the content .
I would just like to mention two points .
Firstly , the quotas on certain sensitive products may be very restricted after one or two years , as in the case of flowers .
Secondly , we should pay particular attention to the clauses of Article 68 which allow each of the parties to take measures that it considers essential for its security in the event of war or internal strife .
This Article 68 must not be allowed to take precedence over Article 2 , but , rather , should be subordinate to it , given that the latter provides for implementation of the clause on human rights , enshrined as they are in all treaties , specifically , in relation to such questions as torture and the protection of democratic principles .
The main importance of this agreement lies , I think , in its political nature .
It strengthens the Palestinian authorities and could contribute to the stabilization of the region and to regional integration , and with that in mind , of course , the European Parliament welcomes and supports it .
However , as we have seen , everything will depend on exogenous factors which could turn this agreement into nothing but a piece of paper with no real significance .
Given that possibility , I think that the adoption of a stable , firm , uniform and effective stance by the Council of Ministers towards the present crisis is perhaps much more important than approval of the agreement by this Parliament .
We must avoid acting like Pontius Pilate as , unfortunately , President Clinton has been doing .
There must be a genuine and clear representation to Israel to stop it putting up housing in East Jerusalem in order to give us hope that the Middle East peace process can be got back on to its feet .
Mr President , the Committee on External Economic Relations is also delighted with the interim agreement on trade and cooperation between the European Union and the PLO , for the benefit of the Palestinian Authority of the West Bank and the Gaza strip .
First , because it will contribute to consolidating an area of peace and stability in the region , given that it is designed to facilitate the development of the former occupied territories , in line with the policy maintained by the European Union since 1970 and making it the major donor of humanitarian aid and aid to the economic and political development of the Palestinian people .
Secondly , because it formalizes , albeit provisionally and only until 1999 , bilateral relations between the European Union and the Palestinian Authority , just as this committee requested , and because it confirms the Palestinian people 's status as a full Mediterranean partner when the legal status of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have been definitively established .
Thirdly , because the democratic basis of the agreement , underpinned by the non-implementation clause , constitutes a contribution to the development of the democratic principles and fundamental rights which must accompany the peace process .
This agreement and its timing during the current difficult situation in the peace process and also with the approach of the Second Euro-Mediterranean Conference are of undoubted importance , above all political .
That is why the Committee on External Economic Relations has endorsed the agreement , but that is also why , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , I must deplore and express my disagreement with the procedure followed by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which issued its endorsement without taking account of our committee 's opinion .
It is not the first time this has happened , but we particularly deplore it on this occasion , because a ratification procedure is involved and because the agreement is so significant politically .
Mr President , I am grateful for this opportunity of making a statement here on behalf of the Council concerning the present situation in the Middle East .
The Council is extremely concerned at the latest developments in the Middle Eastern peace process .
Although a clear step forward in relations between Palestinians and Israelis was recorded in January with the signing of the protocol on Israeli resettlement in Hebron it transpired that the momentum this created was short-lived .
Israel 's decision to build 6 500 houses on a hill close to Jerusalem , called Har Homa by the Israelis and Jebel Abu Gneim by the Palestinians , prompted a marked deterioration in the situation in the region .
Tensions are running high .
Trust in the Arab world has declined and the Israeli Government 's will for peace has lessened .
In addition to peaceful protests by Palestinians against the decision there has also been violence in a number of places .
Terrorist suicide attacks have been mounted against Israeli civilians .
The Council has made its views clear more than once on Israel 's settlement policy .
The European Union regards the Israeli settlements as contrary to international law and inconsistent with Security Council resolutions 242 and 338 which form the basis of a peace settlement .
Israel 's settlement policy also pre-empts the outcome of the talks on permanent status .
And I am particularly concerned about the position of Jerusalem .
Manifestly the settlement policy is undermining the peace process and the confidence of both Palestinians and all other Arab countries in it .
Prior to the Israeli decision on Har Homa / Jebel Abu Gneim the European Union had urged Israel through diplomatic channels not to continue with its plans to build there .
When the decision went through the European Union made its opposition plain , through the presidency and in the United Nations .
The Council was appalled to learn of the recent attacks in Israel and condemned them in the strongest terms .
An attack was mounted on a café in Tel Aviv and recently there were two suicide bombs in Gaza .
Clearly those acts of violence have cut the ground from under the peace process .
Innocent civilians are the one who suffer and their feeling of security is very seriously undermined by these attacks .
The European Union has urged the Palestinian Authority to make every effort to counter terrorism in those areas under its control , in line with the obligations it undertook under the interim agreement .
As already happened in the past Israel reacted to the latest terrorist attack by closing the border with the Gaza Strip and the West Bank .
The Council stands by its belief that restrictions on the movements of the Palestinians must go no further than measures genuinely needed to ensure Israel 's security .
In the Council 's view the renewed acts of violence , which claimed new victims again yesterday , show how fragile the peace process is .
All the parties involved should take stock of their responsibilities in the light of this precarious situation .
And we must not lose sight of the structural measures to help the Palestinian people which are equally necessary to the peace process .
The Palestinian economy is in a very parlous state and a wide and protracted closure of the border with Israel is not acceptable .
The closure will lead to living standards of the Palestinians in the Palestinian territories falling further behind , creating the danger of a breeding ground for unrest , anger and violence .
The European Union is anxious to improve the social and economic situation of the Palestinians and has an extensive programme of aid to this end .
The Council hopes that both parties will refrain from acts which might further undermine the peace process .
With this in mind the Council and the European Union 's special envoy on the Middle Eastern peace process , the highly respected Spanish ambassador Mr Moratinos , have had numerous contacts with the parties since the crisis first began .
The Council President has visited a number of capitals in European Union partner countries in the Middle East to prepare for the Euro-Mediterranean ministerial conference which is scheduled for 15 and 16 April in Malta .
The President had in-depth discussions not only on the Euro-Mediterranean process but also on the current situation in the Middle East .
Although the Barcelona process is a separate thing from the Middle Eastern peace process it offers a forum for cooperation to all those involved .
The President expects , and will do his best to ensure , that the Malta conference will be a success in this regard too and will help to defuse the tensions .
Our envoy , ambassador Moratinos , is in constant touch with the parties concerned to explore ways in which the European Union can take constructive action to get the peace process back on track .
When direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians broke down he offered his good offices , which were welcomed by both sides .
He spoke to President Netanyahu and President Arafat , and with members of their cabinet .
He also maintains close contact with his US counterpart Dennis Ross .
He is trying to persuade the parties to resume both their cooperation on security matters and their political dialogue .
After all , progress on both these fronts is needed if mutual trust is to be rebuilt .
Without political dialogue it will be clear that substantial progress is impossible .
The day before yesterday , on 7 April , special envoy Moratinos and representatives of the Member States met in the Council for an in-depth analysis of the situation .
Given the seriousness of the situation we think it is important that the parties should defuse the tensions and seek to resume the dialogue .
Certainly just now it is important that all the parties should strive to get the peace process back on track .
The Council presidency is liaising closely to this end with the United States which has just had talks with the Israeli premier and tomorrow , on 10 April 1997 , premier Netanyahu will be visiting The Hague .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the chance to make this statement .
Mr President , I shall not , of course , waste time describing just how bad the situation is .
At this juncture , we are , I believe , to some extent in accord with the Council 's position ; I share the very grave concern and the way in which it has been expressed here in the House by the President-in-Office .
The past few months have seen the trust that was built up with difficulty between the parties after Oslo , largely eroded .
There has to be trust in a process that has been , and will always be , difficult , but sadly it has been lost .
The European Parliament and my group have hitherto refused to sound the death knell of the peace process - though there are those who wished for just that - or to propose extreme measures , such as requesting that the Council and the Commission freeze the agreements between the European Union and Israel .
We did not do that because it is not for us to be the first to declare , before the actual parties involved , that the peace process is finished . Another reason why we did not do so is because we hope it will be able to resume .
We have exercised caution .
The Organization of Arab States has , however , called into question the new economic and political relations with Israel , which have formed an important step in the peace process .
This is a significant step backwards which reflects the scale of the damage caused to peace in the region in recent months .
The European Parliament is now faced with a new situation and has to decide how to react ; how it can make a more helpful contribution to peace . The fact is that Parliament and my group have always and , I hope , will always encourage but also help push forward the peace process .
At this point in time , we need carefully to assess what can most usefully be done .
We are told that , after the unsuccessful meeting with Clinton , the Israeli government is intending to propose global negotiations which will solve at a stroke all of the problems , both the issue of Israel 's security and the second and third stages provided for under Oslo .
We are told that the intention is to speed up the peace process , so that it does not last two and a half years but is brought to a conclusion in nine months .
It is not clear to us what elements of this proposal from the Israeli Prime Minister constitute a real possibility and what is simple propaganda and to a large extent the abandonment of peace .
We know - and the Council today confirms it - that the Prime Minister will be meeting with the Council this week , and we are aware of the existence of a letter from the Council to the US government proposing joint action .
We have no idea what all of that will produce .
From that perspective , the House was right not to provide for a resolution at present .
But the House will have to be able to express a view and it may be that it will have to do so during the next part-session in Brussels .
It should do this in a way that avoids repetition of the exhortations , warnings and concerns voiced on several occasions in recent months .
Meantime , we welcome the fact the House has moved very rapidly to approve this association agreement , which certainly represents a contribution of the right kind and in the right direction in a peace process that is currently locked in a very difficult phase .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the agreement we are today discussing marks an important step in relations between Europe and the Palestinians and in relations with the Mediterranean generally . It also demonstrates that the European Union is fully involved in the political and economic life of the nascent Palestinian State , and that it clearly intends to move , together with the parties concerned , along the path of reintroducing normality into the Middle East .
That applies more particularly today , at a time when a gradual increase in tensions and difficulties is threatening to sweep us off course .
While the Palestinian side is currently demonstrating a desire to seek European intervention in the peace process , there are others who are seeking to exclude Europe , by standing in the way of the excellent work of Ambassador Moratinos and undermining the aim and scope of the association agreement itself .
It is therefore extremely important that , in the wake of Barcelona , Europe should make clear its own commitment - and not just its financial but its political commitment also - to the region .
The reference to Barcelona and the next conference at La Valletta is necessary precisely in order to link the agreement into the process more generally , the aim being to create a free trade area in the Euro-Mediterranean region by 2010 .
It is in fact right to accord the Palestinian people the rights the MEDA programme guarantees to them , and the conclusion of this agreement will mark an important step in that direction .
It is also right to provide the definite legal framework necessary for trade and cooperation with the Gaza Strip and the West Bank , specifically in order to reinforce this approach based on openness and mutual interest in relations between the European Union and all the countries of the Mashreq and Maghreb - and peace in the region is the absolute prerequisite for this .
The agreement has a value which is political rather than economic , and we have therefore to mention here the unusual nature of an agreement signed by the Organization for the Liberation of Palestine on behalf of a State that has yet to be recognized and that is struggling to assert its own right to exist , including within its own frontiers as it conceives them .
The hope is that it will be possible by 1999 to arrive at a Euro-Mediterranean association agreement with a Palestinian State fully constituted in compliance with international law and enjoying a peaceful relationship with neighbouring countries .
Mr President , October 1996 to February 1997 : these extremely important negotiations have , I would say , been concluded with rare , laudable and exemplary dispatch .
What we have now to hope for is that the international legal status of the Palestinian Authority will be regularized with the same speed and decisiveness , so that when the interim period laid down in the Oslo agreements is over , that is to say at the end of 1999 , it will have the full capacity to negotiate with the other States .
Greater dignity and greater authority also mean greater internal stability but , more particularly , greater international prestige .
Those are crucial developments if Palestine is to become a real nation and thus be able to negotiate global and lasting agreements .
But - and there are many who have now said this - the essential prerequisite is the restoration of security and acceptable living conditions for all .
That will not be possible until the conflict over the Israeli settlements in territories subject to the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority has been resolved .
Each of these settlements is a powder keg , that is to say a potential danger spot , and anyone , from either side , can light the touchpaper whenever they think the time is right .
Peace above all then , but also free access to the resources Palestine has but has hitherto been unable to exploit specifically because of the controls exercised by Israel .
We are thinking here primarily of the sea , the port that not even Gaza has been able to have , despite the fact that there it is before the windows and doors of the houses .
We hope that there will soon be access to these natural resources , but we hope above all to see economic revival , which will certainly come on the basis of agreements of the kind we are today welcoming , but more particularly via initiatives to promote production .
Along with other honourable Members , I was an observer at the elections and noted that , amid the bombs and the fear , Palestinian people are organizing themselves to respond to that appeal .
Those are the people we should be helping , not just through economic and financial intervention but also through some form of technical assistance to enable them to acquire not just political but also economic independence .
The words of the President-in-Office of the Council are consistent with the picture we have of the situation in the Middle East and particularly Israel , and it comes as no surprise to hear him speaking along liberal lines .
It is clear that an escalating situation of conflict has taken over from the peace agreement and the way to peace .
It is clear that the Israeli Government 's policy of settlement is one of the major causes of this conflict , however legitimate the statement on Jerusalem which will have to be discussed in the latest round of talks .
The spirit of the Oslo agreements is possibly every bit as important as the letter of them .
The aim is to build mutual trust between the parties .
The interim association agreement being negotiated between the European Union and the Palestinians is one of the building bricks of that policy of trust and will bring a better balance to our relations with Israel and the Palestinians .
It takes into account the realities of Oslo and creates a strong legal framework for expanding mutual trade and cooperation between the Union and the Palestinians .
Happily trade with the Palestinians has already been substantially liberalized and the Palestinians need to expand their economy more if they are to have better prospects for the future .
At the same time we can demand that they respect human rights , a condition of the agreement .
We thus hope that the Union , together with the Americans , will do everything possible to prevent any further escalation .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , ' you can do it if you really try ! ' That thought is inspired by the association agreement signed between the European Union and the PLO for the benefit of the Palestinian authority .
You have been able to remove legal obstacles and set diplomatic pressures aside in record time to take what may prove to be a great initiative for the success of European Union foreign policy .
A great initiative , certainly , because it in fact confers on Palestine the international recognition it is entitled to .
But it will only be completely successful on one condition : that you do not stop in midstream .
In fact the text of the agreement stipulates that its objective is to support the economic and social development of the Palestinian territories and participate in building an area of peace and stability in the region .
Now , there is no chance of achieving these objectives unless urgent and comprehensive action is taken to end the unprecedentedly grave crisis in the peace process .
So what is to be done ? We are aware of the position just adopted by seventy-four non-aligned countries and its political scope is impressive .
And Europe ?
There is at least one thing we can do : suspend the interim trading agreement between Europe and Israel until Mr Netanyahu 's government ends its colonization in the occupied territories of East Jerusalem , in other words until it respects the signed agreements , as it has been asked to do virtually unanimously by the United Nations .
Far from a rejection of Israel , this strong political act would , in our view , be a gesture of solidarity towards those who are bravely mobilizing within Israel itself , like the tens of thousands of men and women who presented the world with a dignified , peaceful and responsible image of their country .
They have one aim , which is also ours : to save the peace .
Mr President , In the latest issue of the Journal of Palestine Studies the American researcher William Quant says that if Israel concluded a peace agreement today on the basis of the two State solution , everything which was being sought prior to 1967 would be gained .
So why do they not conclude a peace agreement ? 59 percent of Israelis believe that there could be a war .
But 51 percent of Israelis say that they will accept the two State solution .
Why does President Netanyahu not follow the will of the people in his country ?
I think it is important to remember that Netanyahu represents a particular brand of Zionism , revisionist Zionism which holds the view that it is not only Gaza and the West Bank which forms part of ' lawful Israel ' but the kingdom of Jordan as well .
Netanyahu is under an enormous amount of pressure from his own supporters .
He lives quite literally in fear of his life , a fact demonstrated by the murder of President Rabin .
If we really want Netanyahu to conclude a peace agreement he must be put under counter pressure , very strong counter pressure .
One way of producing such counter pressure is through the support given to the Palestinians .
It is a good thing that the association agreement has now been concluded ; it could have been much better and much more could have been done .
But clear signals that the European Union and the world community require part of the ultimate solution to be a Palestinian State form a part of such pressure .
But I wonder if we should not go even further , if we should not make it clear in other ways to Netanyahu that he has more to lose by sabotaging peace than by continuing to dream about ' the great Israel ' .
I do not want to go into detail here but I think that the Council really ought to consider how Netanyahu can be subjected to enough counter pressure to make him see that he must take the chance now to achieve peace .
There are usually serious wars in the Middle East every eight years .
The next would therefore be in 1998 and I hope that through our combined strength we can prevent it .
Mr President , at a time when the peace process is in a critical state , victim of premeditated aggression and multiple provocation , we will not dwell here on the opening of a tunnel in the Arab town , the repeated cordoning off which prevents an entire population from moving around , the installation of new extremist colonists , the collective reprisals , the deaths resulting from attacks , and the repression .
After two years of step-by-step negotiations , when the Palestinian authority controls exactly 7 % of territory militarily occupied by Israel , we must show our solidarity with the people of Palestine , as well as with the hundreds of thousands of Israeli citizens who fervently support peace and respect their Arab neighbours .
The agreement before us today is a factor for stabilization throughout the region .
Its political scope is obviously even more important than its economic and financial side .
The Union must be present on the ground , especially at a time when the American government , which has been so involved , so active and sometimes so effective , now seems to be having difficulties in restraining the ardour of a rabble-rousing head of government .
Consequently the European Union must demonstrate its determination to promote peace and justice .
Mr President , in terms of the existing trade relations between the European Union and the West Bank and Gaza Strip the practical benefits of the proposed agreement with the PLO are not great .
Earlier measures have already largely liberalized trade between the European Union and the autonomous Palestinian territories .
Nevertheless various people have made the point that the agreement is primarily of political significance .
Improvement of the economic and social conditions of the Palestinian people can be of positive benefit to the peace process .
Another point of political importance is that by signing the agreement the PLO and the Palestinian Authority will be committing themselves to ensure that fundamental human rights are upheld .
That too is important in the context of the peace process .
But more is needed to get the peace process going again .
The Palestinian administration for its part will do everything possible to stop the terrible killings in Israel .
On the Israeli side , premier Netanyahu last week conveyed a proposal to President Clinton that accelerated talks should be held within six months on a definitive settlement of the status of the autonomous Palestinian territories .
Whether or not this is feasible is hard to say .
In any case the US Government will have to continue its role as active mediator .
Pressure will achieve nothing here .
In the hope that the agreement between the Union and the PLO will further the economic development of the Palestinian territories and encourage the Palestinian administration to conclude a safe and final peace settlement with Israel , we are happy to endorse this agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we of the Freedom Party welcome the broader and deeper consideration of political co-operation in the present agreement with the PLO , particularly with regard to the consolidation of democracy and respect for human rights as a way of safeguarding peace and stability in that war-torn region .
In this context , we also greatly welcome the inclusion of a democracy clause , enabling the agreement to be suspended in the event of serious human rights violations .
We must , however , reject the additional importing of agricultural produce into the EU , as in view of the present surplus agricultural production in the European market the importing of more agricultural products would make matters worse for the farmers and could result in a further fall in prices .
We in the Freedom Party have always declared our opposition to the transportation of live animals , especially to countries far beyond the frontiers of the EU , because of the intolerable suffering it involves for the animals , and so we regard it as our duty to demand the deletion of this passage from the Commission proposal , a point on which , unfortunately , no comment is made in Mr Alavanos 's report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone recognizes that the situation today in the Middle East , in Israel and the Palestinian territories is difficult , even dangerous , if not explosive .
Concern has been repeatedly expressed this morning .
Is it helpful to reiterate that the reasons lie in the programme of the Israeli government parties , in the personality and ideas of Mr Netanyahu , in the resumption of colonization , but also in the appeals to violence of certain Palestinian groups , in the murderous terrorist attacks and the assassination attempts , not to mention certain statements by the Palestinian Authority ?
I am not sure that this is either necessary , helpful , or indeed positive for the resumption of the peace process that a large majority of the Israeli people hope for and that many Palestinians still support , in spite of everything .
What is really needed is joint international action by the United States and the European Union , and the President-inOffice of the Council has set out the means .
And here I would like to congratulate Mr Moratinos , our European ambassador , on the quality of his work and his determination .
Even if the Oslo agreements allow them and do not prohibit them , the creation of new colonies must be halted , not just because they are a source of tension and short-term deadlock , but especially because they will be unmanageable in the long run , whoever is in government .
But above all terrorism , calls for terrorism , and all the ideas that underlie them , must be denounced , combatted and prosecuted .
Nothing can justify terrorism .
There can be no compromise on this point .
Who , in Europe , in Spain , in France , in Great Britain or in Ireland , to mention just a few countries , would dare to disagree ?
In parallel , economic cooperation with Israel must continue in full and , of course , it must be accelerated with the Palestinian Authority .
That is why , as President of the Europe-Israel Delegation , I give my utmost support to the interim Euro-Mediterranean agreement with the PLO , just as I have supported the agreements with Israel and just as I strive to make them fully effective , and rich in programmes and concrete results .
Without these agreements , the very idea of peace through cooperation and partnership would be damaged .
I ask everyone to think about that last point .
The next few days will be crucial .
May good sense prevail and with it the peace all the countries of the Mediterranean so desperately need .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while we are debating the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the European Community and the PLO in this Parliament today , sadly the situation in that area has degenerated considerably and the peace process has been endangered .
It is more important than ever for the Union to provide the diplomatic impetus to progress the negotiations to achieve peace , taking on the pro-active role that becomes it .
As we have frequently stated in this Parliament , economics is not enough in itself to restructure the equilibrium of the area : economic cooperation must also be accompanied by political initiatives .
That is why we welcome the fact that the basic aim of the provisional agreement consists in offering an adequate framework for a global dialogue which permits the development of close relations between the parties , as well as progressive and reciprocal liberalization of trade , supporting the economic and social development of the Palestinian territories .
Our satisfaction extends to the complementary agreement under the form of a joint declaration on political dialogue , which seeks to strengthen relations between the parties through regular coordination on issues of common interest , like peace , security , democracy and human rights .
But all these positive aspects , ladies and gentlemen , are - as I said earlier - endangered by the deadlock in the peace process .
Security , peace and stability in the area are good for everyone , and we in this Parliament must commit ourselves to strengthening and reinforcing that .
That is why I am formally calling on the international Community from this rostrum to strengthen dialogue between the parties , re-establish the spirit of Oslo and insist on its fulfilment , which means halting Jewish settlement in Jerusalem . This and the commitment from the Palestinian National Authority to guarantee security in the area , controlling the extremist movements which have discovered a suitable culture medium for disturbing the peace process even more .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot allow the extremists to benefit from the failure to fulfil the peace agreements .
Mr President , the interim association agreement with the Palestinian Authority has been finalized at an unusually fast pace , and the proper procedures have not always been followed .
Notably , an important opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations was not considered at the proper time by the Committee on Foreign Affairs and that is a pity .
But that does not affect the new situation for the Palestinians who can now apply for money from MEDA funds .
That means more chances of development for the Palestinian territories but also more dialogue between the European Union and the Palestinian Authority .
It is a provisional agreement , which means that fully-fledged political dialogue cannot yet take place , but in any event it is an agreement which can promote the social and economic development of the whole region and thereby bring stability and be good for the peace process .
Very shortly we shall be holding the Malta conference and we want to see a consolidation of the Barcelona initiative .
We shall be evaluating what has worked and what has not worked and we want to make progress in the areas of security , economic and financial wellbeing and social and cultural policy .
The Palestinian Authority will be taking part in this Malta conference in its new capacity as a more serious partner of the European Union and that is a better position than it has ever enjoyed before .
I am very glad that today , at an early stage of the proceedings and before the conference , we are debating Mr Alvanos 's report .
We all know that in the region itself there are turbulent and sometimes negative things going on but ultimately this agreement will help to bring about a positive turn of events in the Middle East .
Mr President , peace in the Middle East will only be achieved by applying the Oslo Agreement correctly in terms of timing , depth and form .
Obstacles are being put in the way of this application at the moment through Mr Netanyahu 's unacceptable policy , the latest episode of which has been the start of construction of a new settlement in eastern Jerusalem , violating all the rules of international law .
The European Union must play an active and autonomous role in supporting the peace process .
So we support both the implementation of the agreement with the PLO for the benefit of the Palestinian Authority , and the operations of the European Union special envoy to the region , Mr Miguel Ángel Moratinos , including the proposal for a code of conduct for the parties .
But this is not enough .
The Union should put strong pressure on the Tel Aviv Government by every means at its disposal to make it comply with the agreement .
And I think suspension of the interim European Union-Israel Agreement should be considered .
Similarly , I think the Union should propose that Mr Clinton should take similar action on behalf of the United States , and include this proposal in the framework for transatlantic relations .
Mr President , on the eve of the Malta meeting the peace process is wounded and we must hope it is not dead .
Clearly this situation will have a decisive influence on the outcome of the La Valletta meeting , because it should not be forgotten that the Euro-Mediterranean Agreements are the first offer Israel has had to escape from the enclave situation it has existed in since its creation .
I have two points to make .
First , the statement by the President of the Council must be welcomed with satisfaction , especially coming from this Presidency . I have not forgotten the role played by the Netherlands in resolving a 500 yearold dispute between Israel and Spain .
I think the statement was very clear and for once , as we are always complaining about foreign policy , we must applaud the Council for stating that what is happening is against the UN declarations and that the settlements policy is not only contrary to the Oslo agreements but to the UN declarations as well , which clearly advise against settlements , repeating that at the end , and express opposition to terrorism .
And I would also add that we cannot remain impassive faced with a policy which could bring a whole people to despair and wipe out its leadership .
I think it is essential at this time to reaffirm our commitment to the peace process and assert our complementary and parallel role to that of the United States , aware that negotiation still has to take place between the Israelis and Palestinians , as has happened in the past and in the earlier peace processes - I am thinking , for example , of Camp David , where a predecessor of Mr Netanyahu as leader of the Likud took that step in relation to Egypt .
It is very important to re-establish the climate of confidence and have a code of conduct adopted , which Ambassador Moratinos is trying to take forward .
The process of dialogue must be encouraged , and it is unacceptable that a process in line with the UN resolutions , the Madrid Conference , the Oslo Conference and everything that has happened since - and hence our agreement with the Palestinian Authority - should be exhausted in six months , destroying trust and creating Bantustans .
Here I think our agreement , criticized by Israel , opens up the possibility of making concrete progress .
In my opinion something that empowers the port of Gaza , Gaza airport , the safe corridors , is important , and Israel could give a positive signal .
Otherwise we will find ourselves forced to take more serious decisions as regards our trading relations with Israel .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are four things that command our attention in this short but essential debate .
The first thing is the new agreement between the European Union and the Palestinian Authority .
I congratulate Mr Alavanos on his work and resolution and I , too , want to say that it constitutes an essential and positive step in regard to relations between the European Union and the Palestinian Authority and for the peace process and EuroMediterranean cooperation as a whole .
I therefore support it .
The second thing is the peace process .
I do not think that I need to repeat what you are all aware of with regard to recent events .
However , I do stress that the European Union has an obligation to do whatever it can to save the peace process and that it is essential that it should honour that obligation .
So I am very pleased with what the President-inOffice has said here today .
The third thing is coordination between the parties involved , Europe and the United States . It is a true , perhaps , that the United States has an advantage , precisely because it is a single state with a single foreign policy .
Nevertheless , there is a great deal that Europe itself can do .
We already have the special envoy , Mr Morinatos , who is doing excellent work .
But we must do more to help him and give him the means and the political backing to enable him to bring his task to a conclusion .
The fourth and final thing is the fact that this debate is happening just a week before Barcelona II is due to take place in Malta .
The Barcelona II conference gives Europe a fresh opportunity to set out a new framework based on the trustbuilding measures in the region as a first requirement for salvaging what little remains , regrettably , of the peace process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be brief because in the end the European Commission subscribes entirely to the presentation on the European Union agreement with the Palestinian Authority and the situation created as regards the peace process in the Middle East that the minister , Mr Patijn , has made and we have little to add .
So if I may , I will reply to some of the speeches in order to clarify the European Commission 's attitude to the agreement with Palestine , the situation in the Middle East , and the meeting next week - Tuesday and Wednesday in La Valetta , Malta - on the Euro-Mediterranean Conference .
First , the agreement with the Palestinian Authority is very significant politically regardless of its content , which is limited given the current state of the Palestine economy .
Because ultimately , from the moment the Palestinians took part in the Barcelona Conference and signed up to the Barcelona process , it was necessary , as you rightly point out in your report , Mr Alavanos , to respond by putting the Palestinian Authority - and this is the political point - on the same level of institutional , economic , financial and cooperation relations as the other Mediterranean countries .
This agreement does not have the same legal form as the agreements with Israel , Tunisia , Morocco , Jordan and Egypt , but in its content and future intentions it is obviously exactly the same .
Maybe some day , when I am no longer a Commissioner , I will be able to tell you about all the obstacles and pressures we had to avoid in order to conclude this agreement .
But in the end , it is positive that the Council of Ministers has signed it and the European Parliament is unanimously in favour .
My second comment is on the situation in the Middle East , which has been fully described by Mr Patijn and the majority of speakers .
Last week we had the opportunity to tour the whole Mediterranean with the President of the Council of Ministers , Mr van Mierlo , to assess the situation on the ground , also with a view to the meeting next week in La Valetta .
After talking to the various spokespersons with Mr van Mierlo , I can confirm that the situation is very serious and frankly grave .
This is not a matter of Arab League bad temper .
Nor is it a matter of political positioning which may change from one moment to the next .
It is a very serious matter .
The basic problem , as Mr Barón and others have very clearly pointed out , is simply that the Oslo agreements and the United Nations resolutions are not being respected .
And throughout the Mediterranean the idea has been created , justified or not , that Israel , or the Israeli government , is operating on the basis of total international impunity .
Naturally this has created a very grave problem of confidence in the process itself .
The initiative taken by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers after the meeting on Monday on political cooperation , and the proposal put forward by Ambassador Moratinos are , in my opinion , an intelligent and appropriate way of achieving something the European Commission considers fundamental .
If fresh negotiations are initiated in a form different from the one we are accustomed to , naturally in the form the two parties , Israel and Palestine , decide on , it would obviously be incomprehensible now if the European Union did not participate in the process .
The European Union must now participate in the process .
That would be useful to Israel , useful to the Palestinians , and I venture to say useful to the United States first and foremost .
This time the European Union should be able to participate directly in the negotiations , playing a complementary role .
So we must firmly support Ambassador Moratinos ' action , we must support the charter Mr van Mierlo has sent to the United States , and I ask Parliament to support it , and we must support the idea that the code of conduct presented by the Council of Ministers of the Union is the only reasonable way to find a rapid solution to this problem , which could worsen .
Thirdly , La Valetta .
One of the problems which concerned us the most , and which was very difficult to solve , was precisely to detach the Middle East peace process from the Mediterranean Conference .
In the context of the peace process the Arab League has again declared a boycott , withdrawal from all multilateral groups and closing down the offices of political representatives and interest groups , something which has been taking place inside the most moderate Arab countries and those which had already initiated a rapprochement with Israel .
That happened on Maundy Thursday .
But on the same day the Arab side decided it would be wrong to contaminate the La Valetta meeting and that the Mediterranean project had its own content and its own momentum to keep it going .
Naturally , I am not pretending that the context of La Valetta is the same as the context of Barcelona .
In Barcelona there was the euphoria of the peace , the Washington agreement had just been signed , there was a certain political , intellectual and economic relaxation .
The La Valetta meeting is taking place in a context of enormous difficulty , because both the final communication and the resolutions will have to be handled as carefully as possible with the aim of being able to maintain the Mediterranean platform as a separate element which is not predetermined by the peace process .
Mr Patijn 's reasoning is correct .
Barcelona , the Mediterranean process , is not the peace process , but there is no doubt that this process can feed the dialogue in the very difficult situation we are experiencing at the moment .
That is what I wanted to say on behalf of the Commission , and I thank Mr Alavanos once again for his report and the European Parliament in general for the welcome it has given this agreement , which is the result of very difficult and complicated negotiations .
Mr President . I have just returned from Palestine and Israel and I would like to ask the President-inOffice a question .
Everybody has been very supportive of Ambassador Moratinos today , but I believe that we in the European Union have been totally sidelined in the process .
Neither the Israelis nor the Americans want to give us any significant role .
I hope very much that the ambassador will be very successful in his efforts there , but with Gaza closed down for three weeks , with the fruit rotting in the streets , with the goats being fed the carnations , something is going to blow in Gaza very soon .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office , does he see any role now for Thiérry Larsson who made such a success of the Oslo peace agreement ?
I believe that his kind of experience is vital and that we need some kind of audacious political gesture very quickly if we are not to see the whole thing fall down around our ears .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12 p.m. )

Statement by the President
I am delighted to announce that the European Parliament 's team , comprising Mr Ebner and Mr Nassauer , took second place in the team section of the Adelboden Cup , the ski competition for Members of Parliament and Members of the European Parliament , held between 3 and 6 April 1997 .

We congratulate them .
Votes
Mr President , the vote on my report was held over to today so that Commissioner Flynn , who was unable to attend Monday 's debate , could give the members of the committee further information yesterday .
I would ask you , Mr President , to give Commissioner Flynn the floor so that we can all hear his important statement .
The proposal before the House involves amendment of a 1990 directive .
The current proposal has two objectives : firstly , to extend the general scope of the 1990 directive so as to cover all preparations - pharmaceuticals , cosmetics and pesticides ; secondly , to prescribe specific limit values for atmospheric concentrations of benzene .
It should be noted that benzene will be the first of a longer list of carcinogenic substances to be dealt with in this manner .
At first reading , the European Parliament proposed certain amendments and the Commission accepted eleven of them .
Five of these have been included in the common position taken by the Council .
Six have been omitted primarily because of insufficient technical supporting data and tests .
The Commission was prepared to accept the common position for two reasons .
Firstly , it meant that agreement could be reached on the first substance and thereby provide a precedent for others in this category .
Secondly , it offered a potential break-through on a wider range of health and safety measures .
In the second reading the European Parliament proposes to introduce certain amendments which had been omitted from the common position in the Council .
The Commission continues , as at first reading , to agree with the general substance of Parliament 's amendments .
But in the absence of the necessary technical amendments and technical supporting data , it is obliged to accept the reticence of the Council to take on specific legal obligations at this point in time .
Against this background , the Commission is not prepared to accept Amendments Nos 1-10 in Mrs Ojala 's report .
In adopting the common position the Commission indicates its intention to come forward with specific proposals in line with Parliament 's amendments as soon as might be feasible .
When it comes to the point of final adoption of the proposal , the Commission intends to formally restate this intention in the Minutes of the Council .

As regards Amendment No 11 , introduced for the purpose of advancing the date by which Member States must have implemented all the national laws required to give effect to the amending Directive of 31 December 1998 , the Commission is prepared to accept this amendment and to submit a modified proposal to the Council on the point .
The Commission believes that this proposal , as it stands in the common position , together with Amendment No 11 would represent really genuine progress , a view which is shared by the rapporteur - I thank her for it - and expressed in the final paragraph of her report .
I am confident that Mrs Ojala and the other Members of the House who expressed some concern about the position taken by the Commission in the debate on Monday evening , are now reassured of my intention to follow up in a practical way all of Parliament 's requests .
Mr President , now that I have heard Commissioner Flynn 's standpoint , I should like to state that I recommended the adoption of the amendments in question and that the recommendation concerning Amendment 11 , to which I intended to make an oral amendment for 1999 , is now superfluous .
I withdraw it , since Commissioner Flynn has stated that the Commission is prepared to adopt as it stands the proposal put forward by the Greens for the period from 1998 .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Mr President , we have an agreement with the Commission and the Council which should avoid us having to go to third reading .
Last night the Commissioner stated that he wanted to make some very minor textual changes to the amendments we are about to vote on .
I am very happy to recommend the changes that the Commission proposed - they are an improvement .
What I do not wish to do is to fail to vote on them now and have to activate the whole conciliation procedure on such a minor point .
So , if the Commission is able to present its improved suggestions , I would ask the House to support them in that form .
Mr President , I confirm that the two amendments are perfectly acceptable to the Commission in their present wording .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the Lehne report , but against Amendment No 16 .
The Danish Social Democrats are of the view that it must be possible in a payments system to exclude a financial institution from participation in the payments system if that financial institution is unable to provide sufficient assurances for covering the payments which the institute is seeking to have effected .
If there is no possibility for exclusion , there is an increased risk that the payments system will lose money , and such losses would then have to be borne by the other members of the system if a given financial institution goes under .
With respect to Article 3 of the proposed directive , all the reported transactions must be included in the payments system irrespective of whether the participant has provided sufficient assurances for covering its payments .
Point 2 of paragraph 1 of Article 3 nevertheless opens up the possibility that a payments system can be set up and that payment orders cannot be recognized until it is established that there will not be problems with clearance of those payments because all the financial institutions have sufficient cover or have provided a surety .
Thus it would be inappropriate to remove point 2 of paragraph 1 of Article 3 .
The Danish Social Democrats are therefore voting against Amendment No 16 .
Ojala recommendation for second reading ( A4-0072 / 97 )
Since arsenic is also one of the transmissible heavy metals , the substances listed in Amendment No 5 really should be included in the scientific evaluation .
Chemical compounds of this kind can become fixed in the human cells in such a way that they are passed on through breast milk , thus posing a threat to subsequent generations .
In particular , there are dangers attaching to these heavy metal compounds in their interaction with other environmentally hazardous substances such as chlorofluorocarbons or cyanides , which are still being used in industry today although alternatives exist .
It is extremely difficult to counter chemical substances which are distributed in trace form over much of the human race .
Efforts must be made , therefore , to use , and re-use , hazardous chemicals in such a way that it becomes impossible for them to spread , even in trace form .
In particular , it should be noted that in the case of some harmful substances - arsenic compounds , cyanides and chlorinated hydrocarbons - the damage to health is not direct ; diseases such as cancer may not occur until many years later .
Farassino recommendation for second reading ( A4-0087 / 97 )
The sole purpose of the Commission 's proposal to amend Directive 91 / 439 / EEC was to convert the conditions on which the holder of a driving licence can drive a vehicle into clear codes valid for the whole of the Union .
Right from the start the European Parliament took up the proposal with a view to bringing about far wider ranging changes to the driving licence .
At first reading it was suggested that the system of licence points be adopted together with mutual recognition of the withdrawal of a licence .
The European Commission and the Council feel , however , that these additions are outside the scope of the Commission proposal .
The common position thus did not include these proposals by the European Parliament .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism , in its recommendation for the second reading , nevertheless called again for penalties for driving offences imposed by one Member State to be recognized in all other Member States .
In the explanatory statement to the recommendation we read that mutual recognition is a fundamental requirement if there is to be true freedom of movement for individuals within the single market .
Whilst I agree with the Transport Committee that serious traffic offences in one Member State should have serious consequences for the licence to drive anywhere in the Union , I feel that this reference of the Transport Committee to freedom of movement for individuals is exaggerated and unconvincing .
I agree with the European Commission and the Council that recognition of a licence suspension or withdrawal comes under the responsibilities of the third pillar and is thus outside the scope of this proposal .
And a proposal for any such recognition cannot be based on Article 75 , but must be based on the K articles , with the relevant powers for the European Parliament .
For these reasons I voted against the amendments and the recommendation of the Transport Committee .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted against the recommendation from of the second reading of the common position adopted by the Council on the amendment of directive 91 / 439 / EEC on driving licences .
The two proposed amendments in the recommendation provide that suspension of a driving licence in one country would automatically result in suspension of use of that driving licence in all the other Member States .
The Danish Social Democrats vote against the recommendation because it is incompatible with the Danish reservation , in connection with participation in joint action on legal and internal matters , about making criminal judgments effective outside one 's own country .
The Danish wishes with regard to joint rules on the suspension of use a driving licence are that there should be a comprehensive exchange of information between the national authorities so that the individual countries are in the best possible position for taking a decision on whether to suspend the right to drive after a licence has been suspended in another country .
I wish to specify the reasons for my vote on the draft recommendation for second reading consequent to the common position agreed by the Council on driving licences .
This proposal for a directive seeks to define a system of harmonized codes applicable to the notes that are to appear on the Community driving licences issued by Member States .
These codes will be particularly useful to European motorists in their daily lives .
Above all they introduce consistency in official documents , strengthening and crystallizing the sense of citizenship amongst residents of the European Union .
That is why I voted in favour of the common decision agreed by the Council .
The rapporteur , Mr Farassino , wanted the common position amended to the effect of mutual recognition between the Member States of provisions on suspension or withdrawal of driving licences .
Personally and on behalf of the UPE group , I think Mr Farassino 's two amendments should not have been retained in the context of Parliament 's decision .
The idea of mutual recognition of suspension or withdrawal of a driving licence may be perfectly acceptable in itself , but I simply do not think it has any place in a text which seeks to define a system of harmonized codes to be entered on driving licences .
And I do not think such recognition falls within the powers of the Community under article 75 of the treaty .
So in voting on this draft recommendation for second reading , we have kept to the common position of the Council which represents an advance on the road towards ' functional ' harmonization of European rules and an improvement in the daily lives of the citizens .
Palacio Vallelersundi report ( A4-0030 / 97 )
We think that the right of resale has an important role to play in giving the originator the right to remuneration .
This is why we were pleased to see the introduction of this legislation in Sweden on 1st January 1997 .
For reasons of principle , we do not think that this issue should be harmonised at European level but principally our view is that such a move appears to be unnecessary .
The number of large sales which would move to other Member States which have not yet regulated this issue is infinitesimal .
Nor does the need to protect sales of lesser works necessitate harmonisation as these works of art almost without exception find a market within the Member State itself .
The European Commission 's proposal for an artist 's percentage on the sale of a work of art is ill-thought-out .
According to the British Fine Arts Federation , it could lead to the loss of 5 , 000 jobs in London and to the most important sales moving either to Switzerland or to the United States of America .
The British Fine Arts Federation 's concerns are shared by the French Commissaires-Priseurs and their equivalents in Belgium and Luxembourg .
The European Commissioner has failed to carry out a cost-benefit analysis of the proposal .
Indeed , it has treated the British Government with scant courtesy in failing to reply to a strongly worded request for a proper cost-benefit study sent by Technology Minister Ian Taylor on 6 March .
British Conservatives supported a call in the European Parliament - in Amendment No 40 - for a postponement of the proposal until a proper cost-benefit study has been carried out .
Sadly , this amendment was defeated .
British Conservatives , too , disassociate themselves from the official position of the Group of the European People 's Party which supports the Commission 's proposals .
We were not sent to the European Parliament to vote in favour of a proposal which will damage an important British industry .
British Conservatives also believe that the Commission is wrong to bring forward this proposal in the name of the European Single Market .
The art market is global , not European .
According to the evidence submitted to the European Parliament by both the French Commissaires-Priseurs and their Belgian and Luxembourg opposite numbers , 90 % of the revenue which is currently raised by the artists ' rights levy in Paris and Brussels is on works of art whose creators are dead .
Only 10 % goes to the benefit of living artists .
British Conservatives are not in favour of depriving 5 , 000 living Britons of their jobs for the sake of dead artists !
Resale right is the right of an author of an original work ( excluding manuscripts ) or his heirs , to receive a percentage on the resale price of his work up to 70 years after his death .
Within the European Union , resale right exists in the legislation of eleven Member States , but it is only really applied in eight .
It is not mentioned in Dutch , Austrian , Irish and English law .
So it is important to harmonize this author 's right and to do so on the basis of article 100A ( harmonization as regards intellectual property ) in order to put an end to the distortions of competition and the discrimination suffered by authors of plastic works essentially depending on the country where the works are sold .
We must bear in mind that authors of plastic works , unlike authors of literary , musical and audiovisual works , only have one main source of income : the initial income from their creations .
Resale right seems to be a form of restitution to allow the author to profit from his work .
In addition to these economic imperatives , it is indispensable to protect and promote artistic creation because it represents the identity of European culture .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the report on the proposed directive regarding the resale right to the benefit of the author of an original work of art .
In Europe as we know it today many of the artists who produce original works of art do not receive a percentage of the price which such works fetch once the artist has sold it .
A number of countries - Denmark included - have attempted to solve this problem by bringing in resale right legislation that would ensure the artist received a certain percentage of the price a work of art fetched when it was sold for the second , third , fourth time , etc .
However this gives rise to a new problem : the fact that art dealers can avoid paying this resale right if they sell the works in countries which do not have that legislation .
The proposal for which we have voted would , on paper , mean a reduction of Danish artists ' financial conditions .
However the proposals do not differ greatly from the current Danish resale right legislation .
At the same time it is formulated in such a way that there is a chance of its being voted through the European Parliament .
In this way we would be contributing first of all to ensuring that artists in all EU countries received remuneration more in keeping with the market 's valuation of their work .
Secondly we would be avoiding the distortion of competition .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Seppänen , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Holm and Lindholm ( V ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen , Krarup and Sandbæk ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) We have voted against this report as we think that harmonisation of the classification of works of art is unnecessary .
This classification should take place through National legislation .
We also think that the issue of what is to be considered original is manifestly a cultural issue which should be resolved at National level .
This report does not maintain a balance between commercial interests and the interests of the artist and represents a marked deterioration in conditions for Scandinavian artists .
The report pays no attention to small or national markets nor to markets for art which are primarily served by young artists where prices are low , often under 1 000 ECUs .
The proposal for a directive enshrining the economic rights of the authors of plastic and written works at Community level is a positive move forward .
Firstly , because the rights in question are not protected by legislation in all of the Member States and , secondly , because of the very substantial disparities between the legislation of the various countries as regards the types of work covered , beneficiaries and the rates payable .
The harmonization of legislation on the matter must , at least , maintain the authors ' rights at the present level .
We cannot countenance any form of harmonization which would have the effect of curtailing their rights or of reducing their income .
We disagree with the Commission 's proposal to set the application threshold for the financial right at the sale price of ECU 1000 .
This would exclude a large portion of the legal acts drawn up in relation to art works , especially in relation to the works of new authors .
We are proposing , as the authors ' unions are requesting , that the threshold be reduced to at least ECU 500 .
The Commission 's proposal on price bands does not satisfy us because , with the situation as it is in the various Member States , it will lead to a fall in the authors ' incomes .
However , the rapporteur 's amendment is also unacceptable . If the widened upper band that it proposes were to be adopted , the repercussions for the authors would be truly disastrous .
The authors ' unions are requesting , and we support their request and have tabled an amendment accordingly , that the rates be set at 5 % , 3 % and 2 % of the sale price for bands of , respectively , ECU 500 to ECU 50 , 000 , ECU 50 , 000 to 250 , 000 and over ECU 250 , 000 .
We disagree with the limitation on the protection of copies proposed by the rapporteur . We disagree also with the exclusion of manuscripts from the scope of the directive .
However , we consider the strengthening of the inalienable nature of the resale right to be a positive step . This will help to prevent exploitation and the exertion of pressure on the authors and , to the extent that it is possible , place their rights on a par with those of authors of other original works .
For the reasons that I have mentioned we shall vote against the report unless our amendments are accepted .
Ford report ( A4-0110 / 97 )
Mr President , Mr Ford 's report , which we oppose , seeks to construct a new anti-racist ' whatsit ' , that is , a new way of oppressing free people .
Because everywhere in Europe , anti-racist ideology has become a thought police , with its cops , its servile magistrates , and its press kapos .
The situation is particularly serious in certain countries , like the Netherlands .
For saying that when the Democratic Centre comes to power it will do away with the multicultural society , which is a perfectly defensible political objective , the President of the Dutch Democratic Centre , Mr Janmaat , has been sentenced to two weeks in prison by an overzealous judge , Mr Van den Heuvel , who has thus brought dishonour on Dutch justice .

Let me make it clear that if this sentence for a crime of opinion should be maintained at appeal , the Members of the Front National and the Vlaams Blok would insist on visiting Mr Janmaat in prison .
Our Parliament is preoccupied with the defence of human rights in the world .
It ought to put its own house in order .
Anti-racist justice in the Netherlands is no better than in Peking or Djakarta .
Many of the reports which are discussed here in Parliament put the case for the creation of new institutions and organisations .
This report is no exception .
It is rare indeed that we see a report calling for the abolition of an institution or organisation .
We doubt that a European centre to monitor racism and xenophobia is the right way to try to counter prejudice in society .
The aim may be very well intentioned , but we feel that there are many other social costs which are more urgent in the fight against unemployment and poverty in Europe .
Centres such as this tend to produce ever more paperwork while at the same time having little effect on people 's everyday lives .
Even if we vote for the report we wish to make known our strong reservations as listed above .
We have today decided not to vote in favour of the Ford report on the establishment of a European monitoring centre for racism and xenophobia .
There are several reasons for this .
Firstly the Council of Europe has done an excellent job tackling this area for some years now , amongst other things by carrying out a successful youth campaign against racism , anti-Semitism , intolerance and xenophobia , in collaboration with a large number of youth organizations and anti-race discrimination movement .
It is our view that the Council of Europe has the greatest competence in this area and we therefore believe that it would be appropriate for the Council of Europe to continue this work .
We find it difficult to see the relevance of an EU centre in this area , especially when we know that the Council of Europe covers a far greater number of countries and thus reaches a wider audience .
Secondly we are concerned about the chosen legal basis , Article 235 .
We are against the EU being allowed to increase its areas of competence .
Of course we agree that we should combat racism and xenophobia , but query whether the EU is the best forum for this type of activity .
Randzio-Plath report ( A4-0111 / 97 )
Mr President , we have to vote on a report on growth and employment . This is almost a joke when there are twenty million unemployed and almost eighteen million homeless .
The European Commission tells us that everything is going fine : inflation is under control , rates of interest are falling , growth is returning - who knows when , but it is returning !
No doubt it is inspired by the religious virtue of hope !
Mrs Randzio-Plath has also given us an excellent clinical examination of the situation .
We are told that Europe is the sick woman of the planet .
It is true that there is mass unemployment , it is true that demand is weak , and it is true that there is appalling inequality between rich and poor , it is true that the distribution of wealth is such that wealth is moving from the bottom to the top .
Where the analysis is weak is on the causes .
The European Commission maintains that everything depends on supply .
But if the supply of sand is increased in the Sahara that does not mean there will be demand for it .
This clearly shows that the problem is one of demand , not supply .
What restricts demand ?
Excessive taxation .
What destroys jobs ?
Immigration , obviously , and the senseless opening up of the frontiers .
Mr President , if the causes are dealt with the problem usually disappears .
We think that the Randzio-Plath report is essentially a good one , on the whole .
But we have certain reservations concerning the sections which state that taxes and social costs must be reduced in order to tackle unemployment effectively .
We think that these comments are far too general for us to be able to share these views in every respect .
I advise readers to pay close attention to the part of the Commission 's economic report devoted to the impact of monetary fluctuations .
In fact there are many economic , monetary and indeed political lessons to be learned from it .
No-one has forgotten that two years ago , in the middle of the internal monetary disorders which struck the Community , the Commission published a soothing statement explaining that the macro-economic impact on growth was not very great : 0.25 to 0.5 percentage points .
It even minimized that assessment a little more by adding that this included the dollar effect , external to the Community , and that no strict relationship could be established between the nominal variations in exchange rates and the variation in competitiveness .
In parallel , the Commission haughtily rejected the proposals of all who , like France , proposed to introduce immediate remedies , either by toughening the disciplines of the European monetary system , or by adjusting the structural funds , or again by setting up monetary compensation funds .
Today , two years later , the tone has completely changed .
In the annual economic report presented to us , we read that growth suffered a sudden setback in the second half of 1995 , that the deceleration was particularly violent in the countries whose currencies had appreciated during the monetary crisis of spring 1995 .
The others were not spared either .
In fact it is explained that in countries whose currencies depreciated , short term interest rates rose , sometimes considerably and the result was a definite slowdown in the economic activities of those countries as well . ' Violent deceleration ' , ' definite slowdown ' : the words are no longer the same .
The final conclusion is also very different : globally ( that is , including the dollar effect ) growth in consumer demand , which had reached almost 3 % during the previous 18 months , fell to just 1 % in the second half of 1995 ; growth in real GDP fell from 2.4 % to 1.2 % in the space of six months , a much larger difference than had been announced earlier .
Commissioner Silguy amplified this disturbing fact by verbally adding that Europe lost 1.5 million jobs at that time .
We need to ask ourselves why the Commission has made this U-turn .
Were its experts so incompetent that they did not notice what any man in the street recognized and my group strenuously denounced , at the end of 1995 : the disastrous impact of the internal monetary fluctuations , particularly on France which had tied its currency to the Mark ?
We will not insult the Commission in such a way .
So what is the explanation ?
We think the initial position , the 1995 position , was actually dictated by considerations of political strategy : on the one hand the negative effects of the internal monetary fluctuations had to be recognized ( how could the Commission deny them ? ) and the prospect of the eventual solution of the single currency held out , but on the other hand they had to be minimized to prevent their disastrous nature inciting the Member States to take immediate measures , which would have demonstrated that the problem could largely be resolved without the strong medicine of the single currency .
We do not hesitate to say that this was pure manipulation of the information at the time , and the Commission seems to think it has lost its usefulness today .
The theoretical deadline for the single currency is now quite close , the monetary fluctuations have calmed down , and if it was asked again the Commission could always reply that the deadlines are now too short to take intermediate measures .
So it can afford the luxury of telling the truth and somehow wiping out the traces of its crime , while singing new praises of the future benefits of the single currency .
We should learn the political lessons of this affair : the Commission lied in 1995 , at least by omission , and knowingly prevented Member States taking measures to defend their jobs , sacrificing the workers on the altar of the single currency , towards which inexorable progress must be secured .
This says a lot about its authoritarianism and its contempt for people and countries .
But let us not forget that those who lied yesterday may lie again tomorrow .
This is a timely reminder when the Commission is urging us , despite the growing imbalances , to rush headlong into the fusion of our currencies and the unification of economic policy .
We have abstained in the final vote .
The report contains a real and badly needed criticism of the policy of restraint which has marked the Union 's official thinking for some time and which has been one of the main causes of mass unemployment and social unrest .
We see the report as a change towards an expansive and demand-stimulated economy .
But we do not share the view that implementation of EMU is advisable .
On the contrary it is the EMU regulations which are the cause of the restrictive and deflationary policies in Member States .
EMU would also involve standardisation of policy in every country which would not correspond to their individual needs .
The expansive policy which the report quite rightly advocates is in contrast to the EU 's currency policy which is why the currency policy needs to be changed and the thought of a European currency must be given up .
Currency union ought to take other forms , compatible with an aggressive policy against social unrest and unemployment .
Nor do we share the view that a reduction in company taxation and a reversal of employment rights regulations - under the fascinating name ' flexibility ' will have any positive economic or structural effect .
As usual , the Commission 's annual report makes for tedious reading as it concentrates only on the purely economic aspects of the EU such as finance and monetary policy .
Those issues which are of concern to ordinary people , i.e. unemployment , reductions in the public sector and environmental issues are omitted completely .
So the resolution of the European Parliament makes positive reading , as it contains a real and badly needed criticism of the policy of restraint which has marked the Union 's official thinking for a long time and which has been the main cause of mass unemployment and social unrest .
But we do not share the view that implementation of EMU is either advisable or desirable .
On the contrary it is the EMU 's convergence criteria which are the cause of the restrictive and deflationary policies in Member States .
Sweden is an excellent example of this .
From 1990-91 , when the Swedish government got it into their heads that Sweden must join the EU and consequently embarked upon EU type financial policies in the economy , with low inflation as the prime goal , Swedish unemployment has risen considerably even though Sweden did not become a member of the EU until 1995 .
When EMU is introduced the economic policies of the EU countries will be ' co-ordinated ' and therefore no attention will be paid to the differences which exist in the different regions of the EU .
The expansive policy advocated by the report is in contrast to the EU currency policy which is why the currency policy must be changed and the notion of a European currency must be given up .
Currency union ought to take other forms , compatible with an aggressive policy against social unrest and unemployment .
The two EU Structural Fund programmes 1989-1993 and 1994-1999 have clearly assisted in enhancing the economic growth of the Irish economy .
The average income per capita in Ireland is now over 84 % of the EU average and this is primarily due to large transfers of EU monies through the European regional , social , agricultural , fisheries and cohesion funds .
Ireland 's recent economic performance highlights what can be done if social partners and government pursue consistent and stable macroeconomic policies building on social consensus .
This is a process which began in 1987 and which has resulted in the most part in industrial peace .
While Ireland is set to be one of the countries which will meet the Maastricht convergence criteria and thus will be in a position to join EMU at Stage I , there are still a number of underlying economic concerns for the Irish economy .
Firstly , Ireland receives over 11 % of the overall EU Structural Fund package 1994-1999 .
Post-1999 , this figure will come down to about 7 % or 8 % of the EU Structural Fund package 2000-2005 .
The Irish Government , which has increased spending sizeably in the last two years , has not put any structures in place to deal with the shortfall in EU monies post1999 .
While growth rates in Ireland have varied between 7 % and 10 % in recent years , the Irish Government 's spending policies have been geared towards short-term gain with no long-term economic strategy in place .
I believe that Ireland should join EMU at the first available opportunity , but we should implement government policies that take into account the above inflationary increases in public expenditure , the fact that there is still under-funding for essential infrastructure and the fact that it will be difficult to sustain current growth rates while economic activity in other EU countries is weak .
I fully agree that EU Structural Fund monies must and should be directed to those regions whose economic performance and average income per capita is not up to the European average .
There must be maximum coordination of the disbursement of EU Structural Funds through the European Regional Development and Social Funds and regions within Member States whose economic performance is lagging behind that of their European counterparts .
In Ireland , for example , the debate must begin now as to how the next EU Structural Fund monies will be disbursed during the years 2000-2005 .
As MEP for the constituency of Connaught / Ulster , I believe that the counties of Donegal , Cavan and Monaghan , together with the province of Connaught , must retain Objective 1 status during the years 2000-2005 .
Objective 1 status , which entitles regions to the maximum amount of European Regional and Social Funds , is normally only granted to areas whose average income per capita is below 75 % of the EU average .
The counties of Donegal , Cavan , Monaghan and the province of Connaught should and must be entitled to the maximum amount of EU monies , because these areas are not performing as economically or competitively as other areas in Ireland .
Let us be clear on one thing .
If the EU is serious about linking Structural Fund polices to economic performance of regions , then the region of Connaught / Ulster will be granted Objective 1 status during the period 2000-2005 .
Employment is understandably one of the most serious challenges facing decision- and policy-makers at European Union and Member State level , and while the situation is improving , it behoves all of us in public office to reintensify our efforts to create a favourable environment for further investment and economic growth from which productive new employment can be generated .
With inflation within the European Union moving in a positive downward direction and a corresponding increase in GDP it is more important than ever that this welcome trend is managed in a manner which stimulates further economic activity from which sustainable jobs can be created .
I am pleased to put on the record that the economic policies put in place in Ireland in 1987 are beginning to bear fruit and that our unemployment problem ( one of the worst in Europe ) has now taken a positive turn with a slow but steady increase in new jobs .
The rapporteur is right to identify the important role of the private sector in employment policy but this will only happen if individual Member State governments put in place policies which encourage and reward investment , enterprise and risk-taking .
In far too many instances the cost of creating a new job is prohibitive - high taxation , national insurance contributions and over-regulation - are factors militating against job creation .
Surely , it is better for governments to make the necessary financial adjustments on the taxation side rather than pay in social welfare the cost of supporting an unemployed person .
In allocating European Union and national Funds to employment projects , special note should be taken of the success of existing community-based programmes such as ' LEADER ' and ' County Enterprise Boards ' which have the capacity to generate employment at a level not normally reached through national-based schemes , thus helping to retain a reasonable urban / rural infrastructure .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted against the report on the Commission 's annual financial report for 1997 .
In this report the Commission is criticized for not having given sufficient attention to unemployment , and the prospects for growth in the EU are seen as inadequate for effectively combating mass unemployment .
Considerable attention is paid to unemployment in the report .
The Danish Social Democrats agree with the report 's approach to the problem of employment in Europe and are in favour of the exchange of information and other policy initiatives in a number of areas , but we cannot support the demand for the establishment of a form of economic government at an EU level , as discussed in point 13 .
The Commission 's description of the economy is overoptimistic .
EMU will not solve the main problem of high unemployment but runs the risk instead of making the situation worse by increasing the numbers of unemployed through its one sided concentration on price stability and fiscal economic demands .
The committee 's statement is considerably more realistic and would also appear to appreciate part of the problem of EMU but it does not draw any conclusions from this .
There is talk of increasing demand and investment without seemingly understanding that it is EMU which is holding back development as a whole and placing a lid on the whole of Europe .
Against this background I have voted against the report .
Unfortunately , a chance majority has resulted in the defeat of a central political aspect of the report - the call for a reduction in working hours as an indispensable factor in a more comprehensive policy for redistributing labour and incomes .
None of the other available instruments takes effect so quickly !
This is a defeat for the new politics that is simultaneously beginning to grow , with the Europe-wide strike by the Renault workers , with the European marches against mass unemployment , precarious employment and social marginalization , with the European Assembly for Full Employment and with the impending Day of Action of the ETUC .
Even though I cannot share the rapporteur 's optimism that the punctual introduction of European economic and monetary union , as presently conceived , can be reconciled with a new ecological and social policy , there are many other things in the report that do point in the right direction - the direction of an ecological and social revolution in which the fight against mass unemployment is really given top priority .
Otherwise , the issue is clear : in the debate on the broad economic guidelines , ladies and gentlemen , which are still succumbing to the neoliberal ideology , we shall meet again !
Metten report ( A4-0105 / 97 )
Mr President , Parliament has just voted for the Metten report , which unfortunately confirms the fears of all those who think that the costs of managing the single currency will have far more impact on our economies than its achievements in terms of simplification or reduction of exchange charges .
At first sight the report seems to deal with a secondary technical question : a system of mutual financial support between Member States in case of serious balance of payments problems affecting one of them has existed for a long time .
This mechanism rarely operates ( the last time it was used was in 1993 , for the benefit of Italy ) which is understandable because at the moment each country still has the right to pursue a separate economic policy , even if it is more or less coordinated with those of the others .
The question is whether this mechanism should be maintained when the single currency is in force .
The Metten report says it should .
First because some countries will remain provisionally outside the single currency , and above all because a mechanism of this kind will be even more essential for the participating countries , because their economic polices will be merged and it will certainly be necessary to find a common system to help each of them absorb the asymmetric cyclical shocks they might suffer and which will affect all the others .
Here we come to the heart of a crucial debate .
In fact , in the future monetary union as adopted at Maastricht , there is no federal European budget to serve as a shockabsorber in case of crisis , local or general .
So there is no Community instrument for fighting asymmetric imbalances .
Mr Metten has had an idea for filling this gap , and Parliament has followed him without reservation .
He proposes that the baton of the current financial support facility for balances of payments be taken up tomorrow by a wider system , entitled the ' facility for stabilization and growth ' which could complete the future stability pact .
But where will the money come from to finance this new system ?
We see at work here the perverse spiral which has progressively swollen the bill for the single currency .
As we predicted from the start , in a few years time we will realise that its disadvantages far outweigh its advantages and the costs it will engender are far greater than the benefits it may bring .
I voted in favour of the Metten report since the Member countries involved in Economic and Monetary Union will now have recourse to a medium-term financial instrument should they run into difficulties with their balance of payments .
This mechanism operates through the capitals and loans market guaranteed by the Community budget at a favourable rate of interest .
The conditions for these loans are exceptional and beneficiary countries will be required to submit and adhere to a repayment schedule approved by ECOFIN .
The problem which now arises is that of whether this mechanism should lapse in relation to countries moving on to the third stage of EMU and yet belonging to the EURO , or whether it should be recreated , clearly in other forms but in the same spirit .
It must be borne in mind that for countries belonging to the EURO , the concept of balance of payments needs to be reconstructed , since the majority of operations will be carried out in EUROS .
For example in Portugal approximately 80 % of our trading is with countries of the European Union and , as regards those which belong to the EURO , it will not be possible to measure the financial fluctuations corresponding to the different currencies .
The same will apply to tourism and other currency exchange operations .
Furthermore , it must be borne in mind , as the Commission 's Annual Economic report for 1997 says , that the degree of Community openness in relation to the world economy is relatively slight and comparable to that of the United States of America or Japan .
In 1995 European Union openness was approximately 10 % as compared with 12 % for the United States of America and 9 % for Japan .
That indicates that the globalization of trade affects only a limited proportion of the Community economy .
Despite the overall reduction in this amount , the fact has to be faced that countries of the European Union , or the Union as a whole , for exceptional reasons are beginning to have problems as regards balance of payments , above all because , in contrast to what is happening in the United States , for example , workers have less mobility - especially because of language differences - and the automatic stabilizers and the scale of the Federal Budget operate in the United States as shock absorbers .
Thus the European Parliament has just approved , with my support , a resolution proposing that the Commission should submit to us and to the Council a draft regulation on the possibility of assistance in the third stage of EMU for a Member state encountering difficulties in its balance of payments , with the suggestion that the maximum possible benefit should be linked to a percentage of the GDP of the beneficiary Member States .
In our view that instrument is essential in order to face any possible restrictions which the stability pact might create .
Mr Metten 's report rightly tackles an important problem .
Unfortunately , it is too hesitant .
Without an effective system of financial compensation , the transition to the third stage of economic and monetary union will prove impossible to arrange in a manner compatible with regional and social policy .
This is all the more urgent in that the demands made by Parliament to the effect that EMS II should be structured so that the burden of adaptation is distributed symmetrically and equitably are likely to remain unfulfilled .
The pact for ' stability and growth ' requires not ' support ' but total reconstruction . It needs reconstructing as a pact for the joint transition to a new socially and ecologically sustainable development model .
The Metten report provides no energetic orientation here .
It also has nothing to say about the financing possibilities , which is entirely in line with its excessively modest approach .
Such an energetic approach should appropriate about 1 % of the EU 's GDP for this kind of compensation and disaster insurance fund .
Then it will at least be able to start fulfilling its function .
New EU sources of taxes and levies ( the energy tax , etc . ) should be reserved for this .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Situation in Albania
the next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Albania .
Madam President , I am happy to respond to Parliament 's request for a statement on Albania .
The situation in Albania remains unstable .
The Government of National Unity under premier Fino is treading a careful line between the socialists on the one hand and President Berisha on the other hand .
There is still wide disagreement between the main political groups .
Whilst the Government has restored order in a number of towns , robbery , looting , banditry and shooting matches still continue .
So the situation is still unpredictable .
Many people are escaping to neighbouring courtliness , especially Italy .
The media are hampered in their operations and a definite date for the previously agreed elections still has not been set .
Provisionally it is likely to be next June-July .
At the request of the Danish President-in-Office of the OSCE the former Austrian Chancellor , Dr Franz Vranitsky , visited Tirana in person on 8 March .
The pressure exerted on the Albanian authorities by the presidency of the European Union , among other things in its talks of 7 March , together with the efforts of Dr Vranitsky and other members of the international community prompted President Berisha to announce early elections .
A Government of National Unity was also formed headed by Prime Minister Fino , a man from the south .
Recommendations were also made for support from the international community in setting up a dialogue between government and opposition , collecting in weapons , preparing new elections , drafting a new constitution and tackling macro-economic problems .
The General Affairs Council of the European Union on 24 March decided to send a mission to Albania to advise the Albania authorities on humanitarian , economic and political issues and on questions of security .
This advisory mission will operate within the framework of the OSCE which will coordinate the efforts of the international community in Albania .
Each of the various international operations has its own part to play .
The picture is roughly as follows : responsibility for overall coordination lies with the personal representative of the OSCE president , Dr Vranitsky .
He will be assisted by an on-the-spot deputy , still to be appointed , who will be nominated by the Union .
This deputy will report to both the OSCE and the Council of the European Union .
But the ultimate responsibility for coordination rests with the OSCE .
Between 26 March and 2 April a mission was in Albania to prepare for the advisory visit of the mission .
This preparatory mission comprised representatives of the Dutch presidency of the Council , the European Commission , the OSCE and the Council of Europe , plus members from the United Kingdom , Italy and Greece .
The job of the mission was to advise on the remit and composition of the subsequent advisory mission and it reported on 4 April .
The results of the mission will be debated shortly both by the European Union and by the OSCE in Vienna .
Although definitive decisions are still needed in a number of areas , it seems likely that the activities of the international community will in any event include the following three elements : firstly , humanitarian aid with the European Union playing the leading role , together with a reinforcement of Albania 's police capacity , possibly with the European Union playing a co-ordinating role together with the Council of Europe .
Structural aid will also involve close cooperation with the IMF and World Bank .
Secondly , the more political part : elections , human rights , greater democracy .
In this area the OSCE will play an important part in close co-operation with the Council of Europe .
Thirdly , a multinational protection force to which a number of countries will contribute troops .
This multinational force , which the UN Security Council has meantime approved , is headed by Italy and will provide escorts for humanitarian aid and ensure the safety of international bodies working in Albania .
There will be close liaison between the force commander and the OSCE representative in Tirana .
The European Union and OSCE will be consulting more closely and taking final decisions on the mandate and structure of the advisory mission .
But I will touch on a number of aspects of specific aid provision and possible instruments through which it may be given .
The first need is for law and order and proper policing .
The preparatory mission found that the Albanian authorities need material support and more particularly with a view to the longer term they need advice and training .
To obtain a better idea of training and advice requirements it would be a good idea for the advisory mission to include a team of 20 or so police officials .
The preparatory mission 's report says that the police framework envisaged should be a joint effort by the European Union and the Western European Union in cooperation with the Council of Europe .
In addition to advising , the police team can also work in a supervisory capacity in four police districts of Tirana , with the collection of information also forming part of the requirements .
The police team will also make specific recommendations on how the Albanian police can be helped in the short and medium term .
And then the monitoring of the situation .
At present the ECMM ( European Community Monitoring Commission ) is operating in Albania with a group of ten observers .
When the existing memorandum with the Albanian authorities is implemented the work of the ECMM observers can be extended to the whole of Albania and its numbers will be increased to 24 .
This wider ECMM presence will enable two to three teams to operate in each region , in the Tirana area , in the north around Shkodër and in the south around Gjirokastër .
A proposal on this must first be accepted in the Council .
As regards preparation of the elections and the democratization process the OSCE will work closely with the Council of Europe on democratization , freedom of the media and human rights .
Secondly , the preparation of elections , technical assistance with the drafting of en electoral law , observation during the elections and perhaps the supervision of the arms amnesty .
Probably a pretty unenviable task .
Finally there is humanitarian aid .
As yet there is no talk of a general situation of emergency but this may well arise within a period of a few weeks .
Because the hospitals and the government 's strategic food stocks have been looted , because the borders have been closed and because the internal security situation has been so bad , the normal pattern of food and medical supplies and distribution has been severely disrupted .
This may lead to an emergency in welfare institutions such as hospitals , orphanages and old people 's homes .
That section of the population which lives on welfare is also vulnerable , about 150 000 families .
Distribution will be targeted at clearly defined categories of people who are in need , namely the institutions I mentioned just now and the weaker members of society .
For the longer term , the preparatory mission recommended economic and financial aid to Albania .
But a precondition of this is security and stability .
It does not seem that much readjustment of the PHARE programme would be needed here .
Commissioner van den Broek will doubtless be able to say more about this .
Possible aid in rebuilding the country 's infrastructure can only be meaningfully discussed once the scale of the damage is known .
In conclusion , it must be obvious that given the complex problems in Albania the European Union is faced with a major challenge .
It is equally obvious that aid cannot come from the European Union alone .
Given this background it is most important that the Union should work at all levels with other institutions such as the OSCE and Council of Europe and that the efforts made should be properly coordinated .
It is essential that these efforts should complement each other .
Only if the work of cooperation is structured in this way can the international community give the best possible help in solving the crisis in Albania .
Madam President , the recital of facts by the President-in-Office was interesting and entertaining but , nonetheless , disappointing . Listing facts , Mr President-in-Office , is not enough .
There have been enough words . The need now is for action .
And not just by the OSCE and the Council of Europe . We need action from the European Union .
The people of a European country are suffering .
They are suffering because of the serious mistakes of a man who came to power , in a devious manner , via elections that were marked by violence and fraudulent practices .
And they are suffering also because most of us chose to sit on our hands after those disgraceful elections last May .
We did not demand that they be declared void and held again .
We did not take the allegations seriously enough at the time , Mr President-in-Office , and there were many of them .
We have all helped to place Albania in its present state of crisis , some of us through silence and some with active assistance to Mr Berisha .
The Commissioner was correct when he said that the crisis is political .
Today , however , is a good day for the European Parliament . The overwhelming majority of Members have agreed on the adoption of a resolution which puts us back on the right track .
It is true that the presence in Strasbourg of the leaders of the main parties in Albania which support democratic change - the presence of those leaders who are here in the Chamber at this very moment - has helped us to get a better understanding of what is happening in that country .
Over the course of the last few days , Fatos Nano , the leader of the Socialist Party , Neritan Tseka , the president of the Democratic Alliance , who is an observer member of the European Christian Democratic Union , and Skender Kinoussi , the president of the Social Democratic Party , have spoken with all of the political groups .
The creation of a government of national reconciliation appears to be the first step in a process of institutional change , which is encouraging .
We now have an opportunity to show that we intend to do something .
The Council of Ministers has not managed to agree on joint action to tackle the problems in Albania .
The European Parliament is now calling on the Council to re-examine its position .
Fortunately , some Member States - Greece , italy , France , Spain and Austria - have understood that something has to be done and now have a presence in Albania .
The Albanian people need us .
They need help not only in order to survive , but also in order to bring about change .
Independent justice , full access to television and radio , free and fair elections , unimpeded participation of all democratic politicians in elections and control of the secret services - those are matters on which we can help .
Mr Van den Broek and Mrs Bonino of the Commission are ready to act .
The Council has a duty to give them the green light .
The Albanian problem is a European problem .
Let us , at long last , do something to help European citizens .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as I said previously during our last part-session here , Albania is an appalling example of what a communist government does to people .
They long remain incapable of dealing with the new freedoms and with the temptations offered by criminal elements , capitalist and otherwise .
I welcome the fact that the Council has given an undertaking today , which I strongly support , in which reference is made to the ECMM taking on important functions in that country in the future .
The fact is that we shall not succeed in creating or consolidating democratic structures with financial aid alone - the European countries also need to send human resources to Albania .
My group welcomes the formation of the all-party government .
We support this government , under President Berisha , but we also welcome the fact that the socialists have returned to take up their seats in Parliament .
We expect all Albania 's politicians to take their responsibilities seriously and not simply to wait for us to bring them a solution from outside .
We cannot do that !
We welcome the decision by the Council of Ministers to allow some Member States to provide close joint co-operation by sending troops to protect the humanitarian aid workers and help promote stability in the region .
Of course , a genuinely joint action would have been even more effective , but this flexible manipulation of the instruments of foreign policy is a welcome step forward when we compare it with the way we were hamstrung in past years in Bosnia and other parts of the former Yugoslavia .
Unfortunately , the socialists in Albania are still playing a dubious role .
On 28 March they tried to establish official contacts with the self-styled leaders of the rebels , instead of supporting the lawfully elected town councils and mayors , including some of their own political complexion .
Talks with these rebels must be confined to the objective of disarming them .
If we , as members of the European Parliament , are no longer prepared to support the local politicians who were lawfully elected in September , how can we expect the rebels to do so - especially when their political and professional backgrounds are particularly dubious ?
My group is in favour of early elections , but a precondition for those elections is universal access to the mass media and the laying-down of arms .
The latter point is particularly important to allay the fears of these armed gangs felt by normal citizens in Albania - which means the great majority .
The flow of refugees , too , can only be stemmed if anarchy in Albania once again gives way to the rule of law and order , and public order is restored .
With regard to the sharing of the burden of accommodating the refugees , called for in the joint motion for a resolution , I hope the House will understand when I say that I would prefer this call to be addressed only to those who have been most dilatory on this point in recent years .
The European troop contingent must be sent to the area soon .
The issue is not just protecting the humanitarian aid workers but the survival of democracy in Albania as such .
Every day counts .
Madam President , I do not share the optimism apparent in what was said by the President-inOffice about the situation in Albania , which is deteriorating with every moment that passes .
First of all because the UN mandate which , in combination with the good will of some States , means that a multinational force can be sent to Albania , is rather a fragile mandate , since it does not permit weapons to be recovered and the militia to be disarmed .
This is , moreover , a situation in which the Council has again shown itself unable to face up to its own responsibilities out of fear that the right of veto will be used , in this instance - I believe - by the United Kingdom .
The machinery that regulates European foreign policy is not fully functional , and great dangers now threaten the military and humanitarian mission which is about to begin , particularly since there is a great deal of anti-European and anti-Italian feeling in Albania , as a result of the impact of the sinking of the Albanian ship , with the loss of more than 80 people in the Adriatic .
There are going to be armed men who are out for revenge and seeking to provoke , ready to shoot at anyone .
On top of all of that are the statements by the Italian Government 's undersecretary for foreign affairs , who has been mandated by the United Nations to command the mission and who considers it appropriate to sideline Berisha , although that is outside the UN mandate .
I ask myself and I ask you whether , in the final analysis , the intention is really to reestablish peace and create the conditions for the restoration of democracy or to instal a political party in government in Albania .
Madam President , I should like to start by thanking the Commissioner and Mr Patijn for their reports , and emphasize that the liberal group in this House will of course support all the humanitarian aid projects that have been launched , including the deployment of a military protection unit which , sadly , is once again needed in order at least to safeguard the humanitarian aid .
In this context , though , we should also ask whether the mistakes being made in that country may not be partly attributable to outside influences .
We should remember that no country , relative to the size of its population , has received so much aid from the European Union as Albania - aid provided on the basis of a treaty which laid down democratization as an essential condition ; and yet past events there have seen the development of what is virtually a one-party state , excesses committed by the intelligence services , etc .
I ask myself , and I ask you , Commissioner , whether something has not gone wrong here when all this aid has failed to take effect ; most of all , though , I ask you why the democratic political principles on which this co-operation was founded have apparently been consigned to oblivion .
This , I believe , is an important point and one we should look at closely .
A second point is this : Mr Patijn has said a great deal about the role of the OSCE in the current operations .
But I would like to ask him this : where was the OSCE when there was a need for someone to call attention to this development at an early stage ?
Because that is the real and very important task of the OSCE - to function as a political early-warning system for imminent crises .
The OSCE failed to perform that function , and so when we come to give consideration to these events we should include the question of how we can reform this further development of the OSCE .
Albania is another example of how urgently the European Union needs a Common Foreign and Security Policy , and we should therefore do everything we can to ensure that it actually has one .
Madam President , there have been several occasions during this century when Italy has been an occupying and colonial power in Albania .
In an Albania that has emerged from Stalinist dictatorship , the kind of capitalism , Italian mafia and Italian petty politicians we are used to have , in recent years , engaged in all sorts of business at the expense of the poor .
Without the help of a number of Italian banks , the fraud committed through the financial pyramids could never have taken place .
The Italian Government has been and remains one of the most mealymouthed when it comes to condemning the electoral irregularities of Berisha 's authoritarian regime and its involvement with the pyramid financial schemes .
Two weeks ago , an Albanian non-military vessel , full of women and children , sank in the Strait of Otranto after colliding with an Italian naval vessel ordered to deter it from reaching the Italian coast .
Those are all reasons why it is inappropriate for Italy to be leading a humanitarian mission to Albania . That is why this is not really a humanitarian mission but a colonial operation using , as a pretext , Albania 's request for humanitarian assistance .
That is why this is basically a military operation and why it offers no guarantee of that the way to free elections in Albania and , particularly , to fresh presidential elections will be opened up .
We are calling upon the United Nations to assume full responsibility for a humanitarian action in Albania , instead of contracting it out to Italy , and we urge that the military support for the mission should , most especially , not be Italian .
We are finally calling upon the European Union to take its responsibilities more seriously ; it is unacceptable that the Union too should have handed responsibility for Albania over to Italy .
It is yet another symptom of a European construction that is completely impervious to the needs of the people that live in or alongside it .
Madam President , it has again to be said that the European Parliament has , on several occasions , discussed the problem of Albania in recent months , and it has , on several occasions debated the legality of the recent elections which caused all elements of the opposition to reject the outcome .
In its resolutions , the House called upon the interested parties , in Albania , to enter into dialogue and called for fresh elections to be held .
Unfortunately , those calls have gone unheeded and neither the Council nor the Commission has been able to bring forward a common policy on Albania .
Faced with the fact that events are coming to a head and given the worsening crisis the only country to have called for action on behalf of the Albanian people has been Italy . But Italy had a very specific reason for doing so : the growing numbers of refugees fleeing to Italy .
That is certainly no reason for accepting that it should be Italy , and considering it appropriate that it should be Italy , that organizes the intervention and a mission to bring humanitarian assistance to Albania .
Sadly , however , we have to recognize that a common European policy has failed in regard to Albania , and in those circumstances we have also to say that the dispatch of humanitarian assistance is now necessary and that it needs the right kind of escort , in accordance with the mandate set out in the UN Security Council 's decision of 28 March .
We have again to say that it is inappropriate that Italy should be leading this mission , particularly since it is not yet clear what exactly happened to cause the sinking of the Albanian vessel with the loss of 80 lives , but we cannot say that that mission - which is a humanitarian mission , a mission that should guarantee a return to civilian life in Albania - should now be blocked .
The aim of that mission should not just be to protect the consignment of humanitarian aid but also to bring the local police forces back into operation via a process of cooperation that is designed to eliminate and disarm the criminal bands and thereby encourage the ability of the independent national Albanian forces to deal with resolving their own problems .
Madam President , as you will have noticed , the last two speakers have given us a glimpse of Italian domestic politics .
I too could point out that a country unable to secure respect for the constitutional state within its own frontiers is perhaps ill-suited to lead this multinational force .
But I say that as a member of the opposition , but having to hear it from influential representatives of the majority , which supports the government that is sending out the mission , is perhaps a little more difficult here in this European Parliament .
I wish to thank Commissioner Van den Broek for being here once again today for issues that fall within his strict area of responsibility , and I hope he understood what I was trying to say yesterday when I referred to the code of conduct on attendance by commissioners .

Madam President , my group will be voting without enthusiasm for this European Parliament resolution on Albania because , as has already been said , the European Union in particular failed completely to prevent and identify the dangers in this whole process of a regression in democracy that we have seen in Albania - even though it seems to me something of an exaggeration to say that four year of free market and democratic freedom have been worse than the 50 years that went before . The European Union has failed completely in terms of a common foreign and security policy .
The Dutch presidency is about to give us a new draft treaty and will - I hope - learn from this and have the resolve to include , in draft at least , something to prevent the European Union taking the kind of approach and attitude which means that we able only to send observers . For the rest , we offload our responsibilities on to institutions which are definitely not meant for that or on to Member States which are then prevailed upon , with great difficulty and although they do not have the necessary resources , to shoulder the whole responsibility themselves .
We are opposed to this and sceptical about the possibility of elections being held in June . Above all , we take the view that this resolution could have contained a reference to a permanent European civilian and military corps able to provide Europe with a genuine common foreign and security policy .
Madam President , Commissioner , as this House debates the situation in Albania , the Italian Chamber of Deputies is preparing to vote on a text , a technical agreement , requiring the government to implement immediately the decision of the United Nations concerning an aid and security mission to Albania in the form of a multinational force under Italian leadership .
That agreement involved a great deal of heart-searching and was made possible by the great sense of responsibility felt by Italy 's centre-right in the face of a majority which has now ceased to exist in our country . Indeed , one element of the latter , the neo-communists , are about to confirm that they will be voting against .
This is a decision of great responsibility , in terms of freedom in Italy , in terms of the nation but also in terms of Europe , since Italy has for the first time been given responsibility for leading an international mission .
While we have to say that it would be unthinkable and unacceptable for two or three thousand Italian soldiers to go and risk their lives in Albania without the backing of a largely united nation conscious that this was a decision that had to be taken - and we welcomed what the Osservatorio romano , an organ of the Holy See , had to say on the subject - we have also firmly to condemn , yet again , the serious failure of Europe to be present and its tardiness to act .
The crisis in Albania has highlighted the need for Europe finally to establish a common foreign and security policy .
It is no longer comprehensible to or tolerable for our own citizens , of whom we are currently asking sacrifices and new taxes to meet the Maastricht criteria , that Europe should not develop the minimum of cohesion needed to send a humanitarian force to a European country in a process of disintegration within a realistic time scale .
Even in these circumstances , however , the diplomatic efforts of some countries have , as they say , been pitted against us : bureaucratic obstacles have been put in the way and meetings that ought to have taken place very quickly deferred .
We can only hope that a solution will finally be found within the Intergovernmental Conference , allowing a Community decision in these areas is able to be taken rapidly and by a majority of the Member States .
Nevertheless , we can detect some positive signs .
Despite all the delays and the more or less disguised attempts at sabotage , a European peace force is about to leave for Albania .
For the first time , this is an entirely European peace force , which is moving on its way without the usually crucial support of the United States .
A further positive element is that Italy is going to be coordinating the mission and that the other European countries participating in the mission have displayed confidence in Italy .
As far as this Italian responsibility is concerned , I wish to stress the contemptible nature of the statements made in Austria by the liberal leader , Haider , who criticized his government not for taking part in the mission but because it had agreed that the Italian contingent should lead it .
Were that racist ranting to be confirmed , it would be of a pair with yesterday 's statement by an Italian undersecretary of state , representing the main party of the left in the government , who had the effrontery and arrogance to assign to the humanitarian assistance and security mission the objective of securing the fall of freely-elected President Berisha .
We are clearly dealing here with schizophrenic and irresponsible attitudes and , perhaps , in some cases , a nostalgia for Enver Hoxha 's barbaric communist regime .
The hope is that Europe and Italy will be able genuinely to contribute here to reestablishing freedom and democracy in an Albania which has experienced such dreadful suffering .
Madam President , I do not want to make any small contribution of my own to turning this into a debate between Italians : the definition of Italian policy it will be a matter for the Italian Chamber of Deputies , as it was , yesterday , for the Senate .
I want to take advantage here of the presence of the President-in-Office and the Commissioner to point to the need to learn the lesson of a number of critical events which led to this crisis .
Commissioner Van den Broek rightly says that it is not for the moment predominantly a crisis , a humanitarian emergency .
It may come to that , as the President-in-Office said , and it may not take long , but it is above all a sociopolitical crisis .
I would add that it is also a major institutional crisis .
But we have to ask ourselves how matters ever got to this state .
And even though I cannot ask the President-in-Office and the Commissioner to state , unequivocally and clearly , their views about who is responsible for bringing us to this state of affairs , I venture to say that we , as the European Union and as the countries of the European Union , have some share of responsibility , by confirming , for instance , almost blindly , that there was election rigging .
We pretended that it was better to accept that outcome of the election , even though we knew that many things had not proceeded properly .
And it was certainly not an acceptable decision - though not , of course , one on which we could intervene - when President Berisha had himself re-elected by a somewhat compliant parliament , and that was probably what sparked it all off .
It was also a mistake to believe the statement given , officially , by the information service , according to which southern Albania had been occupied by armed bands .
Admittedly , there are armed bands and criminals but there is above all violent opposition , of a kind we cannot endorse , to the President for two reasons : his self-election and the financial pyramid crisis .
If then we want to avoid a number of critical events recurring in the future , then we have to take important decisions .
As regards the aid - and I am addressing Commissioner Van den Broek in particular here - we must ensure that the route taken by European Union aid is carefully monitored .
That , clearly , is something we have failed to ensure properly .
As far as the forthcoming deadlines are concerned , Mr President-in-Office , and the elections in particular , I wish to ask you why , even if we have been unable to bring forward joint action as a European Union - and that would certainly have been better - we cannot do so now , making good that absence and supporting the electoral process .
Why can we not have - with the participation of the OSCE and other international bodies , of course - joint action by the European Union to support an electoral process , which ought then to produce elections and a renewed constitution ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , up until now the Council has not decided to undertake joint action on Albania under Article J.3. of the Treaty , but the Commission also has not requested the Council to undertake such action , as it is entitled to do under Article J.8.3. of the Treaty .
What has actually been done ?
Through its Council of Ministers the European Union has merely declared itself to be in agreement with the Security Council resolution and , at the present time , it is true , is backing the initiatives of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
For all their lack of riches , Greece and its people have provided and are continuing to provide humanitarian and other forms of assistance to the people of Albania in their suffering and hardship , and a number of other Member States are doing the same .
But the European Union , which has the capacity to give expression to the common will of the governments and peoples of all 15 Member States , is absent from Albania .
Gentlemen of the Council and the Commission , this Parliament does not know the reasons why you do not want joint action .
The rumours and whisperings in the corridors do not tell us the whole story .
Is it because of indifference or because you cannot agree among yourselves ?
Or could it be that you think that the interests of the European Union are better served by a policy of non-intervention ?
Whatever the reasons they cannot justify the official absence of the Union from the unfolding situation in Albania .
In the present conditions , and bearing in mind the need to secure the prospects for democratization and economic recovery , the presence of the European Union in its own right and its active participation in events are absolutely vital .
In finishing I would like to say to the Italian Members of all the various political groups who are present in the Chamber that Greece has accepted Italian leadership of the force that will go to Albania and that it has confidence in that leadership .
That decision has been supported by both the Greek Government and the Greek opposition .
With the exception of one small political grouping , we in Greece subscribe to a common position in this matter . And I call on everyone on the Italian side to support the initiative .
At this crucial time there must be no backtracking from any quarter because we all have very substantial obligations to Albania and its people .
Madam President , listening to the representatives of the Council and the Commission made me wonder which Council and which Commission they represent .
I got the impression that they were speaking not for Europe but for another continent , and for another Union , and certainly not for the European Union .
They have not even felt the need to apologize or to express contrition for having closed their eyes in order to avoid upsetting their man , Mr Berisha , even though they knew what was boiling up in Albania .
Ever since the last election parody in Albania , Members of this Parliament from all political groups have regularly rung the alarm bells with questions and always the answer has been the same : ' We inform the honourable Member that we will investigate the allegations and inform him of the outcome . ' .
You have never informed us , gentlemen , never .
And by not giving us information in response to our questions you have shown contempt for this Parliament .
The tragic events in Albania have caught you on the hop .
Even now , as you have told us , you are still at the stage of monitoring the situation .
Your rivalries and conflicting interest do not allow you to have a joint policy on Albania and to take joint action in the name of the European Union .
Is it really true , Mr President-in-Office ? Do you now understand that Mr Berisha 's police force requires training ?
Do you really now understand that there is an Albanian mafia and that there is a danger that humanitarian aid will not reach the Albanian people ?
You are being given a final chance to pursue the policy objectives set out in the European Parliament 's resolution .
You are the moral instigators of what has happened in Albania , just as you were the moral instigators of everything that happened in the former Yugoslavia , and it will be the last time that the people of Europe forgive you .
Madam President , in contrast to my group , I have signed and will be voting in my personal capacity for the compromise resolution on Albania , because I approve of what it says and agree that there is an urgent need to send an international humanitarian mission .
The European Union , and Italy in particular , have - in my view - a political and moral duty to help the government of national reconciliation restore a climate of peaceful co-existence and democratic normality to Albania . All of the political forces in Albania , in the majority and in the opposition , including the committees of the south , are asking the United Nations to follow up the international mission that Italy will be coordinating .
To do nothing now in Albania would be a sin of omission through the failure to provide aid , though it is right that Europe should be concerned about the democratic fate of a country which is part of Europe , geographically and politically .
Moreover , the voices raised here too in opposition to the mission , those of my own group , have no immediate valid alternatives to offer , save for general political proposals which do nothing to resolve the short term crisis Albania is experiencing .
In my view , we need to support Prime Minister Fino 's coalition government , in all of its political demands , because today that government is the only body we can talk to that is able to administer Albania . And , in that context , in my opinion , President Berisha would do well to shoulder his responsibilities and make an effective contribution to finding a political solution to the crisis in Albania , particularly by making available his own office in the interest of national reconciliation , to encourage fresh elections .
I have now to direct criticism at the Council and the Commission for being conspicuous by their absence in this crisis , leaving it to Italy to manage the problem alone ; they simply observed the outbreak of the crisis and the flight of the refugees without lifting a finger .
The Commissioner herself , Mrs Bonino , went completely to ground in her own area of responsibility , namely aid to refugees .
I therefore accuse the European Institutions of having remained inactive and having thus betrayed their duty of support to the Italian Government in the difficult crisis in which it is involved .
I hope that a new common foreign and security policy will be able to prevent fresh crises , including through the use simple majority voting .
In the case of Albania , the solution involves sending in immediately the international force that has my support , and I shall be voting for the resolution notwithstanding the view of my group .
Madam President , I would like to begin my contribution by paying tribute to the many very brave men and women in Albania who have risked their lives and their livelihood in order to try to preserve peace , order and decency in that country .
Their bravery deserves our admiration and indeed our support .
We all know that what is in the back of our minds , and what we fear , is that Albania will turn into another Bosnia , and if that happens the whole of the Balkans will explode .
It is in that context that we have to see our debate today .
So while I would pay tribute to the efforts that have been made so far by the Council and the Commission , we have to say that more definitely needs to be done .
I share the concern that has been expressed by some Members today that the multinational protection force is not sufficiently representative .
Too much emphasis is being placed on Italy in a theatre where history should tell us that we ought not to put the Italians into too exposed a position .
There is a danger on all these occasions of the protection force becoming part of the problem rather than part of the solution . That is the risk we are taking by not having a fuller , supported protection force .
If ever there was a time for European solidarity surely it is now . I agree entirely with those who called for joint action in Albania because history has surely taught us that if we turn a blind eye to the Balkans it will damage us all .
We have turned a blind eye to what has gone on in Albania for too long and we are now reaping the consequences .
We must get humanitarian aid , we must get peace restored , we must ensure there are proper elections based on free media and respect for the rule of law .
That is not going to be easy and it is going require far more effort than we have been prepared to put into it up to now .
Madam President , with their statements the Council and the Commission have attempted to feed ' European parliamentary political camomile ' to us and , through us and through the media , to European public opinion . That is an odd sort of thing to say but it needed to be said .
Accept the message , because you cannot run away from it !
We are talking about blatant and naked military intervention in an independent European country .
Intervention aimed at shoring up the corrupt , thieving , mafia-riddled Berisha regime which you have nurtured and succoured and are now intent on sustaining .
Neither you , nor the UN under Anan , nor all the international organizations put together , nor anyone else can deprive the Albanian people , who have decided that enough is enough , of their inalienable right to determine the fate of that man .
You , and with you those who put their names to this resolution , and who make no mention of Berisha and support the military intervention without a murmur , have no right to decide from here , from restful armchairs , to send the sons of the European people to kill or be killed in what could well become a bloodbath , purely for the purpose of enforcing unlawful interests and grabbing spheres of influence .
Because that is what the game is .
So accept the message !
This situation will not die away . Sooner or later it will boil up again and you will discover that you cannot establish real democracy at the point of a multinational gun .
You will just create a ' fast food ' democracy .
A variation on Berisha democracy !
Madam President , anyone following today 's debate will have noted that it has been conducted with cool common sense although , in some cases , not without emotion .
There is absolutely no point , given the present situation in Albania , in moaning about communism and about the successors of communism in Albania , whose part in the proceedings has not been very edifying .
And anyone who still talks about the dubious role of the socialists in Albania should be asking himself whether he is striking the right note .
Because what matters now , as I see it , is that all men of good will should pool all their resources to work to improve conditions in Albania , to work together , and Berisha himself must play a constructive part in this process of reconstruction and do his bit for it .
I should like to emphasize how seriously this House has taken , and still is taking , the debate on the situation in Albania .
I believe the debate , and the joint motion for a resolution , which addresses all the important factors , show that we are prepared to do what is necessary to help support the building of new political and economic structures ; all speakers in this debate have clearly expressed that point of view .
The emphasis is on ' joint ' , because without joint action the task will not be done .
To this extent , I hope that the announcements by the Council and by the Commission were not just empty promises .
Mention was made at the beginning of this debate of the ECU 500 million or so that have found their way to Albania through the PHARE programme .
The Commission will have to ask itself - not today , but sometime - where that money went to .
At any rate , when I was in Albania I saw nothing of any of the projects that were allegedly being aided with that money .
I believe , at the end of the day , the international community and especially the European Union , the OSCE and the International Monetary Fund , now have a duty to support the macroeconomic development in Albania so that people there can once again have a future .
Otherwise , I think , the long-term prospects for that country are poor .
Anyway , we are willing to do our part .
We will be voting for the joint resolution , even though it is not perfect and does not provide an adequate response to the problem facing us .
The problem is one of trust .
It is impossible from here fully to comprehend the depth of mistrust felt by the Albanian people towards , on the one hand , Mr Berisha , and , on the other , towards us and the European Union as a whole .
That mistrust is very understandable .
There are many here who have supported Mr Berisha and who continue to support him , despite the fact that he bears the biggest share of responsibility for the fraudulent elections and the political crisis and for the pyramid-type savings theft and is the main object of suspicion in regard to every attempt to impose irregular solutions on Albania .
He lacks all credibility .
If we want to restore trust , we must do everything we can to bolster the government of national reconciliation and to establish a European Union influence well in advance of elections and during the elections on all matters pertaining to the restoration of democracy . There must be no hint of support for Mr Berisha .
We must allow him to be marginalized by developments .
Lastly , Commissioner , we must ensure that the victims of the pyramid-type savings theft are compensated . You mentioned that last time , but neither you nor the Council have said anything about it today .
And likewise , unfortunately , there is nothing about it in Parliament 's resolution . Without that compensation any political solution will be founded on shaky ground .
In the Belgrade case the European Union sided with the peaceful demonstrators against the Milosevic mayor .
And the mayor fell .
In the case of Bulgaria , it sided with the peaceful demonstrators against the Videnev government .
And the Videnev government was brought down .
It is taking the same sort of stand today on Belarus and Lukashenko .
So we must ask why , even now , there is this support for Berisha and his clique , for the people who are sabotaging the development of democracy in Albania , when the United States , whose lead we generally follow , has already distanced itself from the man ? Why this continued tolerance ?
The Left Group gave a warning about this when the European Union was monitoring the elections , when even the socialist governments were sending their presidents to pin medals on Berisha at the time of the elections .
It gave a warning then and it gives a warning now that , in this political crisis , as Mr Van den Broek has said , we must tackle the political problems first and , above all , neutralize , not for reasons of revenge but for the sake of Albania 's survival , the faction which is undermining the democratic process in Albania , before we do anything whatsoever about sending peace-keeping forces .
It saddens us to see the European Parliament effectively rubber stamping the Council 's positions and displaying such frightening ' savoir vivre ' towards Berisha with this joint resolution , this compromise resolution , rather that trying to give the Council some impetus .
We are requesting that votes be taken on our own amendments which , among other things , call for President Berisha 's resignation . I believe that that would improve the situation in Albania .
Madam President , I just rise , since it is obvious that I have not been here during the whole of the debate , to say that my colleague , Hans van den Broek , expresses his strong regrets at the fact that he unavoidably had to leave the Chamber early in order to catch an aeroplane .
Clearly , that would not have been his wish in any other circumstances .
He has also asked me to say that if there are specific questions of detail or information arising out of the proceedings of the debate , to which he will obviously pay close attention , he will be happy to provide answers to those specific questions in writing .
Madam President , I think that we have an obligation to the voters of Europe not to allow false impressions to be created .
It is very important that we in this House should make clear that it is a mistake to think that we did not know that the elections were fraudulent .
We did know that the elections were fraudulent and we did nothing about it .
Secondly , it is not correct that we considered public order to be the highest priority , because if we had really wanted to give priority to public order we would have disarmed and disbanded the secret police .
The people of Albania have taken up arms because we let them down and did nothing .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled under rule 37 , paragraph 2 , of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at noon .
Situation in Hong Kong
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Hong Kong .
Madam President , I am grateful to you and to Parliament for asking me to speak today on Hong Kong .
In less than twelve weeks from now Hong Kong will revert to the People 's Republic of China .
The Council views the future of Hong Kong with confidence and is sure that the close relations between the United Kingdom and the People 's Republic of China will guarantee a smooth hand-over of power .
There is much to be gained from a smooth hand-over of Hong Kong .
What happens to Hong Kong is relevant to all the trading nations , including the European Union 's Member States , whose trade with Hong Kong totalled some 43 billion ECU in 1996 .
Hong Kong is of vital importance as a gateway to China and a financial and commercial centre for the whole of the Asian region .
But we must never forget that the future of Hong Kong is also the future of six million Hong Kong residents who have been promised that they can continue their present lifestyle for the next fifty years .
The two parties involved in the hand-over , the United Kingdom and the People 's Republic of China , have negotiated extensively and will continue to do so over the next four months and thereafter as well to ensure that the hand-over is smooth .
Many aspects of the transition have already been successfully debated and worked out , for example continuity in Hong Kong 's civil service .
The Council hopes that the remaining four months will see the successful resolution through debate of the remaining issues involved in the hand-over .
In recent months a number of events have occurred which are important to the future of Hong Kong .
In December last China set up a provisional legislative body , the so-called Provisional Legislature , which after 1 July will take over the duties of the present Legislative Council , Legco .
The Council hopes that this Provisional Legislature will not hamper a smooth hand-over and the future development of Hong Kong .
The Council assumes that the Provisional Legislature will be replaced as soon as possible after the transfer of sovereignty by a permanent legislature to be elected in accordance with the principles laid down in the Basic Law .
Mr Tung Chi Wa has been appointed as future Chief Executive and has chosen his future council members .
The Council welcomes the appointment of Mr Tung which removes a point of uncertainty concerning the hand-over .
From Tung 's choice of top officials and the members of the Executive Council it is clear that he is resolved to ensure a maximum of continuity in the machinery of officialdom , which the Council welcomes .
The death of Mr Deng Xiao Ping , architect of the one country , two systems principle , is not expected to prompt any change in China 's policy towards Hong Kong .
It is now time to look to the future and trust the Government of the People 's Republic to apply the principle of one country , two systems after 1 July as promised .
A prosperous and stable Special Administrative Region , the SARHK - my apologies for this acronym , but I was not the one who thought it up - is doubtless what the Chinese Government wants too .
Last December 's European Council in Dublin once again confirmed the great importance which the European Union attaches to future peace and prosperity of Hong Kong as a special administrative region of the People 's Republic of China , together with the European Union 's wish to do everything possible to assist a smooth transition .
We are working energetically to continue our ties with the SARHK in the World Trade Organization and in other instances where Hong Kong can act independently by virtue of its Basic Law .
The Council has asked the Commission to put forward proposals during 1997 to secure the best possible guarantee of close economic cooperation with Hong Kong .
The Dublin summit also stressed its full support for the special status of the SARHK and its citizens in every respect , including their right to representative democratic institutions of the kind already in place .
Full implementation of the Joint Declaration is the best guarantee that Hong Kong will remain a success and that its people can continue living the lives to which they are accustomed .
The Council will thus watch carefully to ensure that the terms of the Joint Declaration , an internationally binding treaty between the United Kingdom and the People 's Republic of China , are adhered to .
To conclude , many of the requirements for Hong Kong 's continued success have already been met .
The economy is healthy and people appear to be facing the future with confidence .
But unavoidably there are also concerns and anxieties at this time .
That is normal in times of change .
Strikingly , it is mostly people outside Hong Kong who are concerned , whilst most of the citizens of Hong Kong itself seem generally more optimistic about the future .
The European Council in Dublin expressed its support for Hong Kong .
The Council will monitor developments up to the time of the hand-over of sovereignty and afterwards too , when China shapes its policy of one country , two systems , in what will then be known as the Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong .
The Council has faith in Hong Kong 's future and will work for close cooperation in every possible area .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes this opportunity to discuss Hong Kong and I am grateful to Parliament for providing this facility by tabling these motions today .
My references on this occasion will be only to Hong Kong but the House can be assured that the policy approach that I spell out here will be sustained also in the case of Macao which naturally , as time goes by , will be receiving more extensive treatment both in this House and elsewhere .
With the transfer of Hong Kong 's sovereignty - as Mr Patijn has just said - just twelve weeks away , this debate is obviously timely but it is also a good moment to look ahead beyond the handover on 1 July and to reflect on how our relations with Hong Kong as a special administrative region of China might evolve in the future .
We believe that Hong Kong will play an important and positive role in our relations with China in the decades ahead .
As the House will know , over recent years the European Union has taken every opportunity to stress the importance it attaches to the future of Hong Kong .
The European Council has repeatedly emphasized the Union 's strong stake in Hong Kong 's future peace and prosperity .
The European Union 's economic interests in Hong Kong are both large in scale and deep-rooted .
Hong Kong is our tenth-largest trading partner with over 100 European Union financial services companies and about 250 regional headquarters of European Union companies settled there .
But our interests are not only economic and commercial .
More Europeans live in Hong Kong than in any other city in Asia and Hong Kong 's spirit of openness obviously means that we have many shared values .
So , Hong Kong is and should remain one of our main Asian partners .
In the coming weeks therefore , the Commission will bring forward a communication , which will also be transmitted to Parliament , looking ahead at our future relations with Hong Kong in a comprehensive fashion .
The Commission believes that effective implementation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration and full observance of the Basic Law is the best way to protect the European Union 's very real interests in Hong Kong , and of great importance to preserve the well-being of the people of Hong Kong .
We give this clear message to the government of the People 's Republic of China at every opportunity .
The effective application of the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law will mean that Hong Kong as a special administrative region of China , enjoys a high degree of autonomy , not only in economic affairs but in administration , finance and the legal system .
The Declaration and Basic Law also confirm the essential core freedoms in Hong Kong , including freedom of speech , of assembly , of association and of religion in practice and belief .
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Convenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights will continue to apply to Hong Kong .
Of course for reasons that are very obvious there has been much concerned speculation about the continuance of these arrangements in the future .
The arrangements are , however , laid out very specifically in the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law and this must be regarded as the fundamental guarantee for the people of Hong Kong .
It is clearly something which we will be seeking to monitor closely in the years to come and the Commission expects the existing common foreign and security policy mechanisms to give regular consideration to Hong Kong since the CFSP instruments are clearly there to be used .
The depth of the European , United States , Japanese and other interests in Hong Kong is not the only reason to have confidence that Hong Kong will continue to be an important partner to the international community .
The Joint Declaration is an international agreement deposited in the United Nations but , more than that , the international dimension is central to the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law .
Hong Kong will continue to be a distinct voice as a separate member of numerous international organizations and will be able to sign international agreements in areas within the Hong Kong SAR 's autonomous responsibility .
In the years to come we will be expecting Hong Kong to maintain its status as an active and autonomous partner in economic affairs and in the other policy areas reserved for the SAR .
I emphasize that it is in the interests of everyone outside and inside China to maintain international confidence in Hong Kong .
Uncertainty about the legislative process and about the legal system in Hong Kong can only be harmful to that confidence .
That is why we are concerned about some developments in recent months relating to the Legislative Council and to civil liberties legislation .
This is a sensitive time and it is very important that reassurances are given to the people of Hong Kong and to the international community about the preservation of democracy , civil liberties and the rule of law .
A clear announcement that elections for a new Legislative Council elected on a free and fair basis will definitely take place soon after the handover would be a clear and important reassurance about Hong Kong 's future stability .
The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region , as provided for in the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law will , obviously , be unique but that very uniqueness makes it doubly important that people in Hong Kong , in the rest of China and in the international community give the Hong Kong SAR a chance to work as intended .
I assure the House firmly that Hong Kong will not slip from our sights in the Commission .
On the contrary , as we will propose in the forthcoming communication , we can play our part in maintaining Hong Kong 's traditions of openness and internationalism first by following the situation there very closely and secondly by developing contacts further .
We therefore intend to monitor and to report regularly on all aspects of Hong Kong life and I can certainly confirm that this will include an annual formal report to the Council and to Parliament on all questions relevant to EU-Hong Kong relations , not least political and commercial matters , human rights and cooperation .
In addition , we in the Commission intend to build on the progress made in recent years in intensifying ties with Hong Kong , as so many individual European citizens whether students , visitors or businessmen - and many others , including this Parliament , have done .
Since 1993 our office in Hong Kong has played a critical role in developing our relations with the area and we attach great importance to its role as an independent office providing a direct link with Brussels .
That office will continue to perform this function in the future .
We will work to ensure that this intensification of relations continues and we look forward to the active employment of the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law and the further evolution of our relations with Hong Kong in the years to come .
Mr President , could I thank the Commission and the Council for the clarity of their statements and could I also begin by making clear what this debate is not about .
It is not about China .
After 1 July Hong Kong will be governed under the principle of one country , two systems , and logically therefore Hong Kong has to be discussed in its own right and must not be used by people as a sort of Trojan horse to discuss and criticize China .
We have requested this debate for two particular reasons which we wish to highlight .
Firstly , after 1 July Hong Kong will no longer be a solely British issue , it will become a concern for the whole of the European Union .
And secondly , as has been said particularly by Commissioner Kinnock , a peaceful transition of Hong Kong is in the interests of all concerned .
Hong Kong is the world 's eighth largest trading entity ; it is the regional harbour for south-east Asia ; it is the gateway to trade with China and as such is a major motor of economic growth in the world .
A successful transition will benefit us all .
An unsuccessful transition will equally damage us all .
A mishandled transition will , in particular , hamper important political developments in the region - including , it seems to me , China 's eventual membership of the WTO , which we all hope will happen sooner rather than later .
Of course there is no reason , as has been said by the Council and the Commission , why the transition should not go well .
The Chinese Government has given a clear commitment to uphold the Basic Law and the Joint Declaration , and I would certainly not wish to question the sincerity of that commitment .
Furthermore , the decision to maintain in place the existing Chinese civil servants in Hong Kong is an important vote of confidence in the area , particularly given the high quality of the individuals concerned .
There are of course one or two areas of concern .
The setting up of the provisional legislature was at worst illegal , as the governor claims , or at best unwise , unjustified and unnecessary , as the Americans have claimed .
The intention to repeal or to amend the Bill of Rights Ordinance - which includes provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights - along with the Societies Ordinance - which was aimed after all at dealing with the Triads - as well as the Public Order Ordinance which deals with meetings and demonstrations must cause us some concern about the future of human rights in Hong Kong .
Furthermore , the way these measures are being proposed by a preparatory committee meeting in secret gives us no confidence for the future .
As the chairman of the Hong Kong bar association recently wrote , the rule of law requires that the process of making and repealing law is open , reasoned and in accordance with the law .
I do not believe these proposals match that requirement and therefore it is important , as Commissioner Kinnock has indicated , that elections for a new Legislative Council are held as soon as possible .
Article 70 of the Basic Law says that these elections should be held within three months of the dissolution of the existing Legislative Council .
Given that it will be dissolved at midnight on 1 July - or one minute past midnight on 1 July - then these elections should be held this year and not next year as some in Hong Kong have claimed .
The rule of law of course is vital for the future , and yet a Chinese official commenting on the provisional legislature says it exists under a legal system different from that of the British Hong Kong Legislative Council .
However , the continuing application of Hong Kong 's legal system has been promised in every detail and therefore we must demand that the law is applied consistently , in accordance with the Basic Law .
When I was in Hong Kong a number of people observed to me that people involved in cases of litigation were asking for postponement of their cases to after 1 July , implying that they might be getting special favours after that date .
We must not allow this to happen .
There has to be respect for the rule of law .
Similarly Mr Tung told me in conversation that he does not want to see foreign interference in Hong Kong political activity .
I would agree with that .
After all I have said that Hong Kong millionaires should not subsidize the British Conservative Party as they have been doing up to now !
But there is a question about how far this law goes .
Does it include all political activity , in which case trade unions will not be allowed to participate in the international fora , nor with human rights groups .
The best guarantee of human rights is the ability of people to cooperate at an international level .
It is therefore vital that we get a message across today that human rights are not some add-on extra , they are an essential prerequisite of a modern economy .
You cannot have economic freedom without political freedom .
That is why it is important that the Council of Ministers speaks with one voice on this issue - not as it has done on some other issues recently - and makes it clear that we are committed to ensuring the future prosperity of Hong Kong .
That is why I welcome Commissioner Kinnock 's statement that the Commission will monitor the transition in all its formats .
That way we can ensure that all of us benefit from the continuing prosperity in Hong Kong .
Thank you Mr President . I do not want to spoil the air of unity about this debate , because I know that most of us agree with the resolution tabled before us .
I would , however , only point out to the House that talking about China gives some difficulties to Members of the Party of European Socialists since I understand that the Chinese Communist Party is a fraternal organization of the PSOE .
I would sincerely question why Hong Kong millionaires have not given any money to ' New Labour ' , but I think the answer speaks for itself .
I wanted to thank the Council and the Commission for their remarks .
The Council might have had its statement written in Paris : the optimistic tone regarding China 's intentions seemed to have been written in French .
The French , I note , are currently in Beijing seeking an end to the EU arms embargo , and I want to thank the presidency for the efforts they have been making to try and get a resolution on human rights in Geneva .
This , I think , will be the European Union sticking to its guns , not trying to sell them to Beijing .
Thanks also to the Commission for a very comprehensive statement which goes a long way to reassuring us that at least the Commission is going to pay some regard to the situation in Hong Kong after the handover .
It is of course true that Hong Kong is of great importance economically to the European Union .
The Commission has already spelt out some aspects of this but I would like to say that there are 45 , 000 European citizens in Hong Kong ; that the European Union is its third largest trading partner after China and the USA ; that Hong Kong is the European Union 's twelfth largest trading partner in the world ; and that our exports to Hong Kong amount to about ECU 2 , 000 per head in Hong Kong , whereas Australia takes only ECU 400 and Japan ECU 200 .
Hong Kong has of course been an entrepôt for exports to mainland China for generations but recently , since the reforms in mainland China in 1978 , these have risen about 500 % .
There are , as the Commissioner remarked , many European companies which have their headquarters in Hong Kong and there are 44 Hong Kong based banks incorporated in the European Union itself .
So that is some idea of the importance of this territory to us in Europe , not just to the British but to Europeans as a whole .
Might I add that Hong Kong with a population of 6 million produces about 23 % of the wealth of China as a whole and currently enjoys 100 % democracy .
I am reassured that the Commission is going to monitor in particular the political and social developments in Hong Kong after the election and I join with Mr Titley in making the demand that there should be free and fair elections , based on adult universal suffrage , within three months of the hand-over on 1 July .
This , I think , is the most essential of the rightful demands the international community has to make of China when it takes over this territory .
I myself do not share the unbounded optimism either of the Council or of some other commentators .
We need to be very vigilant , and this Parliament as a whole , I hope , will be so .
Mr President , it seems to me that the fragile promises made by China are very gradually being broken ; whatever Mr Titley may say , Hong Kong 's problem is in fact China , and that cannot be left out of account .
The agreements signed by this major trading partner of many Member States of the European Union are also being broken , given that , according to the new Chinese leadership in Hong Kong , the Legislative Council democratically elected in September 1995 is going to be dissolved , the laws that provide for and safeguard the freedom of the press and the freedom of association are going to be repealed , associations are no longer going to have the right to maintain links with foreign organizations and there will be restrictions on the right of assembly and expression .
If we do not need to be concerned about China , Mr Titley , then I do not know what else we should be concerned about .
I am also , plainly , addressing the Council which has demonstrated an optimism that I consider unjustified in view of the current situation .
I therefore believe that the commitment entered into here by Commissioner Kinnock to ensure that the Commission is able continuously and constantly to monitor the situation in Hong Kong is an important one but it is not enough .
We are demanding that by the end of May there should be a report back to the European Parliament on the human and civil rights situation ; we are calling upon the Commission to increase its own diplomatic representation in Hong Kong and for the situation to be closely monitored .
Mr President , it is 13 years since the signing of the Sino-British Joint Declaration ; that is 13 years of the UK telling its European partners : ' Have no fear , Hong Kong is safe in our hands . ' There is now fewer than 13 weeks until Hong Kong becomes a Special Administrative Region of the People 's Republic of China ; fewer than 13 weeks for Europe to make up its mind on how to build a coherent common position on Hong Kong and how to deal with unfinished bad business .
The President-in-Office spoke of the importance of Hong Kong to business .
I would like to tell him that bad business for democracy is bad business for business .
His statement to me seemed not to be written so much in Paris as in the hallowed halls of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London .
My interest is not just in business , it is in people .
The President 's colleague , Mr Van Mierlo , had to write a letter to his colleagues ten days ago about Europe 's failure to agree a common motion on China at the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
If we are having a problem with human rights for 1.5 billion people , what hope is there for the human rights of 6 million in Hong Kong ?
If there is one area where European countries could benefit from standing foursquare behind the European flag , it is on relations with China .
China has announced its intentions to repeal parts of the Bill of Rights Ordinance and 25 other ordinances and to abolish the directly elected legislative Council .
Just last month I went with a group of other Members of this House to Hong Kong , and I can tell the President-in-Office that the fear is not mainly from the outside , the fear is in Hong Kong .
I hope that the Council will join with the United Kingdom in seeking referral of the question of abolition of Legco to the International Court of Justice .
When we were there we met the Chief-Executive-designate , Mr Tung .
He appears to be a good man and he is trying to do a difficult job to the best of his abilities .
But if , when he talks of traditional Chinese values , it turns out to be the same as the Asian values practised elsewhere in Asia or worse , as the famille-patrie-travail once advocated in Europe then the liberal and democratic forces , whom we also met in Hong Kong , will face a daunting task and they will need our continued help .
In conclusion , Liberal Democrats in this Parliament want Europe to have new watchwords on Hong Kong : vigilance , active assistance and zero tolerance .
China is the world 's major totalitarian state .
Let us coax it into democracy and liberty .
In the latest issue of the Hong Kong Human Rights ' Monitor News Letter it is possible to read the following : ' History will judge Britain poorly for holding the Hong Kong people back from political life ' .
I think we can summarise the Hong Kong problem by saying that it was created by Great Britain but is being exploited by China .
Unfortunately the introduction of democracy in Hong Kong did not start until after the Chinese-British agreement in 1984 .
This is precisely why China maintains that Governor Patten 's democratic reforms are against the agreement .
But it is obvious that democracy and human rights have an intrinsic moral and political value which must carry more weight than international agreements which have been entered into over the heads of the people concerned .
Of course there are some positive features in the Chinese attitude which have also been noted in the common resolution .
But there is far more to be concerned about .
I agree therefore with those speakers who are concerned that the Council representative seems so unconcerned about the process which is emerging as the transfer of Hong Kong to Chinese rule .
There is every reason to emphasise strongly the need for continuous monitoring of the events in Hong Kong and to be prepared for action on the part of the Union .
Mr President , my colleague , Mr Titley , is absolutely right when he warns people not to use Hong Kong and Hong Kong human rights as a stick to beat China .
People who do so do not help Hong Kong .
However , he is fundamentally wrong when he says this debate is not about China .
The whole nature of the problem , all the difficulties that we have with Hong Kong are based on the difficulties Britain has handing over its last remnants of empire and on the very strong sense of hurt pride and , indeed , humiliation that China feels in having ceded territory to my country in the past .
I have been listening to Chinese politicians for the past 13 years and that tone of deep resentment is either on the surface or very shallowly beneath the surface .
It is interesting - as an aside - to note that that does not exist with Portugal and Macao .
But none the less that resentment is there .
There are some problems now in coming to terms with that , but it has spilled over into attacks on Governor Patten 's reforms .
The argument that they are belated seems to me misguided .
Once democracy is introduced , it is introduced .
It may be a good debating point to say that it is belated , but that really does not have much foundation .
We must understand that those reforms brought in by Governor Patten now have broad support .
That is the key point .
The Chinese seem unable to grasp the essential point , pointed out by Mr Watts and others , that it is not simply a money-making city ; its economic welfare depends on the wellbeing of its citizens , and that point has yet to be grasped .
Britain 's rule will end .
Something called Europe can provide - to use Hong Kong parlance - the ' through train ' to continue interest .
Europe provides a convenient fiction for us to continue a dialogue with the Chinese , free from the colonial past and the colonial resentment .
I just have two further points .
One is specifically to the Council : it must make rapid progress on allowing the SAR passport-holders visa-free access throughout the 15 Member States .
Secondly , to the Commission : I welcome Mr Kinnock 's statement .
However , can we press the Commission to draw up a trade and cooperation agreement with the SAR of Hong Kong as soon as possible ?
Mr President , systematic abuse and denial of human rights continues in mainland China , yet the Western world remains embarrassingly silent .
Regrettably the reason is patently obvious : commercial interests are dictating the policy towards China in both the United States and many European Member States .
It would seem they would prefer to forget the events in Tiananmen Square and yet at the same time they will protest loud and long about the denial of democracy and human rights in other parts of the world with which they have no significant trade .
I believe this hypocrisy must stop , and must stop now .
Events in Hong Kong after the hand-over in July later this year will be pivotal and revealing as to the role that mainland China intends to play in the region .
China has given undertakings in the Sino-British Declaration that the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region will enjoy a high degree of autonomy , except for foreign and defence affairs .
The European Union must ensure that these international commitments are fulfilled .
In that sense I welcome the statement of the Commission , although I am concerned about the comments of the Council .
The dissolution of the Hong Kong Legislative Council is an ominous sign , as is the stated intention to restrict freedom of assembly and expression and to alter the composition of the island 's civil service .
The European Parliament should work closely with the US Congress to stiffen the backbone and resolve both of the European governments and of the current US administration .
We should also pave the way for the immediate introduction of trade and other economic sanctions in the event of China reneging on its promises .
I believe my colleagues are wrong when they say we should not use this as a debate on the role of China .
The European Parliament should use this debate to make a statement and to send a message to mainland China , saying where the European Union stands .
If the European Union is to be a leading player in international affairs , it must command respect .
It can only do so by putting principle before expediency and human rights before commercial interests .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for their statements .
On 1 July after 150 years of British rule Hong Kong will be handed over the Chinese People 's Republic .
Hong Kong and its people have succeeded in turning the territory into a vibrant economy of world class standards .
As has been noted , it is the eighth largest trading nation in the world and has the world 's largest container port .
Economic growth stands at over 5 % while unemployment is around 2 % .
Apart from Hong Kong 's economic success , the territory has a reputation for a fair legal system and respect for individual human rights .
But there are worrying signs that both Hong Kong 's economic success and its political and civil freedoms could be put at risk after the hand-over on 1 July .
The provisional legislature appointed by Beijing should not become a permanent puppet legislature .
When the existing Legislative Council is abolished new elections must be held within a matter of months as both Mr Titley and Commissioner Kinnock have indicated .

Nor should the Chief Executive C. H. Tung allow any erosion of Hong Kong 's Bill of Rights or Societies ' and Public Order Ordinances .
Freedom of association , expression and of the press must be maintained .
Indeed this is written into the Joint Declaration and Basic Law which guarantee the continuance of Hong Kong 's existing way of life for at least 50 years .
China must deliver on Deng Xiaoping 's promise of one country , two systems .
Political and civil freedom , as has been mentioned , cannot be separated from economic success .
While I welcome China 's recent announcement that it would sign the UN 's International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , it should also be pressed to sign the UN Convention on Political and Civil Rights .
In any event the EU should not let up on criticizing human rights abuses in China and it should monitor developments in Hong Kong closely over the coming months and years .
Can I also add that attention should also be paid to the plight of refugees in Hong Kong and I hope that this question is settled swiftly .
In conclusion China should be told the EU is watching and , despite recent wobbles on human rights , will take effective action if human rights and international agreements are violated in Hong Kong .
Mr President , I commend Members of the House strongly on the effectiveness and perception they showed in the course of this debate and say also , as I hope they will have gathered from their previous contact with the Commission , first that many of the concerns that have been registered about current and future conditions are shared by the Commission and secondly that we wish , in exactly the constructive spirit that honourable Members suggested , to pursue our future relations with Hong Kong and , for that matter , the People 's Republic of China on the basis of cooperation , certainly , but vigilance too .
I would like to respond very briefly to specific points made by honourable Members .
In response to Mr Caccavale 's desire for a report from the Commission on civil and human rights to be produced before the end of May , the fact is that over that period we will be producing our comprehensive communication on the approach to the issues relating to Hong Kong .
I hope that will provide him with the opportunity to consider policy and enable him to make the responses that he wants in the context of that communication .
So far as that is concerned , I would respond to Mr Hindley 's very proper point relating to a trade and cooperation agreement with Hong Kong by saying that , in the communication that I have mentioned , consideration will be given to the various options for institutionalizing commercial relations between the European Union and the Special Administrative Region .
So , hopefully , in the context of that communication , some of the points raised by honourable Members today , and I know elsewhere , can get a tangible and practical response .


I must say that Mr Titley , Mr Truscott , Mr Brinkhorst and others were absolutely correct to draw attention to the interdependence between liberty and the development of a modern industrial state .
Mr Watson put the point succinctly but forcefully too .
There have been too many instances where societies developing out of a command economy and away from an authoritarian state have not recognized the link between economic and political freedoms and have consequently collapsed under the weight of their own paradoxes .
Hopefully the People 's Republic of China will realize that is almost an inescapable fate unless the development takes an appropriate form on both fronts - cultural and political , as well as economic and commercial .
The consequences of recognizing that will be beneficial not only for that country and for Hong Kong but for the world in general including the European Union .
On the visa point raised by Mr Brinkhorst , I would conclude by saying that the decision about whether to grant visa-free access obviously lies with Member States , as I am sure the honourable Member knows .
But the Commission believes that there are good reasons for all Member States to give serious and sympathetic consideration to granting visa-free access .
The benefits which easy travel gives to developing economic and other contacts , and the importance of demonstrating confidence in Hong Kong 's future , suggest that freer access to the European Union would be in the interests of both the EU and Hong Kong .
At any rate it would seem appropriate for the purposes of the common visa list to continue to treat Hong Kong , as now , on its own merits .
I look forward to the further debate that will come as a consequence of the publication of the Commission 's communication and I am sure that at that time and for many years in the future honourable Members , like the Commission , will sustain a close and vigilant interest in the affairs of Hong Kong .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Petrol and diesel quality - motor vehicle emissions - atmospheric emissions - fuel economy
The next item is the joint debate on the following four reports on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection :
A4-0096 / 97 by Mr Mamère , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending Council Directive 93 / 12 / EEC ( COM ( 96 ) 0248 - C4-0462 / 96-96 / 0163 ( COD ) ) ; -A4-0116 / 97 by Mr Lange , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles and amending Council Directives 70 / 156 / EEC and 70 / 220 / EEC ( COM ( 96 ) 0248 - C4-0463 / 96 - COM ( 97 ) 0077 - C4-0091 / 97-96 / 0164 ( COD ) ) ; -A4-0099 / 97 by Mr Eisma , on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on a future strategy for the control of atmospheric emissions from road transport taking into account the results from the Auto / Oil Programme ( COM ( 96 ) 0248 - C4-0492 / 96 ) ; -A4-0117 / 97 by Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and improve fuel economy ( COM ( 95 ) 0689 - C4-0015 / 96 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the honour of presenting my report on fuel quality , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , in the framework of the codecision procedure .
In presenting this report , I would first like to mention the criticisms which can be made of the studies the Commission has presented on the Auto / Oil directive .
I think Auto / Oil can be described as more of a political study than a technical one .
Let us say there has been an attempt to put technical make-up on the political face .
The study was carried out under the very clear influence of industrial groups , car manufacturers and oil refiners , and , as such , there cannot be much technical confidence in the measures proposed in it .
So there is very strong influence from pressure groups and also a distinct lack of transparency - if the results had been as precise as they would have us believe , the automobile groups , the motor manufacturers and the oil companies would not be so divided about the results of this study . Then there are technical errors : like measuring air quality over 4 square kilometres , in complete contradiction to a 1985 directive which required these measurements to be taken in the most affected areas .
Auto / Oil establishes a target for air quality in 2010 .
We think this is too late and we believe this study and this target favour one of two industrial groups .
They favour the motor industry , because we know it takes about fifteen years to renew the vehicles in circulation .
Now it is thirteen years from 1997 to 2010 .
So we think balance should be reestablished and we will not really be fighting air pollution and therefore we will not be improving the quality of human health unless we base ourselves on guidelines and values that are much more prescriptive and much more constraining , both for oil , petrol and diesel and for cars .
That is the line taken in the reports before you today .
So I say that the economic basis of this Auto / Oil study is clearly geared to and principally serves the interests of the industrialists .
It is hard to see how it serves the interests of consumers , who were not consulted even though they have a strong interest in the quality of the product served to them from the pumps , every day and across the whole of Europe .
The improvements I propose essentially bear on the fact that standards must be set , not targets , and that these standards must be set for 2000 and 2005 .
This does not mean that we are opposed to the Auto / Oil II programme ; it means that it must take account of studies covering other sectors , which I will mention to you now .
So , taking account of the fact that the Auto / Oil Directive proposes abandoning leaded petrol as from 2000 , we propose the distribution through the existing network of two different qualities of diesel : one containing 50 or 30 ppm of sulphur , and attracting tax incentives from governments - which is entirely possible - and a ' dirty ' one , at 100 ppm . But at the same time a standard sulphur content of 30 ppm for diesel should be set for 2005 .
I can hear the wails from the oil refiners ' pressure group - and I know it is knocking on the doors of all my colleagues - insisting that this will be impossible to achieve .
That assertion is false .
We know that the refiners already have refineries producing clean diesel , but not for Europe . For the United States and Japan .
Why should Europe not benefit from this quality of diesel ?
And when I propose that there should be these two types of diesel , it is precisely to give the refiners time - five years - to make the necessary investment to modernize their refineries so that they can supply us with diesel which is clean and respects our health .
What is seriously lacking from the directive we have been presented with is what we ecologists call the internalization of costs .
All the arguments are built around one idea , the idea of cost-effectiveness .
But we should also be able to talk about cost-benefit .
When an investment is made its impact on the health economy must also be calculated , in terms of fewer people ill , fewer people with lung disease , fewer people in receipt of social security and less spending on health .
I would like to thank all those colleagues whose amendments have improved my text .
Mr President , I have no more time - it has already run out - so I cannot go through all the amendments , but the parliamentary report of proceedings will show which I accept and which I reject .
' With minor modifications our new engines can easily comply with Euro III , and further changes will bring them up to Euro IV by the year 2005 . '
That was Alfa Romeo 's engine designer .
' A 50 kg weight saving and exhaust levels which are 50 % below the EU thresholds applicable at present and so within touching distance of Euro IV for 2005 . ' That was the designer of the new Mercedes engines .
Mr President , Commissioners , I believe these two quotes very clearly illustrate what is now technologically feasible in the European car industry .
And I believe it would be wrong simply to carry on as we are , because we would then be risking the competitive advantage the car industry derives from high technology and exhaust thresholds .
There can be no doubt about it : if we part company with US legislation we shall be the losers , and we shall make things easier for our competitors outside Europe .
So what we need are ambitious targets which will be binding on the whole of Europe , in the interests of the car industry and the consumer .
Most of all , though , of course , we need them in the interests of our environment .
The studies carried out in connection with the auto-oil programme showed that the ozone problems cannot be adequately tackled with the proposed package of measures .
No , we have to do more , and we can do more .
Mr Mamère has already pointed out certain weaknesses in the programme , and I don 't want to go over that again in detail .
I think the Committee on the Environment was actually right to suggest essential improvements to the Commission 's proposal , though without departing from the original approach .
We do want to adopt a cost-effective , practical approach here , not build castles in the air .
The proposal by the Committee on the Environment contains 10 essential improvements , first - Mr Mamère - improving the fuels , because we know that top-quality fuels have direct consequences for automotive engineering and indeed for all those involved .
For example , a diesel car using the diesel fuel recommended by the Commission emits 25 % more particles of pollutants by comparison with a diesel fuel which is already on the Swedish market and has a much lower sulphur content .
In view of this situation , and with particular regard to the air quality in cities like Athens and Madrid , we need better quality fuel for all vehicles , new or old .
We need them , too , in order to develop a high-level engine technology especially as regards the reduction of nitrogen oxides - and this cannot be achieved with sulphur as proposed by the Commission .
We also need binding limits for the years 2000 and 2005 , because we have an internal market .
We want certainty for the investors , for the environment and for the consumer , so merely indicative values are no help at all .
We also know that tax incentives ultimately get things done , and that manufacturers are working towards Euro IV .
This is clearly apparent in Germany , where initial efforts are already being made to license Euro III vehicles now .
Another important point is ensuring durability .
What we need here is an on-board diagnostic system which alerts the driver to any fault in the exhaust system .
And we need this for both petrol and diesel engines .
It is precisely when engines are claimed to be environment-friendly because they consume less fuel that we cannot make any exceptions .
But this on-board system has to be capable of being serviced not only by franchised workshops but also by small garages , automobile clubs and technical inspection facilities .
So repair information must be readily accessible .
We also need a realistic test .
What use is it if a car produces outstanding figures when tested at 20 degrees ?
When we leave home tomorrow - we all know about this , the Commissioners know and even the people in Greece know - the engine temperature may be only 4 degrees .
And what happens to the exhaust performance then ?
Tests have shown that cars which comply with very strict values at 20 degrees fail to do so at 8 degrees and then emit more than 20 times as much pollution .
So we do need a cold-start test as part of this package .
And we need in-service tests , a very costeffective measure because manufacturers are naturally keen not to become entangled in recalls .
Not everyone , admittedly , is enthusiastic about these proposals .
I have heard that some car manufacturers are unenthusiastic , and that the oil industry is too .
They have even written me very touching letters about it .
But when I read ' BP - profits up by over 10 % ' , ' AGIP - record profits for petroleum company ' , ' ELF - profits up 10 billion francs ' , then I find the oil industry 's investment problems difficult to follow .
In any case , the five major European environmental organizations and 40 million motorists who are members of associations like the ADAC , the RAC , etc. are on our side .
But , to ensure that we have access to independent results , we commissioned a study from STOA which examined the situation in the most heavily polluted city , Athens , and confirmed Parliament 's views .
I believe that , overall , there is nothing immoral about the proposal I am making to the Commission and the Council .
I ask them to join us in giving the green light to environmentally compatible cars !
Because if we are going to be dependent on cars for our mobility for the foreseeable future , then those cars must be as environmentally compatible as we can possibly make them !
It is beautiful weather this week in Strasbourg , Mr President .
Sun , hardly any wind and pretty fair temperatures .
One ought to be able to enjoy it and if you go into the park opposite it looks as if people are indeed enjoying the lovely weather .
But if we look out from the lofty vantage point of our offices over the city of Strasbourg , we see a brownish haze hanging over that beautiful city .
Measurements of air quality in the city tell us that the air is seriously polluted on days like this .
And I am talking just of Strasbourg , not of Milan , Amsterdam , The Hague or Paris where it is much , much worse .
That is why we are debating this subject here today .
To ensure that by the reference year of 2010 this brown haze above our cities of Europe has disappeared and to ensure , for example , that the spire of Strasbourg 's cathedral can one more reach up into a truly blue sky .
Obviously , Mr President , that aim will not be achieved easily .
The Commission has taken a welcome step in the right direction , I have to say , but it has not stretched itself sufficiently and gone far enough .
One important reason for this is that right from the start the Commission has mistakenly based itself on the principle of cost-effectiveness rather than true cost-benefit analysis .
Precisely because most of the cost calculations came from industry itself , which after all has an interest in costs being high , measures which might have been farther-reaching have from the beginning been ignored .
The Commission has also omitted to take into account in its cost estimates the external costs of motor vehicle transport .
As recently as 1991 the Commission put the cost of car transport to society at 200 billion ECU a year .
These 200 billion ECU are incurred by the damage which motor traffic causes to agriculture , water quality and public health .
And in this programme the Commission seems all of a sudden to have forgotten its own calculations and its own objectives .
Mr President , the Commission has to some extent based itself on the guide values of the World Health Organization .
But strangely enough it has used a method of measuring air quality which conflicts with our own European directive , because the fact of taking an average value , a colleague also made the same point , for an area of four square kilometres , means that the important peak values at busy cross-over points are ignored .
For example the city I come from , The Hague , meets virtually all the standards thanks to the calculations which the Commission has applied .
But I could take you to areas of that city where air pollution makes it unhealthy to live according to the WHO standards .
So I am asking the Commission from now on to use a better method of measurement consistent with its own directive .
I should be glad to hear the Commissioner 's view on this .
As regards ozone the Commission has been up to all manner of antics .
The reduction in ozone-creating substances which the Commission proposes will mean that only 37 % of the territory of the European Union will meet the standard laid down by WHO .
Obviously densely populated areas like the Po valley , the Ruhrgebiet and the Benelux countries will not be part of this 37 % .
So the Commission 's target is so weak that most of the population if Europe will go on being exposed to excessively high ozone levels .
And I would remind Mrs Bjerregaard of her responsibility here .
Regarding the strategy to be followed , I am very much in favour of setting mandatory standards for the year 2000 and the year 2005 .
By the time these directives are approved it will already be 1998 .
That means that the year 2005 is not all that far off .
So industry would do better to anticipate that future policy .
It is strange that the Commission saw fit to set standards for 2005 for the car industry alone .
There is after all talk of a very precarious interplay between vehicles and available fuels .
It makes little sense if the right car technology is on the market but cannot function because of a lack of fuel of the right quality .
I am aware of the difficulties the Council is experiencing over this dossier .
It is not the intention that some Member States should impose standards which the other countries find virtually impossible to meet .
Both the Council and the European Parliament must show enough understanding to reach a compromise workable for the Union as a whole .
But I also remind industry of its responsibility .
If it can develop clean , environmentally friendly fuels , its export position in the fuel industry can only benefit .
I urge honourable members to support the proposals currently before us .
The health of those we represent in this House is too important .
We cannot afford to duck our responsibilities here .
We shall adjourn this debate now and resume at 9 p.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0164 / 97 ) .
Question No 1 by Mr Andersson ( H-0195 / 97 )
Subject : Enhancing the status of employment policy
Unemployment is the biggest problem facing Europe today .
Many people take the view that EU monetary policy should therefore be matched by an equally ambitious EU employment policy .
Common indicators such as exist for monitoring monetary policy should be established for monitoring the multiannual employment programmes which governments are to present .
How will the Netherlands Presidency ensure that the EU accords the same status to employment policy as it does to monetary policy ?
I would like to thank the Council for its answer .
Actually it was the intention that this question be answered during the previous session .
I am well aware of the fact that since then there has been an informal meeting between the labour market ministers in Rotterdam .
I would like to say that the proposal discussed there particularly with regard to indicators is refreshing .
It is true that a proposal was put forward in Dublin on a new chapter on employment but I think that we need to put more flesh on the bones on the proposal from Dublin .
It needs greater definition on the issue of what is to be done at Community level in terms of employment policy .
The statement that employment policy at European level is not the only policy is absolutely true .
It does not detract from what must be done at a local , regional and national level but is more of an additional measure in the form of a coordinated macroeconomic policy for example .
How does the Presidency view the opportunities for improving the proposal which was put forward in Dublin .
Will it receive more fleshing out by the fact that we are now also establishing criteria for indicators in the proposal which will be presented to the Intergovernmental Conference ?
If I understand Mr Andersson 's supplementary question aright , he asks how we rate the chances of the Irish presidency 's proposals being applied at the Intergovernmental Conference .
You meant the Intergovernmental Conference ?
Yes .
So I have an institutional problem in that it is not the Council which is responsible for the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is the individual Member States .
I cannot comment on it here on behalf of the Council .
The talks are now in the final phase .
I can tell you that the talks on the Irish presidency 's proposal are proceeding apace and it seems to me fairly pointless to keep commenting from outside on a situation which , furthermore , may change from week to week .
That is not to say that even without amendments to the Treaties , and I certainly would not wish to underestimate or indeed overestimate the importance of Treaty amendments , the Council , Commission and European Parliament can do quite a lot as regards , shall we say , the coordinating and encouraging role which the institutions of the European Union can play in improving the prospects for economic growth and thus for jobs .
The presidency has been busy in that area too .
The Committee for the Labour Market , called for in Dublin , has meantime been set up and has got off to a pretty good flying start .
I would repeat that the informal meeting of the social affairs ministers gave a number of very valuable boosts to the Committee 's debates and certainly to the whole consideration of what might be done to reduce indirect labour costs at European level by good coordination and good cooperation by the Member States .
Question No 2 by Mr Svensson ( H-0198 / 97 )
Subject : The cost of enlargement
Can the Council say now what the total cost of the proposed enlargement of the EU will be and by what amount agricultural and structural fund support to existing Member States will be cut as a result of that enlargement ?
Mr Svensson 's question to the Council concerns the cost of enlargement .
The honourable member 's question is undoubtedly most apposite and the costs of enlargement will have to be considered most carefully in due course .
We need to remember that since the European Council of December 1995 in Madrid the heads of state and government have received reports on alternative strategies for agriculture and the development of the pre-accession strategy to be followed vis à vis associated countries in Central and Eastern Europe .
These reports have since been a major factor in the preparatory debates on these issues .
And I would remind the House here that the Madrid summit asked the Commission to come up as soon as possible with a thorough analysis of the European Union 's system of financing , so that immediately after the end of the Intergovernmental Conference , thus hopefully in June in Amsterdam this year , a communication can be put forward on the future financing framework of the European Union for the period after 31 December 1999 which will take account of the prospect of enlargement .
My suggestion is thus that we do not have this debate now , but later when we have the communication which the Commission will be producing as soon as possible after the end of the Intergovernmental Conference .
But once again I agree with the implication of Mr Svensson 's question that this is one of the most important issues which will need to be discussed when the political decisions on enlargement are taken .
I would like to thank the Council for its answer .
Unfortunately it is possible to infer that the European Union likes to draw up great far-reaching plans without being quite clear as to how much they will really cost .
The figures , that is the approximate figures which I have received so far have been in the region of between 15 billion and 64 billion ECUs .
The plain fact is that obviously no one really knows .
But I would still like to ask another related question .
Everyone knows that it is politically impossible to turn to the Member States and ask for an increase in the Membership fee .
But this means that we must ask the question : How much of a reduction , roughly , will be required in agricultural or regional subsidies in the Member States in order to finance the proposed enlargement ?
This is the interesting question for the Member States involved .
In recent years I too have heard these enormous sums mentioned by a variety of authoritative and less authoritative sources .
I have read a lot of reports on this , but I think one needs to appreciate that this kind of expectation or this kind of project has actually always been an extrapolation from existing policy .
For example : what would it cost to apply the common agricultural policy in its present form to the four Visegrad countries ?
The exercise is pointless , because we know that internal reform decisions and external obligations under the WTO mean that agriculture policy is constantly subject to change and that the cost of our agricultural policy is far lower than was estimated , for example , at Edinburgh , as regards development of the so-called agricultural guideline .
At the same time all manner of other estimates are used , for example this one : policies on agriculture and the structural funds together make up 80 % of the European Community budget , and this structural policy is then extrapolated as well .
But there one is starting from such a static situation that I find it unrealistic to take that as a starting point for shaping policy which will apply in the first decade of the next century .
I urge you not to join in with this kind of speculation .
Let us work together on the basis of cool and clinical analysis which , I know , the European Commission is working hard on at the moment .
President Patijn , I should like to ask you whether you or the Council are familiar with the admirable study by Mr Friedmann , the President of the European Court of Auditors , which shows that the eastward enlargement can be achieved without substantial additional costs .
Secondly , as far as the Visegrad States are concerned , whether you are already thinking in terms of a particular number of States or of the Visegrad States alone , or whether for example you also regard Slovenia and the Baltic States as possible candidates for accession .
I am not myself familiar with the report which the honourable member mentions .
I know that there are opinions and studies which claim that all this can be done within reasonable financial limits , but that assumes certain realities and certain expectations on which I cannot at present comment in any meaningful way .
These are assumptions , speculations , and I suggest we should start the debate once we have a thorough analysis from the European Commission of all the relevant factors , that is to say expected developments in agricultural policy , expected developments in the structural funds , expected developments in the other categories of the European Community 's expenditure and expected developments with regard to the financial perspective and the way in which expenditure actually proceeds , as we have done in past years .
I mentioned the Visegrad countries simply because one of the most hotly discussed reports quoting figures in the billions had to be do with enlargement to include the Visegrad countries , but you can take it from me that that implies no judgment on the Council 's part as to how the future process of enlargement will unfold and which countries will be involved .
Question No 3 by Mr Roubatis ( H-0200 / 97 )
Subject : Participation by Turkish Cypriot representatives in negotiations for the accession of Cyprus
At the last meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Brussels , the British , German and French Foreign Ministers requested the inclusion in the text of the common position of a proposal for the participation of the Turkish Cypriot authorities in negotiations for the accession of Cyprus .
However , it is generally known that the European Union only acknowledges the legal government of Cyprus as being entitled to participate in negotiations for the accession of Cyprus .
Does the Council intend to recognize as a legitimate interlocutor the self-styled ' Turkish-Cypriot government , ' which is illegal and not recognized by the international community thereby undermining the exclusive right of the Government of the Cypriot Republic to conduct negotiations for the accession of Cyprus ?
Does the Council not consider that the participation of the Turkish Cypriots in the negotiations would put Turkey in a position to dominate the accession procedure at a time of crisis , not only in Cyprus itself but also in relations between Greece and Turkey ?
Does the Council consider that changes in the agreed accession procedure for Cyprus might also compromise proceedings for enlargement to include countries of Central and Eastern Europe ?
During Question Time in March the Council replied to two oral questions ( H-0150 / 97 and H-0173 / 97 ) from Mr Papayannakis and Mrs Daskalaki respectively , explaining its position on Cyprus and the Turkish Cypriot community .
In line with the conclusions of the Cannes European Council of June 1995 accession talks with Cyprus will begin on the basis of proposals from the European Commission six months after the end of the Intergovernmental Conference , taking into account the outcome of that Conference .
The Union 's position remains the one established at the meeting of the Association Council on 25 February 1997 .
At the same time the prospect of Cyprus 's joining the European Union provides an opportunity to push this year for a general resolution of the Cyprus question in line with the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council , culminating in a federation with two communities and two zones .
It is important to seize this opportunity as far as possible .
According to the Council 's conclusions of 6 March 1995 Cyprus 's accession to the European Union must create greater security and prosperity for each of the two communities on the island .
As a result the northern part of the island would find it easier to close the economic gap and prospects for growth and employment would be improved , for the Turkish Cypriot community as well .
The Council also thought that the advantages of Cyprus 's joining the European Union needed to be better understood by the Turkish Cypriot community and that its fears on this count needed to be allayed .
The Council calls on the Commission to establish the necessary contacts with the Turkish Cypriot community , liaising to this end with the Government of Cyprus .
The Council stresses that it did indeed fail to reach a consensus on what the Union position should be at the meeting with Cyprus scheduled for 25 February as part of the ' structured dialogue ' .
But the Council stands resolutely by its position of March 1995 , namely that of no recognition for the authorities of Northern Cyprus .
The Council cannot comment on the views of the individual Member States to which the honourable member refers .
I would point out in conclusion that the Financial Protocol signed in June 1995 includes support for efforts to promote a general settlement of the Cyprus question .
The sum of 12 million ECU has been made available for possible initiatives agreed with Cyprus for projects to promote confidence-building measures .
There is also the possibility of additional funds to finance programmes and projects to promote the development of the island as a whole .
I consider it helpful that the President-in-Office has categorically restated the commitment of the Union to ensure that negotiations with the Cypriot Republic are commenced six months after the end of the intergovernmental conference .
Naturally , the Turkish Cypriots will have a place in the representation of the lawful and internationally recognized government of Cyprus .
Moreover , the President of the Cypriot Republic has issued an invitation to participate to the Turkish Cypriots .
What steps have you taken , or do you intend to take , to persuade Mr Denktash to allow Turkish Cypriots to participate on the committees that will be set up to commence the preliminary work and which will afterwards conduct the negotiations with the European Union ?
I cannot really give a clear answer to Mr Roubatis 's question .
He asks how the Council proposes to persuade Mr Denktash to agree anything with the Greek Cypriot Government .
That seems to me largely speculative .
Generally speaking , I think it is most important , if accession talks with Cyprus are to get off to a good start and proceed well , that there should be a clear political understanding between the two communities on Cyprus on their common objectives concerning future membership of the European Union .
I think that will be most helpful to the negotiations .
Like Mr Roubatis , I am pleased there was a firm categorical reply that negotiations would commence six months after the IGC .
However , the Council will know that Turkey is being rather obstructive and has carried this over into NATO and is threatening to block certain moves there if these negotiations go ahead without the North being involved .
Will the Council confirm , positively and definitely , that it will not allow Turkey to blackmail the EU in this way ?
If the Republic of Cyprus can in some way accommodate the North and include it in its discussions , fine - that is a matter for Cyprus - but can the Council confirm that the EU itself will not go back on the pledges it has made ?
As the Council understands it , the Government in Ankara has a veto on the start of accession talks .
I will leave it at that .
I do not wish to anticipate a decision which the Council and the European Council will have to take later this year or next year , namely how the accession talks with Cyprus are to get started .
I should say - and this is not a statement on behalf of the Council - that there are serious doubts within the Council as to whether Cyprus can join the European Union if the political problems on Cyprus persist in their present form .
So the Council is very much concerned to persuade both the Cyprus Government and the Turkish Cypriot authorities and Ankara and Athens that they should do everything possible to create a climate in which the parties themselves are willing to negotiate .
In the first place , of course , that means the two communities on Cyprus .
And in the second place , Turkey and Greece .
They must do everything possible to make sure that there is never disagreement at any time in the future within the European Union about the accession of Cyprus as a result of an unresolved question which has dogged us for the last 25 years .
Mr President , according to the Rules of Procedure , Mr Patijn is here as the President-in-Office of the Council .
I would be very grateful if what he has said about not speaking as the President-in-Office of the Council could be expunged from the Minutes .
Mr Roubatis , the President-in-Office is free to express himself as he pleases in this House and this must appear in the Minutes .
You are free to make your own assessment of it , but in no case can the speeches of the President-in-Office of the Council be restricted , or what has been said ignored .
Therefore what you said just now , Mr Roubatis , will also appear in the Minutes .
Question No 4 by Mr Newens ( H-0210 / 97 )
Subject : Cooperation between international police forces
Would the Council make a statement on the implication of the simultaneous police raids made on the offices of MED TV , the privately funded satellite TV station whose goal is to promote Kurdish culture , in London and Brussels on 18 September 1996 , and on the maintaining of existing standards of civil liberties and human rights within the EU and , in particular , the agreement said to have been made between the Chief of the Belgian Police , Mr De Ridder , and the Turkish Head of Internal Security , Mr Alaadin Yuksel in July 1996 ?
In reply to Mr Newens I must stress that the police measures he mentions come under the responsibility of the appropriate authorities in the Member States and not , I repeat not , under the responsibility of the European Union .
So in this specific case it is not the place of the Council to state a view on it .
But in general terms the Council would make the point that with regard to civil liberties and human rights in the European Union all Member States are parties to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms which was signed in Rome on 4 November 1950 .
Under Article K2 of the Treaty on European Union matters named in Article K1 , including judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters , are dealt with in compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights .
I thank the President-in-Office for that reply .
But it seems to me an amazing coincidence that police raids against MED TV occurred simultaneously in London , Brussels , Sweden and Moscow on 18 September if there was no common origin for their action and if this was not provided by the Turkish authorities .
Does the President-in-Office not think that all our efforts to achieve high standards of civil liberty and freedom of expression in the Union will be undermined if European police forces take action on the basis of laws and practice which apply in Turkey or , for that matter , in other states which have lower standards , and that some effort ought to be made within the Union to prevent this sort of thing from happening ?
Otherwise those things we have tried to achieve on the issue of human rights and freedom of expression will be seriously undermined .
I can only repeat that the actions of judicial and police authorities within their own borders are a matter exclusively for the Member States .
It seems to me completely logical and it is also standard practice for Member States to coordinate their action at international level in some cases .
But the view that standards of international and national law have been infringed here must be tested first of all against the laws of the countries concerned and in any case the individual is always free to challenge the behaviour of Member State governments before the European Commission and European Court of Human Rights .
Question No 5 by Mr Camisón Asensio ( H-0213 / 97 )
Subject : Economic and social cohesion and unemployment
Can the Council confirm , with a view to the economic and social cohesion which might be expected to arise from the distribution of the Structural Funds , that priority will continue to be given to the fight against unemployment in the context of the chief objectives governing the application of the Funds under the Dutch Presidency ?
In approving the legislation on the structural funds one of the Council 's priorities was that these funds should be used to combat unemployment .
And that is and remains the objective .
Thus , for example , during the 1994-1999 programme the Social Fund will , for purposes of combating unemployment , be helping to facilitate access to the labour market , promote equal opportunities on the labour market , expand education and specialist training , expertise and occupational qualifications and promote the growth of employment .
This assistance will be spread over the various structural policy objectives of the European Community and is continuing with undiminished vigour under the Dutch presidency too .
The resulting tasks are carried out by the Commission which is responsible for implementing the legislation and managing the structural funds in close cooperation with Member States .
I would point out here that the Commission , in its communication of 24 March 1996 on structural measures and employment , indicated that it planned to target structural measures more towards the creating of jobs by aligning a few points of the existing planning with the requirements of the legislation in such a way as to place greater emphasis on jobs .
In short , the combating of unemployment is and remains a prime objective of the European Community 's structural policy .
Energetic measures to tackle unemployment in Europe are after all a major priority .
We note with satisfaction the concern about the continuing unemployment situation expressed by the Council under the Dutch Presidency , as was also case under the Irish Presidency .
Unemployment is one of the major causes of anxiety for European citizens , especially in certain countries like Spain , for example .
Because of all this , we must hope that the spread of territorial employment pacts within the framework of the structural funds programmes will become reality as soon as possible , including the possibility of participation by the European Investment Bank .
All this will contribute to achieving the essential objective of greater cohesion by reducing the disparities that still exist despite the undeniable advances in the socio-economic development of the regions .
But it is also appropriate to put on record the advantages of improving the procedure by concentrating resources in the most needy regions , simplifying the procedures and respecting the principle of additionality .
Mr Camisón raises the question of regional pacts on employment .
This is an idea first mooted in the communication of the European Commission President , Mr Santer , which became known as the stability pact .
It was one aspect of that .
I know that these regional employment pacts are now being implemented but responsibility for them lies with the European Commission .
So for details I must refer you to the European Commission .
Question No 6 by Mr Pirker ( H-0218 / 97 )
Subject : Europol
Europol should be created as swiftly as possible as an effective weapon in the fight against organized crime .
However , one precondition for its creation is ratification by the national parliaments .
What steps will the Council take to ensure that these ratifications take place immediately ?
Are there ministers who have expressed reservations about the creation of Europol ?
If so , which ministers ?
What are their objections ?
In reply to Mr Pirker I am glad to say that the Member States have undertaken on several occasions and notably at the European Council in Dublin in December 1996 to do everything possible to complete the ratification of the Europol Convention and the Protocol on the Court of Justice by the end of 1997 .
To date the United Kingdom is the only Member State which has ratified these texts , in December 1996 .
In all other states a start has been made on the administrative and / or parliamentary procedures .
Of course each parliament has its own procedures and ways of operating so that the time scales may differ .
Nevertheless all the Member States concerned have confirmed that the target date can be met .
No major obstacles to ratification have been reported .
The Dutch presidency and especially the Luxembourg presidency which will take over next will unhesitatingly seize every opportunity of reminding Member States which have not ratified the agreement of the undertaking they signed in Dublin with a view to this Convention coming into effect before the end of 1997 .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for that reply .
I have another question , though , in this connection . We all know that the citizens of the Union have a right to security , meaning that they expect the Union to ensure that EUROPOL does eventually come fully into force .
When you say that the Member States are intending to have ratified it by the end of 1997 , how much longer will it take in your view until EUROPOL - the preliminary work is being done - is fully functional ?
Secondly , we know that the situation in the countries of origin is a tragic one .
So EUROPOL must have a strong interest in co-operating with the countries of origin of organized crime , especially in the east .
Does the Council have any plans for activities in connection with EUROPOL which will initiate the co-operation between EUROPOL and the eastern States ?
I am relatively hopeful that Europol will be operational fairly soon after the Convention comes into force , since a precursor of Europol , the EDU or European Drugs Unit , is already up and running .
I invite the honourable member and the House in general to pay a visit to The Hague where Europol 's precursor is in fact already operational in terms of its organization , institutions and the testing of its cooperation methods , but all this on the basis of a provisional mandate which is yet to be ratified .
Europol can only really take off when the Convention has been ratified and has come into force .
And then there is your question about whether Europol will be able fairly soon to initiate cooperation with third countries or whether it will be able to do this at all .
I have to look at the existing legal position here .
I think the powers of the European Union and its institutions to cooperate with third countries under the third pillar are currently limited because this always has to be done through international treaty , through intergovernmental construction of the third pillar , and treaties of this kind have to be ratified .
That is a long and complicated process .
Let me say something briefly about the Intergovernmental Conference .
This subject is on the agenda for the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is looking at how far the legal basis for forging cooperative links with third countries might be strengthened .
Forgive me if I do not report on how the debate is progressing .
For the rest , we have a very practical opportunity now , starting from the provisional unit in The Hague , of forging practical cooperative links with third countries already , naturally under the supervision of the Council of Justice Ministers and later , once the Convention comes into force , within the limitations set by the Europol Convention .
Mr President , if cooperation with third countries is being considered , could we make it a condition for Europol , which is , of course , of immense value in the fight against crime , that it should not take action against individuals based on suspicions of committing acts which are not offences in the European Union but may be offences in third countries which do not recognize civil liberties and freedom of expression in the same way that we recognize them in the Union ?
I hope , for example , that Europol would not be expected to cooperate in a raid such as that on MED TV , which I raised earlier on .
The Convention setting up Europol does not provide for officials or institutions of Europol to be granted operational powers .
If specific proceedings are instituted in a specific Member State , that is always done under the political responsibility of that country 's government and by investigating officials of that country .
Europol officials can never have political responsibility for such measures or responsibility for investigating them .
Question No 7 by Mrs Stenzel ( H-0219 / 97 )
Subject : Poland
Following Poland 's accession there will need to be transitional periods in a number of areas , including the free movement of persons .
How long will the transitional period be following Polish accession in the case of the free movement of persons ?
Mrs Stenzel 's question refers to one of the possible results of the accession talks with Poland , but these have not even begun yet and at this stage the Council has not yet taken any operational decisions on them .
As regards the future enlargement of the Union to include the associated countries in Central and Eastern Europe , Poland being one of them , I can only refer to the Dublin summit which confirmed the timetable for the enlargement process which was set in Madrid .
Immediately after the Intergovernmental Conference ends the Commission will be presenting the Council and the European Parliament with its opinions on each country individually and a comprehensive document on enlargement as a whole .
This procedure guarantees that all countries applying for membership are treated equally .
The Commission will also put forward its assessment of the consequences of enlargement for Community policies and a communication on the future financial framework of the European Union as from 31 December 1999 , taking account of enlargement .
One of the earlier questions referred specifically to that .
After the Intergovernmental Conference ends , in the light of its results and on the basis of these Commission opinions and reports , the Council will as soon as possible take the decisions needed to get the accession talks started .
Mr Patijn , thank you for that answer , which largely recapitulates the familiar timetable for the accession negotiations and the fact that those negotiations will start on the basis of equal entitlement .
Even so , some fundamental questions remain : is the Council giving any thought to ways of preventing the migration of cheap labour into high-wage countries when the rules of the single market are brought into force in the candidate States ?
Has any thought been given to how this can be prevented , so that these workers remain in their own countries and have opportunities for employment there ?
Mrs Stenzel keeps wanting us to speculate about what the negotiating mandate of the European Commission will be in the accession talks .
I can answer her question by saying we should not jump the gun , otherwise we shall all go away dissatisfied .
You must look at the process as follows and then view it in a broader time scale .
I assume that once the talks start they will go on for a number of years .
I would remind you that the negotiations with Spain and Portugal lasted seven years .
It may perhaps be shorter for the countries of Eastern Europe , but there is a timetable and then we still have the ratification process and by the time the new Member States of the European Union are actually in we shall be somewhere in the next century .
In substantive terms I think it is pointless now in 1997 to make pronouncements , quite apart from the formal argument that all these accession mandates still have to be discussed , on how things should look in the year 2002 , 2003 or 2004 .
Meantime the legal position in Europe on the operation of the single market and the operation of the labour market is constantly shifting .
On the other hand the applicant countries are resolutely preparing to join the single market , including those aspects concerned with freedom of movement for workers .
So a dynamic process is unfolding on two sides .
My feeling is that your question is altogether premature .
I would urge you not to speculate on how the labour market in Eastern and Western Europe will look in the year 2002 , 2003 and 2004 , what specific arrangements that will necessitate , whether it will require transitional measures or derogations for the new members .
I think it serves no purpose at all and no political purpose to jump the gun on this kind of issue two , three , four elections ahead of time .
That is my feeling .
Question No 8 by Mr McMahon ( H-0220 / 97 )
Subject : Technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources
Will the Dutch Presidency give Parliament details of the compromise text on technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources which it will place before the April meeting of the Fisheries Council ?
In reply to Mr McMahon 's question about technical measures to maintain fish stocks , I would stress that the Dutch presidency attaches particularly great importance to this .
The Irish presidency presented a compromise text on this at the Council meeting of December last .
The Council indicated that it regarded the proposal as a welcome step forward , but nevertheless believed that a number of problems remained to be solved .
The presidency is working hard on these at the moment , but given the highly technical nature of this subject the Dutch presidency does not intend to place this item on the agenda of the Fisheries Council scheduled for next 14 and 15 April .
Nevertheless , the presidency will leave no stone unturned in its efforts to push forward the discussion of this proposal as soon as possible with a view to its acceptance by the end of June this year .
So hopefully before the Dutch presidency ends .
I would like to thank the Dutch presidency .
This is the first time we have had official confirmation that there will be no discussions , and no agreement , on the question of technical measures .
It is rather unfortunate that Parliament has been pushing ahead with the Adam report and held emergency meetings only on Monday of this week , being told it was to meet a deadline from the Council .
Yet again , the presidencies , in particular the Dutch , have treated Parliament with a rather cavalier attitude .
If the intention all along - perhaps in some way connected with the United Kingdom election - was not to have it on the agenda , then I am disappointed .
Would the Dutch presidency confirm that what might happen in the UK elections has not motivated them in withdrawing this item from the agenda of next week 's meeting ?
I cannot confirm that , all I know is that it will be impossible to complete this dossier at the Fisheries Council in April .
Question No 9 by Mr Howitt ( H-0223 / 97 )
Subject : Non-discrimination clause in favour of people with disabilities in the Treaty on European Union
Does the legal advice available to the Council confirm that the new Article 6a in the TEU as presented by the Irish Presidency at Dublin , if agreed at Amsterdam , would ensure that in future all Commission directorates-general will have to consider and consult on equal opportunities for disabled people in preparing all draft European legislation and programmes ?
Or is it your advice that such a clause would simply enable separate actions to be agreed by Member States to prohibit such discrimination at European level ?
Secondly , is it your legal advice that new Article 6a - as proposed - would or could not act as a legal base for a future EU disability programme , as a successor to the old Helios programme ?
In reply to the honourable member 's question I must repeat that it is not the job of the Council to comment on the work of the Intergovernmental Conference and how its work is progressing .
That is a matter for the Member States and the Council cannot be called upon to comment .
I would emphasize that under the terms of Article N of the Treaty , representatives of the Member States are to determine the amendments to be made to the Treaty by common accord .
The honourable member will appreciate that I , as President of the Council , cannot in any way comment on the suggestions he makes in his question .
Notwithstanding that , the Council is convinced that everything possible must be done to help persons with a disability and to enable them to be fully integrated into society and take an active part in economic and social life .
But the subsidiarity principle must be borne in mind here .
Reference must be made to this in determining what should be done at national level and what the necessary benefits are of measures at Union level .
While thanking Mr Patijn for that answer one wonders about his commitment to assisting the IGC to be an open and transparent process .
How can the many people and organizations who have an interest in the outcome of the ICG possibly consider the issues surrounding the draft treaty and give advice to us in this Parliament and to the national governments if there is this stone wall of silence from the Council .
In this Parliament , whether we are dealing with the buses and coaches directive , the lift directive or all the issues concerned with the information society , we have to fight and fight to get the Commission to consider disabled people 's interest and to consult with disabled people at the outset of legislation .
For the governments to come up with a draft of the Treaty - laudable as it is , and supporting it as we do in this Parliament with regard to actions of non-discrimination for disabled people - that does not cover all of the areas of European legislation would fail to meet the demands of 37 million disabled European citizens .
When Mr Patijn meets the representatives of the European Disability Forum , as he will be doing within the next week , is he going to give them a more open answer and have a more open discussion than we have been able to have in this Parliament tonight ?
I can confirm that I am regularly in touch with representatives of a number of social organizations which are attentively monitoring the progress of the Intergovernmental Conference .
I did indeed have a meeting with the representatives of organizations for the disabled .
In these kinds of talks , which are informal , I have regularly provided briefings on the state of the talks and the chances of a successful outcome to those talks .
But officially that is the job of the Dutch delegate to the Intergovernmental Conference .
I cannot play that part as President of the Council .
I can of course make use of my privileged position of access to background information , but when I have meetings of this kind , I am there in principle as a delegate for the Kingdom of the Netherlands .
Question No 10 by Mr Lomas ( H-0226 / 97 )
Subject : Interference by EC Commissioner in British elections
In the run-up to the UK 's general election , EC Commissioner Leon Brittan is quoted in the British press as having criticized the Labour Party for suppressing debate on Europe .
He voiced disapproval at politicians generally for criticizing the EC , saying that this would undermine Britain .
Does the Council of Ministers approve of its civil servants interfering in a country 's election in this way ?
In reply to Mr Lomas 's question I must do as my predecessors and I myself have done on many occasions in similar cases and that is stress that the Council cannot express a position or a judgment on things which are said outside the formal framework of its meetings , and certainly not when they are said by persons outside the Council .
This appears to be the case with the events which Mr Lomas reports in his question .
These statements are widely reported in the press .
Even civil servants at national and local government level in Britain are not allowed to get involved in electioneering as the Commissioners are doing .
Do you not think some of them - not all - are getting too big for their boots .
Jacques Santer recently berated Member State governments who had some queries about the single currency timetable .
These civil servants ought to get on with their own work and leave the political statements to the elected Council of Ministers .
Would the Council not agree with that ?
I detect an undercurrent of annoyance in Mr Lomas 's questions , but perhaps I can ease that annoyance to a large extent by telling him that members of the European Commission can in no way be called civil servants .
I refer the honourable member to an article of the EC Treaty which he doubtless knows by heart , namely Article 157 which states : ' The Members of the Commission shall , in the general interest of the Communities , be completely independent in the performance of their duties .
In the performance of these duties , they shall neither seek nor take instructions from any Government or from any other body . ' So these are political comments by people who are entirely independent .
Perhaps that will reassure you .
In reply to Mr Morris 's question about the dangers of clenbuterol as a growth promoter in animals intended for human consumption I can say that the Council is well aware of the need for vigorous measures to counter the illegal use of anabolic steroids in livestock farming , with a view to protecting the consumer .
To that end the Council adopted Directive 96 / 22 / EEC on 29 April 1996 in order to tighten up the measures taken in 1981 and 1988 and ensure that they were implemented better .
Also adopted was Directive 96 / 23 on supervisory measures for implementing this tougher policy .
The use of clenbuterol is thus legally banned in the Community except in the case of therapeutic treatment of female cattle during calving and of equine animals bred for purposes other than meat production .
So some use is permitted , but never in animals intended for human consumption .
Regarding the second question the Council has no authority in respect of the case which the honourable member mentions ; it is a matter for the judiciary of the Member State concerned .
It is not for the Council to comment .
The President-in-Office has told us that it is not his business to concern himself with what a Member State does or does not do in terms of ensuring that people who are suspected of dealing in illegal growth drugs are prosecuted .
This is why I asked the question !
The question ought to be : what has the Council - which is a Dutch Council - done to persuade its own government to extradite Gerard Hoogendik to the USA for offences which have been laid at his door , namely that he has been smuggling and distributing adulterated drugs into the US ?
Might there not be a suspicion , in fact , that he has been about the same kind of activity within the EU ?
If we are to be successful in terms of controlling the distribution of illegal drugs and their threat to our food , then prosecutions must be brought and , in this case , extradition ought to be granted so the American Government can bring this man to trial .
If a Dutch national is suspected of a criminal offence in another country which justifies extradition , the Dutch Government , perhaps with the endorsement of a Dutch judge , will respond if an official request for extradition is received .
But this is not a matter for the institutions of the European Union and I cannot give an answer as President of the Council .
I should like to leave it at that .
Mr Speciale raises an important issue .
The Council shares the honourable member 's concern over the difficult position of children in Romania .
In general terms I should say that Romania has made a start on a comprehensive programme of reforms to improve the economy .
The Council supports this programme but has at the same time made it plain to the Romanian authorities that accompanying social measures are needed to safeguard the most vulnerable sectors and groups of society .
In this context the Commission , together with the Romanian Government and non-governmental organizations , is helping with a broad programme designed to improve the position of children in the country .
There are numerous projects aimed primarily at orphans .
And the Community has been giving aid of this kind for some time , since the early nineties .
In total a few tens of millions of ECU have been contributed so far .
The Community 's latest efforts , in close cooperation with the Romanian Government , have been aimed at policy to protect children .
A budget of 12 million ECU has been set aside for this .
Part of it is from the 1996-1999 guidance PHARE programme for Romania .
The Commission has also reached agreement with the Romanian Government to spend some 3.5 billion lei , or about one million ECU , from counterpart funds which can be generated from the economic reform programme , for the protection of young people in Romania .
Mr President , I thank the Council for its answer and for the sensitivity it is showing .
As you know , this is a very sensitive issue .
There have been televised documentaries that have clearly demonstrated just how grave the situation is .
Among other things , there are judicial inquires under way in some Member States concerning abhorrent crimes that seem to link up with Romania specifically .
I therefore believe that urgent action is needed and that it is important that the Council and Commission , along with the Romanian Government , should do all they can to arrive at positive solutions very quickly .
I also wonder how a situation of that kind could arise in the heart of Europe , and I do not know whether the Council has answered that .
I am asking you now , Mr President-in-Office : what programmes for children are already in operation ?
Are they being specifically organized ?
Have there been improvements already ?
That basically is the question I am asking you !
I refer to the answer I gave the first time .
This programme has been going for some time .
Since 1990 , as I said , there have been European Community measures under the responsibility of the Commission , designed to improve the lot of children in Romania and these measures have recently been intensified further .
For details of those programmes I would refer Mr Speciale to the European Commission .
In general , I share the grave concerns he voices with this question .
We all know that some countries of Eastern Europe are deep in political and social crisis as a result of their transition from a dictatorially controlled economy to a democratic free market economy .
That is having great social consequences , and socially vulnerable groups are sometimes particularly hard pressed and I think we are all very anxious that not only the European Community institutions but above all the Member States , and I would expressly mention the initiatives taken by non-governmental organizations which are particularly energetic in this area in my own country , should play an important role in dealing as far as possible with the worst cases .
As the author is not present , Question No 13 falls .
Question No 14 by Mr Sjöstedt ( H-0235 / 97 )
Subject : The EU as an association of free and independent States
Representatives of the Swedish government maintain that the EU is an organization of free and independent States .
Such views are endorsed by the German Federal Constitutional Court 's judgment of 12 October 1993 , which points out that the Member States are the ' masters of the Treaty ' .
However , all of this is at odds with various Court of Justice rulings concerning the precedence of European law over Member States ' laws and constitutions .
Such contradictory signals have given rise to differing interpretations as to the nature of the Union .
The IGC provides an opportunity to resolve this matter by making it clear that the European Union is an association of free and independent States whose constitutions take precedence over EU laws and rules .
This is particularly important with a view to the forthcoming enlargement of the EU .
Is the Council prepared to use the IGC to submit proposals which clearly define the nature of the EU as an association of free and independent States ?
In reply to Mr Sjöstedt I would emphasize , more in general terms , that I fully share his view that the European Union is an undivided entity of free and independent states .
We are indeed free and independent states which of our own free will cooperated on the Treaties establishing the European Communities .
Exercising this same freedom we undertook to comply with the terms of these treaties and help to implement them .
As President-in-Office of the Council I am all the keener to emphasize that the Council and its members attach the utmost value to this communal basis and to the legislation adopted under the Treaty and generally referred to as the acquis communautaire .
For reasons he will appreciate I cannot , as President of the Council , go into the honourable member 's more specific request that the provisions so dear to him should be included in the new Treaty .
The Council is after all not a party to the Intergovernmental Conference and it is up to the governments and the Commission too to put forward proposals for discussion at the Intergovernmental Conference .
I would like to thank the Dutch Presidency for its response .
I think that you are being unduly modest .
You certainly must have an insight into the work of the current Intergovernmental Conference and some influence over it .
I think it is important to clarify the legal hierarchy between National Constitutions and EEC Law .
In reality a praxis has evolved over many years in the EEC Courts while a number of Member States have not changed their fundamental law in line with this praxis .
There are also legal cases underway , in Denmark for example which concern precisely this point of the position of the Constitution against EEC law .
I feel that it is perfectly reasonable on democratic grounds to clarify this legal hierarchy between National Constitutions and EEC law .
My own personal view is that National law takes precedence over EEC law .
If I understand the interpreting correctly it seems that Mr Sjöstedt himself believes that national constitutions are more important than Community law .
I myself do not believe that .
In the Dutch constitutional system Community law , enacted in accordance with the procedures laid down by the Treaty of Rome , takes precedence over national law , and even over the national constitution , and it is up to the judges to decide what takes precedence when there is a conflict between legal systems .
Happily , I cannot recall any instance to date where a supreme judge in a national Member State prohibited the governments or citizens of that Member State from living by the rules of Community law .
Then there really would be a conflict .
My personal conviction based , I would have thought , on a sizeable body of case law , but then I am not speaking as President of the Council - your President said just now that I can occasionally say something in Parliament without it being immediately struck from the record - my own personal view is that if the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg clearly rules in a conflict between legal systems that Community law takes precedence over national legal systems , then that is the last word on the matter .
If that were not the case we would be on an extremely slippery slope towards the judicial disintegration of the European Communities and I would ask the honourable member to think about that in relation to his own personal convictions .
Question No 15 by Mr Medina Ortega ( H-0237 / 97 )
Subject : Common organization of the market in bananas
In view of the conclusions reached by the World Trade Organization panel as regards the common organization of the market in bananas , what action is the Council proposing to take in order to protect Community producers ?
In reply to Mr Medina 's questions I can say that , though our information is primarily from the media , the Council too has noted the interim report of the Banana Panel on the European Union 's regime for banana imports .
The Council does not know for the moment what the status of this text is .
At any rate , the qualification of an ' interim report ' which the authors themselves gave this document suggests that it is a provisional text which may yet be changed before the final document is completed .
So we should make the point that so far no definitive formal conclusion has been reached within the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) to the effect that the current Community regime on bananas is in violation of the rules .
After all , the procedure is not yet completed .
Once the conclusions of the WTO Panel are known , the Council will of course study them with an eye to any consequences they may have for the Community .
The Council would also remind the House that already in 1995 the Commission put forward a proposal aimed at adapting the existing common organization of the market and that it has not yet been able to take a decision , until such time as the results of the WTO procedure are known .
Mr President of the Council , I am grateful for your reply but I would point out to you that in our experience when a question is not put at the right time , the Council or the Commission will say it has not been put at the right time .
I think it is one of today 's worst-kept secrets that there exists a document on bananas by the group of World Trade Organization experts which virtually destroys the cement of the World Trade Organization .
And the worst thing is that the main reason for this group of experts ' action was a request from a government which does not produce bananas , the United States Government .
And that same United States Government has not accepted the right of any group of WTO experts to discuss the Helms-Burton Law .
Those of us who have practised law know that the law lies in the procedural detail .
And in trade negotiations the current practice is retaliation , so could the Council consider possible retaliation against the United States Government in that if it does not accept the jurisdiction of the World Trade Organization on the Helms-Burton Law , the Community will not accept the jurisdiction of that organization on bananas ?
I shall not take up Mr Medina 's last suggestion , because in settling international disputes , if we tied everything to everything else , there would be no end to it .
That is one thing I know for sure .
But on this point I would suggest that we monitor carefully the procedure for WTO panels , because perhaps we are seeing problems before they occur .
We have here an interim report which was in principle reliable , which was put to the parties and which has been leaked .
But the parties still have a chance to comment on that report and perhaps on the basis of those comments the panel may change the report and the WTO disputes settlement procedure then gives a further opportunity of challenging any such verdict of the panel .
So I think it is too soon to be thinking already about direct legal measures against that verdict to be taken either by the Commission or the Council , let alone thinking in terms of reprisals or of starting a trade war .
Question No 16 by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0239 / 97 )
Subject : Attendance by Libya at the Second Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Malta
In view of the wish expressed by Parliament in a number of resolutions , will any consideration be given to the possibility that Libya might be invited to attend the Second Euro-Mediterranean Conference , to be held in Malta on 15-16 April ?
) The European Union stands by its position that Libya cannot expect to have normal relations with other states and to play a full part in international forums , including the Barcelona process , until such time as it complies with its obligations under the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council .
Given that Libya has not so far complied with those obligations , there is no way that it can take part in the second EuroMediterranean ministerial conference .
I think it is regrettable that the Council has not listened to the European Parliament 's repeated request for this to happen .
The Council 's reply is disappointing and once again I must deplore the lack of autonomy and courage in the decisions of the Council of Ministers .
Parliament is asking for a Mediterranean country to be offered the prospect of participation in Euro-Mediterranean policy .
I must point out that , as a member of the great Arab Maghreb , that country , Libya , is part of the Maghreb Delegation to the European Parliament , and is working indirectly on Euro-Mediterranean policy here in this very building in Strasbourg , where more than one meeting has been held .
I sincerely believe this reply is a mistake , and I ask the Council of Ministers , between now and 15 and 16 April , the scheduled dates for the meeting in La Valetta , the second Euro-Mediterranean meeting , to open up this prospect .
The European Union can sometimes be very imaginative and could give replies of supreme ambiguity offering reasonable prospects of working with this country which may become very important to Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in the future .
I must remind Mrs Izquierdo Rojo of Security Council resolutions 731 , 748 and 883 which she doubtless keeps under her pillow if she feels that way about Libya .
The point here is that these Security Council resolutions mention the suspicion of state-sponsored terrorism .
And in them the supreme body of the community of nations has said that the Libyan authorities must do everything possible to allay this suspicion .
Until that suspicion has been lifted I think the Council has every reason to act as it does .
If I have to talk of disappointments , then I am disappointed at the Libyan Government which is doing nothing to help allay this serious suspicion .
Question No 17 by Mr Gerard Collins ( H-0245 / 97 )
Subject : European Structural Funds after 1999
Have there been any discussions within the Council concerning the operation of the European Structural Funds after 1999 and , in particular , does the Council intend to forward guidelines to the Commission indicating the political priorities , notably unemployment levels , which should be taken on board by the Commission when preparing proposals for determining the qualifying criteria for Objective 1 status past 1999 ?
The European Union 's structural policy after 1999 is not currently an issue .
And I cannot give the honourable member the information he asks for .
I would remind you that the European Community in Madrid - we were talking about it earlier - asked the Commission to make a thorough analysis as soon as possible of the European Union 's financing system , so that immediately after the end of the Intergovernmental Conference a communication could be presented on the future financial framework of the Union after 31 December 1999 , taking account of the prospect of enlargement .
So I suggest that we do not jump the gun and concentrate first on completing the Intergovernmental Conference .
After that the Council will be able to take due note of the Commission communication which I mentioned and which will then form the basis for further talks on , among other things , the future of the EU structural policy after 1999 .
My thanks to Mr Patijn for his answer .
I accept everything he has said and I understand the reasons why he said what he said .
And I would like to put it to Mr Patijn that there is need for strong political direction from the Council of Ministers to the Commission , bearing in mind that there is unemployment to the tune of about 20 million in the European Union , which must surely rank as a number one political priority of the Union which has to be addressed in terms of planning for the period after 1999 .
This issue should be addressed as a matter of urgency particularly if , as we would all wish , the European Union is to deal with this problem affecting citizens of the Union , and if the required credibility of the Union in the eyes of the people of the Member States is to be won back .
I am grateful to Mr Collins for understanding that the Council cannot say a great deal about structural policy after 1999 .
The Council agrees that the whole question of boosting employment in the European Union also needs particularly careful consideration at Union level .
We are aware of that and I would not wish to wait till 1999 to see what the situation is .
I think that on the basis of the policy developed since the European Council in Essen we have the ability to make our current structural policy , under which dozens of billion ECU will be spent in the next few years , as relevant as possible to the fight against unemployment .
Mention has been made of regional pacts .
I think these are matters on which we can already act .
We must not be in too much a hurry to start the very important discussion on how we are going to organize our financial relationships in the light of enlargement in the next century .
I have a very specific and tangible question for the Council .
It is as follows : whenever we finance the Structural Funds or pay general fees to the Union , I have long criticised the fact that the GDP fee is based on GDP alone without any adjustment for buying power in the community .
The calculations which I have made in this respect show that there would be considerable changes if we were to make the natural adjustments and take notice of the level of buying power in each country .
I understand the difficulties in getting this communication through to the Commission but I would like to ask the Council the following : Is it not possible for the Council to put forward the view that even Structural Fund charges should include a measurement of buying power so that Gross National Product can be adjusted in relation to this ?
I am not sure I understood the honourable member 's question properly .
Do I gather that he is arguing in favour of using real purchasing power parities rather than gross national product as the basis for contributions to the European Union ?
The ways in which the European Community 's expenditure is financed are laid down in the Treaty .
These are firstly import duties , secondly agricultural levies and thirdly VAT .
Gross national product only comes into it for the remaining part .
That is stipulated in the Treaty .
I as a Dutch delegate to the Intergovernmental Conference am not aware of any proposal , even from the Swedish Government , to change that .
I can confirm that a change of policy of the kind you suggest is not currently under consideration .
Ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank the President of the Council for attending and for his answers , and I would inform you that as the time allocated for Question Time to the Council has been used up , Questions Nos 18 to 29 will be answered in writing .

Question Time is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Petrol and diesel quality - motor vehicle emissions
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0096 / 97 by Mr Mamère , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending Council Directive 93 / 12 / EEC ( COM ( 96 ) 0248 - C4-0462 / 96 ) ; -A4-0116 / 97 by Mr Lange , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles and amending Council Directives 70 / 156 / EEC and 70 / 220 / EEC ; -A4-0099 / 97 by Mr Eisma , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a future strategy for the control of atmospheric emissions from road transport taking into account the results from the Auto / Oil Programme ( COM ( 96 ) 0248 - C4-0492 / 96 ) ; -A4-0117 / 97 by Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community Strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and improve fuel economy ( COM ( 95 ) 0689 - C4-0015 / 96 ) .
Madam President , although the report I am speaking to is independent of the reports by Mr Lange , Mr Mamère and Mr Eisma , it must be recognized that together they form a political and environmental package of great merit .
The first proposal we presented in the Committee on the Environment was weaker than the final proposal .
We have accepted amendments from colleagues in the Socialist Group , the Green Group and even the Group of the European People 's Party , and as a result I think the report has been enriched .
There are perhaps some sentences that I do not entirely go along with , but as the report was unanimously approved in the Committee on the Environment , I prefer not to dwell on them - for example there are words like ' rejection ' of voluntary agreements which I do not support and which could have been worded differently .
But as the report was approved unanimously at the last meeting of the committee , I intend to defend it here .
All the rapporteurs for this package of measures agree on certain points : these relate to air quality , carbon dioxide emissions , and fuel quality .
And we all criticize the fact that more account has been taken of the criteria of industrialists and conversations with them than the views of experts and non-governmental organizations .
Certain points need highlighting .
First , the European Commission itself believes that if energy measures are not taken , the Rio Conference commitment - to be reviewed in New York in June - to stabilize CO2 emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 cannot be met .
This objective seems to be difficult to fulfil , so the Commission 's proposal seems weak because it does not specify any legislative measures which might ensure that we achieve these objectives .
The first criticism is on voluntary agreements .
In this Parliament we frequently debate repeated non-compliance with Community legislation .
And if Community legislation is not complied with , it must be doubtful that voluntary agreements will be complied with .
So in the report from the Committee on the Environment , we propose that , in accordance with the provisions of the European Commission 's own legislative programme for 1994 , a directive be drawn up to cover CO2 reductions , making compliance obligatory . And we propose that it be presented before 1998 .
We also propose that there should be a legislative measure covering a reasonable tax proposal .
And when we say reasonable , we mean we want to avoid burdening the worse off .
The proposal for immediate renewal of vehicles in circulation and the proposal to tax fuel indiscriminately - put forward in an amendment discussed in the Committee on the Environment - make no distinction between those least able and most able to afford them in Europe . We propose that there should be a legislative proposal which , in short , favours those who pollute least .
In the future , when there are cars which can run for a hundred kilometres on three litres of petrol , those who use more utilitarian cars , lighter and less polluting , should have tax exemptions . And taxes should be increased on those who have more powerful cars which pollute more .
We think such a legislative proposal should be put before this Parliament . The Commission should not consider it ambitious to aspire to reduce consumption to five litres of fuel for one hundred kilometres , because we believe there is evidence that this is possible - for example , the car proposed by Greenpeace , the ' Twingo Smile ' .
We also believe that these measures should be complemented by a definite reduction in fuel consumption through measures which I recognize affect the Member States and the principle of subsidiarity in some cases , but which are of the utmost importance : for example , speed reduction ; massive use of public transport - and for this to happen it must be improved ; review of land use .
So there are a number of measures the Commission cannot always take and they have to be designed for Member States to take , but they can help reduce CO2 emissions .
Finally , Madam President , Mr Commissioner , if the amendments to the four reports are accepted in general , I believe this package of measures will take us towards the objective of reducing CO2 emissions , transforming the polluted air we now have in Europe into purer air and making fuel less polluting .
Madam President , I am giving the opinion for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on fuel standards and specifications .
I should say , at the outset , that the committee achieved a high level of political consensus on the opinion produced and , in general , there was a welcome for the Auto / Oil Programme as a step in the right direction , whatever misgivings various members may have had about its detail .
In respect of the plans for fuel specifications in the year 2000 , the Economic Committee proposes limited reductions in sulphur content targets as against those limits recommended in the Auto / Oil Programme .
We were - one might use the phrase - ' less ambitious ' in this regard than the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , though one could pick some other phrases as well to describe the level of discretion the committee chose to employ on those limits .
In respect of the year 2005 , the Economic Committee , anticipating an Auto / Oil 2 Programme , suggested Annexes III and IV and sets out in these annexes indicative standards that it would like to see taken into account in an Auto / Oil 2 Programme .
This differs from the emphasis in the Environment Committee , which would prefer , at this stage , to set a mandatory standard right now in respect of the longer term .
In respect of fiscal incentives , the Economic Committee is of the strong opinion that we should employ them , especially in this fuel area , through differentiation of excise taxation .
This could facilitate in Member States , subject to procedures to ensure coherence of the internal market , the introduction of more advanced fuels than those specified as the minimum essential .
Indeed , I note and welcome the Environment Committee 's support for this proposition .
The Economic Committee spent considerable time in trying to develop an appreciation of the cost differential impact by Member State and noted that there were considerable differentials in cost for the refining industry between northern and southern countries .
Having regard to this , the committee recommended a limited transitional period for southern states , because we have to be realistic , as well as ambitious , in setting targets .
Overall , I would say our approach dealt more with what I might call the ' political ' chemistry than the fuel chemistry in terms of the focus of our concerns .
It is clear from the Commission 's communication that the Council is quite divided on this .
I believe it is proper that we in Parliament should not seek to make the best the enemy of the good in terms of possible solutions .
The Economic Committee proposals are realistic and , at second reading , they will be closer to the ultimate centre of gravity of this Institution 's bargaining with the Council .
Madame President , first of all I should like to thank all my colleagues for their excellent cooperation .
We have drawn up opinions and reports in a number of committees in a good spirit of mutual understanding .
On behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I should like to thank in particular Mr Lange , who is responsible for the parliamentary report on exhaust emissions from private cars .
It is he who , in the Committee on the Environment took over the relevant proposal from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I should like to draw your attention once again to the fact that we are now being asked to take a decision on binding emission standards for 2005 , rather than indicative standards , as proposed by the Commission .
These objectives , criticized by some as too stringent , can be achieved , provided that the appropriate means are employed .
In this connection , in all its opinions and reports Parliament has strongly advocated tax incentives .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy considered the issue in the light of industrial competitiveness as well , and noted that if the European automobile industry does not develop new technologies rapidly , the Japanese will .
It is also very important to tackle the issue of fuel quality , since this has a prompt impact on the quality of the air .
The Swedish and Finnish Governments have commissioned a study which shows that the petroleum industry has overestimated the cost of producing cleaner fuels .
The results of that study have also been presented in Parliament .
All in all , the Commission should revise its approach and base its own proposals on the best available technology .
The result achieved now by Parliament during the first reading will provide an extremely solid basis for the subsequent readings .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has also been very closely involved with the auto-oil programme .
A great deal has been said , and a great deal more remains to be said .
So I should like to confine myself to just five points . First , we absolutely must have a link between vehicle emissions and fuel qualities .
We cannot do one thing and allow the other , that is the belief of the Committee on Research .
Secondly , we can do much more today than we ourselves are willing to admit .
This was apparent from the hearing and it was apparent from the discussions with the associations and the industry .
So we should take a more ambitious approach here .
Thirdly , important points were not taken into account in the sector of research policy , especially the ' car of the future ' task force , which is supposed to make research results available in this specific sector .
No mention has been made of those results , or of that task force .
Fourthly , the health studies commissioned by the Commission have had no impact on the legislation .
The Committee on Research finds this , too , more than regrettable as this would have given clearer indications of what we have to do .
And , fifthly , we do not need a second auto-oil programme .
We know what we can do today , and we can set clear requirements for the year 2000 , and for the year 2005 as well .
The Committee on Research proposed a form of revision clause ; unfortunately , this was not adopted .
But it would have provided an opportunity to make provision , at this stage , for a possible future revision which is not yet seen as a matter of urgency .
The Committee on Research therefore declared in favour of clear , transparent and ambitious legislation , and I hope that Parliament will give a signal to that effect during tomorrow 's debate .
Madam President , I am the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism regarding the measure for which Mr Lange is the rapporteur , but I should like with deep satisfaction to express my appreciation of all the reports presented , from Mr Mamère 's to Mr Eisma 's and that of Mrs González Álvarez , in addition , of course , to the Lange report .



As I agree with everything that has been said so far , I should just like to go into a number of points in greater detail and stress how important it is for the European Parliament not to confine itself to a cost-effectiveness analysis , but emphasize the need for a cost-benefit analysis linked to the relationship with the internalization of external costs , a matter which we have , moreover , already discussed .
We must also give due emphasis to the social , as well as environmental , importance of energy saving and reduction of emissions , rather than to the speed or acceleration capacity of motor vehicles .
For this reason I should like to expand upon certain aspects of my opinion .
Firstly , it is simply not enough to contemplate motor vehicles that can run according to Auto / Oil Programme criteria for only 80 , 000 kilometres ; we are proposing at least 160 , 000 kilometres .
Secondly , we believe that engines should not only allow reduced consumption and improved performance in terms of reducing pollution , but that new engines should be envisaged which are capable of running on new , non-polluting sources of energy , such as solar power or hydrogenic energy sources .
Lastly , it is important for on-board diagnostics systems to be based on minimum criteria standardized at European level , to operate for both diesel and petrol engines and to be designed in such a way as to ensure monitoring and real control .
Madam President , my opinion deals with the future strategy for the control of atmospheric pollution .
The Auto / Oil Programme has been rightly described as ground-breaking with the two industries , the automobile and the oil industries , working together .
Similarly , we in EMAC worked cooperatively to produce our three opinions , finding common positions which enabled us to gain support from colleagues in our committee .
I have to say that was no easy matter for EMAC has at its very heart industrial policy .
We therefore sought a very fine balance between costs to industry as opposed to costs to health .
The outcome , in my view , was a strengthening of the Commission 's proposal to a realistic level with a sensible compromise between cost-effectiveness and the best available technology .
Cold start procedures , on-board diagnostics , fiscal incentives for scrappage schemes and overall improvement for fuel quality were all included in my opinion and supported by the Economic Committee .
Such high standards give us two bonuses : cleaner air in Europe and achieving the leading edge of environmental technology .
With such standards we will be able to sell our cars to all world markets and set a standard for all our international competitors .
I am happy to tell you that I made a contribution , albeit small , to these major reports .
But this very week councils in my constituency produced an excellent leaflet entirely in line with Parliament 's report , making solid proposals for better air quality in Northamptonshire .
Here again is a fine example of European legislation being in tune with local concerns .
If Parliament and the Commission , as I hope , endorse these reports our 360 million citizens will enjoy cleaner , healthier air and lives will be saved which could otherwise be lost .
It is an admirable objective , a lasting achievement and , in fact , legislation we can all be proud of .
Thank you Madam President . I have to say right at the outset that I am representing my colleague , Giles Chichester , who is the rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Research , Energy and Technology .
He has prepared some words for me .
They are brilliant , perceptive and highly technical . I can take absolutely no credit for them .
Mr Chichester has had to go to London because , as the Commissioners may be aware , there is an event on 1 May for which we are preparing in the United Kingdom and Mr Chichester 's presence is absolutely essential for that .
Here is Mr Chichester 's speech : It is important to recognize the progress towards cleaner air that has already been achieved in the reduction of vehicle emissions .
The Auto / Oil 2000 targets for much lower emissions are a further significant step from the smelly 70s .
It is also important to remember that these measures are aimed at improving air quality in urban areas where the concentration of vehicles is greatest .
The question is : has the Commission set the levels for reduced emissions at the right values or has it been too soft on the fuel and vehicle industries ?
In particular , are the target values for sulphur in parts per million for petrol and diesel vehicles still too high at 200 and 350 ?
Under the criteria of cost-effectiveness and reasonableness as well as technical feasibility , the answer is probably yes for 2000 , but we should await the review set for 1998 before taking further decisions about further reductions for 2005 .
Those who want 50 parts per million regardless of cost or technical feasibility must recognize that it is the consumer who will pay for all these measures and that we should proceed on the basis of properly researched and balanced proposals .
Madam President , I wish to give my support to the proposals put forward by the rapporteurs involved in the Auto / Oil Programme , and also to Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez , in her communication on CO2 and cars .
The proposals may appear radical in comparison to the Commission proposal but , in fact , they are only a starting point for future negotiations with the Council .
If you look at what is being currently proposed in other parts of the world , notably Japan and the USA , they are reasonable and comparable with what is being suggested there .
We are debating a package tonight of which all parts are necessary if we are to achieve real progress in all areas , not only protection of the environment and the public health of Europe 's citizens , but also economic development and ensuring Europe 's future economic development and progress .
The package of measures proposed tonight will give us cleaner fuel .
That will enable cleaner cars to be developed and also , probably , smaller , more fuel-efficient cars .
And that will not just be acceptable in Europe , it will give us cars that are acceptable in other parts of the world to which we can sell and export them .
It will also give us a future in the two very important industries that we cannot ignore and ensure Europe 's future prosperity .
We cannot ignore the fact that this package of measures will give our people healthier air to breathe and call , hopefully , a halt to CO2 emissions .
We can also expect that we will do two other things to two important industries .
It will push them in a direction which currently their investment managers do not want to take : investment in new technology , investment in new equipment that will keep them ahead of developments in other parts of the world to ensure that they can provide the products required by the global marketplace .
The investment required to do that is substantial , but necessary .
If we examine the costs , they will be recouped from the millions of motorists that will drive these cars , refuel these cars , that will buy these cars , not just in Europe but in other parts of the world at an average cost of ECU 10 per year , per motorist .
That cannot be a bad deal ; it is a small cost for protecting our environment , the health of our people and the future prosperity of Europe .
I urge the Commission to accept these proposals .
Mr President , I have been the rapporteur for the technical committee on the issue of reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
It is important to make it clear that a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions from private cars will not be achieved through the use of a single measure within a certain limited area .
On the contrary , the technical committee wants to draw your attention to the need to look at the issue as a whole .
A number of measures are required in order to achieve an acceptable environmental solution .
These include taxes , legislation , fewer cars , new types of fuel etc .
The research committee emphasises that the nuts and bolts of these measures is investment in research and technical development .
These issues were not handled in any particular depth in the communication from the Commission , but technical development in this area is far from static , as certain unnamed companies and people are trying to make out .
There are already examples of cars which can , by a very wide margin , meet the requirements which we in the European Parliament have previously set and we would remind the Commission of this .
The community strategy from the Commission is a welcome first step but it is far from adequate from a slightly more long term perspective .
It is important to point out that the reduction in carbon dioxide emissions must continue after the year 2005 , with a new goal for the year 2010 , one for 2015 and so on .
This is necessary for the European car industry 's long term plans and also to enable the EU to achieve the necessary environmental standards which have been set .
So we would remind the Commission that , before the fifth framework programme for research , it must put forward a strategic plan for research into a reduction in the use of fuel in vehicles .
This must contain not only short term solutions but also basic long term strategies for changes in technology , function , materials and production techniques .
Many of the proposals which have been put forward by the technical committee are to be found in one form or another in the report presented by Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez today .
Madam President , I have drawn up the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the report by Mrs González Álvarez .
It may well be helpful just for me to say that , in this confusing mixture .
In combating CO2 emissions , we obviously have to look at the transport sector , because it is after all responsible for nearly a quarter of these emissions , most of which are caused by private cars .
If we are eventually to move towards a sustainable society , the use of cars will have to be dramatically reduced , while at the same time cars will have to be made a great deal more efficient .
However , it is an illusion to think that ' end-of-pipe ' technology will rid us of CO2 emissions and so could also provide a solution to the climate change which these emissions are going to produce .
As long as we use fossil fuels , emissions will be the result , and that is why an active land use planning and urbanization policy should be developed to reduce the distances involved and make collective public transport and bicycles more attractive , since by this means 50 % of car journeys can easily be avoided because they are shorter than five kilometres .
Also , some serious targets must now finally be set for the car industry .
Although the technology exists to produce extremely efficient cars which consume three litres of petrol per 100 kilometres , cars are being given bigger and bigger engines and the CO2 emissions are simply increasing .
These are measures which are of genuine use .
But also the introduction and enforcement of a speed limit of 100 km / h - which you may be amazed to learn the Committee on Transport has approved - and campaigns to promote suitable driving and mobility behaviour can make an important contribution .
Reducing CO2 emissions in the transport sector should not just be a matter of fine words , but be developed into a policy at European level .
We have the policy instruments to do this - what we still need is the political will , both from the Commission and the Council .
Madam President , I originally drafted the opinion on fuels for the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy but now speak for the Socialist Group .
Yes , the methodology of the Auto / Oil Programme was innovative but it had two problems : firstly , it took a long time , so that recent worries about , for example , particulates were not covered ; secondly , the European Parliament was involved at a very late stage .
The European Parliament does not operate on a knee-jerk , reflex system .
We have done considerable research before coming to the conclusions before us tonight .
We used our own research establishment - STOA - to produce for us a paper which indicated low sulphur fuels are essential .
We held a hearing , and other authoritative studies came to the same conclusion .
I want to speak about one thing only - the need for lower sulphur levels , particularly in diesel - for one reason : this would save tens of thousands of lives and would prevent many people from spending their lives gasping from respiratory illness .
Particulates , not identified at the start of the Auto / Oil Programme , are a major contributor to those problems .
The oil companies disagree with the conclusions of Parliament on the grounds of costs .
Let me say this to them : first of all , low sulphur fuels would be more competitive .
Secondly , in any case , they have to refurbish and invest in their refineries continuously .
Thirdly , the cost , as passed to customers , is not exorbitant .
Fourthly , new car technology is only possible with low sulphur fuels .
Fifthly , those Member States particularly hard-hit could have a derogation .
Sixthly , and most importantly , you have an immediate effect when you change the fuels .
For these reasons , the Socialist Group strongly supports the proposals of Mr Mamère .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking tonight in place of my colleague Gérard d 'Aboville who had to jump ship at the last minute and asked me to take the tiller instead of him .
Polluting emissions caused by vehicles and the fight for better air quality are disturbing problems calling for long-term vision . That is the subject of the Auto-Oil programme .
The approach is dispassionate , founded on logical and scientific reasoning , which will make it easier to understand and defend the European Commission 's positions .
I want to discuss the Mamère report , first of all . The sulphur content of petrol is currently 400 ppm and the Commission proposes to reduce it to 200 ppm , which is already an important effort , cutting the current threshold by 50 % .
To reduce the threshold even further , to 50 ppm , as the rapporteur demands , does not take account of the cost-effectiveness relationship in the search for better air quality , because above 200 ppm this reduction involves considerable investment for a minimal reduction of emissions .
Other factors should also be considered , for example inspection , maintenance , elimination of old vehicles , improvement in traffic conditions , use of liquefied oil gas or natural gas for public transport , not forgetting electric vehicles of course , which are non-pollutant and silent .
As regards diesel fuel , the first difficulty lies in the sulphur content .
The Commission has set a threshold of 350 ppm , instead of the current 500 ppm , which represents an important effort and a substantial advance .
The rapporteur is asking for a threshold of 50 to 30 ppm , which would also involve excessive cost without appreciable benefit .
So our group asks for the rejection of amendments 42 to 49 ( except 46 ) and maintenance of amendments 51 , 52 and 59 .


As regards the points raised in the Lange report , it seems unreasonable , indeed counter-productive , to force the motor industry to adopt stricter standards for a lesser result .
In our view the Commission 's proposals on the standards for 2000 , based on a cost-effectiveness analysis , represent a good compromise between the imperatives of economic efficiency and the indispensable objectives linked to the improvement of air quality .
Madam President , in preparing the new post-2000 emission standards , the Commission has sat down with the automobile and oil industries and established a constructive dialogue .
This new approach has taken longer than expected , so that the Commission has proved unable to meet the deadline laid down by Directive 94 / 12 / EEC .
If the Commission itself does not meet the deadlines , what can we then expect from the Member States ?
I think it is important for the new requirements to be implemented without delay .
The fiscal advantages for clean vehicles could then be introduced some two years before the new standards take effect .
We already have some types of cars which meet much stricter standards than are laid down by the existing legislation .
As regards the standards themselves , both for cars and fuels , the Auto / Oil Programme is a disappointment .
First of all , the background level chosen for establishing permitted air pollution is much too low .
Taking the mean value of pollution within an area of 4 km2 fails to do justice to public health .
What is the sense in opting for a measurement network and mean values , when in reality very high concentrations of benzene , nitrogen oxides and sulphur oxides are recorded in places where there are large numbers of people , such as narrow shopping streets ?
For that reason alone , we need to make the emission standards stricter .
But there are technical reasons too .
The automobile industry has known for years how to make substantial cuts in emissions .
What was lacking was the necessary legal force .
Much more can be done when it becomes a matter of necessity .
The same applies in principle to refining .
Here we have to deal with a substantial overcapacity in old refineries .
It may be tough , but the new requirements for fuels are also a good reason for stopping motor fuel production in the older plants .
It emerged from the hearing that the sulphur content , in particular , of both petrol and diesel could be much lower .
As long as our mobility continues to increase , we must reduce the emissions of pollutants , not forgetting CO2 .
I therefore fully support the reports on the Auto / Oil Programme .
Madam President , at a time when the European motor industry is shaken by unprecedented upheavals , there is no question of our being accomplices to its demise and the ensuing social cataclysm , especially in our country where it represents 10 % of jobs .
For our part , we have always criticized the current free trade system ; we have always had this economic system imposed on us in areas where competition is distorted and we have suffered .
The motor industry provides an explicit example .
By keeping the currency low , the American , Japanese and Korean governments are giving their manufacturers considerable assistance .
The American government goes even further by massively supporting research .
If we accept certain ludicrous standards contained in the report , we risk killing off the French and European motor industries .
Some of these provisions are technically impossible .
Furthermore , we have been informed of this .
I also want to remind Parliament that emission standards for new vehicles have been the subject of seven successive sets of measures since 1970 , decimating emissions from private cars .
And in addition , Madam President , we do not really have a report on the fact that vehicles only pollute towns and there are many other forms of pollution .
There are other solutions too , as Mr Pompidou specified just now , and I do not have much time to mention them : old vehicles , further research into fuel , public transport .
So I think we should be more reasonable today and consider the environment but also oppose certain provisions in this report which go too far .
Madam President , we support the position of the Committee on the Environment of the European Parliament for four essential reasons : competitiveness , public health , improving the environment and enhancing the role of the European Parliament .
Competitiveness because it is essential to develop the clean technologies more swiftly if we want to keep European industry competitive on a world scale .
Whilst the Commission and some elements in the oil industry are pleased that the sulphur content is fixed at 220 ppm for petrol and at 350 ppm for diesel , Japan has already announced a cut of 50 ppm in the near future , which will require new catalytic converters which will reduce the emission of gases into the atmosphere .
Reasons of public health because we think it is necessary to set time limits for the standardization of lead-free petrol , in view also of the universally recognized health hazard .
As regards the Commission 's original proposal , we think that an effort should be made , both as regards questions of sulphur and for questions of lead-free petrol , to strike a balance which provides an acceptable exemption for those Member States who do not have the time or the money or rather more time and investment to alter their refineries .
A third point I should like to stress is that this initiative is , taken as a whole , an initiative to improve the environment and this Parliament had two possible courses : either to adopt a more cautious position , along the lines of the Commissions ' initial proposal , and thus lose its leverage for applying pressure in talks and strengthening its role , or , as it to opt , as the rapporteur rightly did , particularly with the Mamère , Lange and Eimer reports and , as the Committee on the Environment rightly did , to opt for a tougher position , thus making it necessary to hold talks on the procedure to be followed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a German Christmas carol which begins with the words ' Once in every year ' .
It would make a good title for this debate : once in every year .
The reason , of course , is that we never have the courage to put forward figures that will do duty for the future , but always mess about with tiny percentages . And then of course the question arises of the cost / benefit ratio and technical feasibility .
I really do think it 's time to get to the point !
That is why we fully support the Lange report , which proposes binding levels for the year 2005 , not just guidelines .
We think it makes no sense to launch an auto-oil II programme a year after this Directive comes into force .
The industry , too , must finally be told what the position is and given the information it needs , then it might be rather more willing to make the necessary effort .
Coming to the point , as I said , is important for the industry too .
As far as the exhaust levels go - there are 14 items , or 18 if we take the totals - we propose in the Lange report a further reduction for six of them .
This is technically feasible even today , and not unconditionally dependent on lowering the sulphur content in petrol .
After all , it was said at the hearing that these values are already within the reach of presentday technology .
Of course , it isn 't necessarily an easy matter .
But there is another thing we must bear in mind : we have already achieved many successes , with levels in some cases being reduced by 90 % .
But if there were as many cars on the roads worldwide as there are in Europe , then the stock would be quintupled .
And even if we cut the limit values substantially , the overall result would be an increase in emissions , and that of course is something we cannot allow .
I believe that the industry could easily manage this , because that in fact is what the engineers are telling us .
And so what I say is that we don 't just need clean engines , we need clean directors too , because they do far more to make things hazy , and to make them grubby - they think a hydrocarbon is a carbon you hide behind !
I have more confidence in the engineers than I do in the directors .
Let me also say a word about the so-called on-board diagnosis system .
We quite agree that this is a good thing for the environment .
But , of course , the work must not go ahead in secret so that only the franchised workshops have access to the data .
As I see it that would be the exploitation of a monopoly position , which is of course completely unacceptable to us as consumers .
Probably these people have been misled by the name ' on-board diagnosis ' and think that where there is a diagnosis there must necessarily be medical confidentiality too .
But the rules of that confidentiality derive from quite different terms .
If we lower these limit values , we can cure our environmental patient without doing too much damage to the cost / benefit principle .
I say again , I have far more confidence in engineers and researchers than I do in businessmen .
Madam President , we welcome the reports today being debated in Parliament on the future of the motor vehicle , which forms part of the future of the economy , technology and the labour market .
We are , however , requiring motor vehicle manufacturers to take on additional commitments : we are asking them to assume social responsibilities as well .
The environment is , perhaps , the first of these commitments and , fortunately , it is increasingly becoming a fundamental consideration in the activities of the automobile industry .
The Auto / Oil programme which we are debating today basically covers three points : a reduction in motor vehicle emissions to combat pollution , an improvement in fuel quality and control of emissions from road transport .
All these reports , by and large , call for solutions to be identified to provide increasingly environment-friendly motor vehicles and fuels .
We agree , of course , with these objectives , but we have to point out that , at times , a desperate search for improvements can end up being counterproductive .
The Commission has drawn up some good documents and some reasonable proposals .
The rapporteurs have to some extent distorted the Commission 's proposals , imagining a future for motor vehicles which started yesterday .
If technical lead times are not respected , costs are increased , leading to a doubly negative result .
Increased vehicle costs slow down sales and renewal of the vehicle fleet , and lead to a crisis in planned investments and consequently employment , without creating new jobs .
In the last 20 years pollution caused by motor vehicles has fallen by 90 % .
A further nine per cent can be eliminated over the next eight years , at a reasonable cost .
For the remaining one per cent , we cannot demand very short deadlines and costs which , ultimately , the consumer has to shoulder .
For these reasons we are critical of some of the proposals made by Mr Mamère and Mr Lange and confirm that we are favourable to the Commission 's position as regards most of the programme .
We are critical because , in the final analysis , certain proposals make neither economic nor environmental sense , and fail to take account of other fundamental issues .
There is no mention of electrically-powered motor vehicles or methanepowered vehicles with the combined petrol / methane bi-fuel system .
There is no mention of fiscal incentives for the purchase of a new vehicle , even though it is well known that there are still too many old vehicles on European roads .
In Italy , the average age of a car is 14 years , and , what is more , companies purchasing cars cannot claim exemption from VAT at 19 % .
And yet there are calls to meet impossible deadlines , to carry out tests at -7o , when the temperature in two-thirds of Europe does not fall below zero all year round , or to install OBD in diesel engine cars , which would mean changing all the industrial production systems .
We do not want stricter standards than those called for by the Commission .
The environment is improving without constraints being applied , and without costs which have to be borne by motor vehicle and fuel users .
In short , we intend to adhere to the principle of sustainable development .
Madam President , there are only two ways to improve air quality .
Either change the technical standards for vehicles , or use less polluting fuels , and they are more sensible solutions , after all , than banning traffic every other day .
The cost of the first option is exorbitant , even if we only consider the renewal of the vehicles in circulation .
The second seems more plausible to me and would have immediate impact .
But two groups are in confrontation .
The European car manufacturers and the advocates of bio-fuels campaign for stricter standards .
The oil industry is hostile to that .
So we must research bio-fuels because , like other oxygenated substances , they are capable of , first , improving combustion conditions through the oxygen ratio , secondly , reducing the greenhouse effect linked to the carbon-dioxide content of the atmosphere , thirdly , reducing the sulphur content of diesel and the emission of particles , fourthly , improving the octane of petrol , and fifthly , limiting the aromatics content of petrol , as these substances are highly carcinogenic .
The development of bio-fuels can only happen if excise duties are adjusted .
Contrary to all environmental logic , France , which wants to create a lower excise duty , is finding itself thwarted by the European Commission .
This very morning , I believe , the College of Commissioners refused to accept general reduced rates for bio-fuels .
The amendments from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection will lead to better air quality and encourage the use of bio-fuels , a more effective agricultural outlet than uncultivated land - commonly called fallow and not very respectful of our desire for harmonious land development .
Madam President , the Lange report on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , in which other draftsmen have been involved giving their committees ' opinions , is extremely important , as may be inferred from the number of committees involved .
Not least among these is the Committee on Transport , to which I belong , along with Mr Tamino , who is also a draftsman for the Committee 's opinion , and whom , along with the others , I should like to congratulate on his excellent work on a complex , topical issue , namely lesspolluting motor vehicles .
The rapporteur and draftsmen all concur in deploring that the Commission failed to involve technical specialists and experts from the various Member States in the research ; however , on the whole they welcome the Commission 's proposals .
At this point I should like to quote from the various reports ; suffice it to say , however , that after examining these reports and the proposals made and opinions expressed , I agree with the view that the costs projected by the Commission for the measures to be implemented to make motor vehicles less polluting seem too high .
Indeed , this is only to be expected bearing in mind that the data comes from the industry , which has a vested interest in overestimating .
Member States are asked to grant tax relief and other economic incentives to the industry to promote the use of environment-friendly engines and fuels .
We should look at this more closely : we have only to think of the criticism levelled at the Commission by the rapporteurs for its failure to include the low temperature and cold-start test procedure in the proposals .
We are also being asked to reduce the sulphur content of fuels substantially in order to restrict emissions of particulate matter in diesel engines and ensure the optimal functioning of catalytic converters in petrol and diesel engines .
I regard as important the idea that there is a need to take prompt action to achieve a drastic reduction in fuel consumption by motor vehicles in a broad sense , by 2005 under the Auto / Oil Programme , with a maximum consumption of five litres per hundred kilometres .
This is to restrict emissions of CO2 , which is a prime cause of pollution and the greenhouse effect .
I should like to hark back to Mr Tamino 's opinion and say that I agree with his request for us to welcome the amendments intended to promote cost / benefits , energy-saving and reduction of emissions as opposed to speed and acceleration capacity in motor vehicles , and to promote the use of renewable energy sources for vehicles .
My report , now at the codecision stage , on the inspection of motor vehicles and their trailers also took that approach .
We in the Alleanza Nazionale will vote in favour of amendments designed to achieve that objective .
Madam President , the Auto / Oil Programme is an excellent initiative for an integrated strategy designed to reduce atmospheric pollution and based on a different approach to traffic management , technical improvements and measures relating to motor vehicle maintenance and fuel quality specifications .
Indeed , atmospheric pollution causes serious illnesses and therefore triggers high social costs , and , unfortunately , despite the initiatives which have been duly taken in the last few years , levels are pollution are increasing , especially in urban areas , as a result of traffic expansion .
The measures introduced by these new directives undoubtedly imply costs for manufacturers , and , in a Europe united on a basis of solidarity and egalitarianism , these should not impose a greater burden on some countries and than on others , bearing in mind , for instance , sources of petroleum supplies .
But the guiding principle must be protection of the environment and the health of our citizens , who can only make their voices heard through their representatives in the only democratically elected Community institution .
In the legislative process the most suitable solutions and the appropriate and necessary timescales will need to be established , but we have to be clear that there is an obstacle and we must not be afraid to tackle it .
Madam President , on behalf of my group I have been asked to comment particularly on the Eisma report .
I would simply like to say that I welcome the report which sets the scene against which the Lange and the Mamère reports must be regarded .
The Eisma report makes it clear that the European Parliament is not prepared to give blanket acceptance to a strategy worked out by the Commission and the industries concerned .
In fact we are in the rather curious position that many of those who have made representations to us seem to believe that there is absolutely no need to alter the Auto / Oil programme in any respect whatsoever .
That is an unrealistic view with which to come to the Parliament .
Members of the European Parliament will want to probe the validity of the Auto / Oil programme 's proposals in the light of the priority which we all want to give to the health of this generation and the future prospects of human life on earth .
Together with Lange and Mamère these European Parliament reports therefore represent , I have to say - not as a trade unionist - a sort of trades union maximum first bid and it is now up to the Commission and the Auto / Oil industries to show MEPs , if they can , exactly where they consider the Parliament 's amendments are excessive .
Colleagues should be aware that very high standards will probably call into being very lengthy derogation periods in certain countries .
We also ignore at our peril the points made by Mr Pompidou and Mr Garosci and some of the Members on my left but politically on the Parliament 's right .
Those points have to be taken into account .
Two personal points if I may .
Through my connection with the Peugeot company in the United Kingdom I bring some knowledge of the auto industry to this debate and I must emphasize that it is in Europe 's interest to have a modern car industry in place giving people jobs but also meeting increasingly stringent emission standards .
Some of the amendments , particularly in the Lange report , require the car industry to conform to very high standards without any particular justification on the basis of gains in air quality .
This is an important point made by Mr Pompidou and we should remember it .
Secondly , a minor point but one which has excited a lot of interest in my country , and I suspect in other countries , is the proposal by the European Commission to ban the sale of all leaded petrol by the year 2000 .
I at least have received many representations from the owners of classic cars which can only run on leaded petrol .
Today I have received from the Commission staff a very useful paper justifying this and setting out the whole background and I think allaying the fears of classic car and vintage car owners to some extent .
I only regret that information could not have been available earlier .
We look forward to what the Commission has to say but I would sound a note of warning .
One thing that is quite clear to me is that the Parliament is very , very under-resourced as regards the necessary research with which to back up the points which are made in Lange and Mamère .
I regard the STOA report as completely unreadable and virtually useless to any Member of the House .
There are copies available over at distribution if anybody wants to have a copy of it .
So we look forward to the Commission 's reply and if the arguments of Mr Alber , Mr Lange and others are right then clearly Mrs Bjerregaard will accept all the amendments put forward by the Parliament because there can be no other alternative .
We therefore wait with interest to see what Mrs Bjerregaard has to say .
Madam President , there are at least five factors to be considered in the whole operation to improve the environment proposed in the Auto / Oil Programme .
First , the social and human costs of the current level of pollution ; second , the objectives to be set ; third , the methodology for achieving them ; fourth , the deadlines for achieving them ; and , fifth , the economic cost to the consumer and industry , and ultimately to society .
We disagree with the Mamère report on the time factor .
We agree on the other factors , but we disagree with the deadlines set in the Mamère report .
Consequently , the Spanish socialists will vote for the Lange report but against the Mamère report because strengthening the objectives for the year 2000 and already setting a second set of objectives for 2005 means that for some countries - including mine - those objectives will not only be very expensive , but virtually unattainable , not to mention producing very serious alterations in supply or geopolitical changes in the market for crude .
Finally , having announced that negative vote , I want to add two points .
The first is that this vote against the Mamère report implies agreement with the deadlines established by the Commission in its proposal for a directive .
In our view the Commission has done serious work , not only from the technical point of view , but also in the political field , and obtained a difficult consensus .
And secondly , the Commission is on the right road and we urge the Commission to evaluate the results automatically a year after this directive comes into force , and to set the second level of objectives as a function of that .
Madam President , I should like to start by saying something about the CO2 question .
I am quite amazed that the Commission should send us a communication about the matter of the CO2 problems in car engineering .
Because I was actually under the impression that this was a classic part of the auto-oil programme .
But if you read through the Commission 's programme then you find out why it isn 't part of the auto-oil programme , because the Commission is not actually proposing anything except to say that it believes a voluntary agreement is the panacea in this particular sector , starting from Europe .
That can 't possibly be right , because voluntary agreements need framework data provided by administrative law , and the Commission proposes no such data .
I must sound a warning note against introducing voluntary agreements without these framework data in Europe .
That is precisely what will lead to the serious distortions of competition that we rightly fear .
At the most , then , voluntary agreements come at the end of the scale .
Then I could quite well image such things .
We need a phased plan for limit values , as far as CO2 is concerned , going beyond the year 2005 and as far as the year 2010 .
I could imagine that tax incentives might be a way forward here .
The car concept has got off to a good start .
We have been able to get the contracting parties sitting round a table .
We have been giving the car industry a hard time in recent years , and I think the industry has done a great deal .
But it takes two to tango , and the oil industry dropped out of the dance after a while , Commissioner .
That broke the partnership , and the result of the broken partnership lies before you : a boring auto-oil concept that leads nowhere .
We took off like a tiger , and the Commission 's truly lamentable paper has turned our tiger into a rug .
That must not be the aim of this Parliament .
We will change this auto-oil programme , with the corrections made by so many Members , until we think it holds some promise for the future .
I am perfectly willing to talk about transition periods .
The parameters for the exhaust values , and for the fuel values , must be met .
But I am quite prepared to grant transitional periods to those countries , now and in the future , that cannot meet the parameters quite as quickly .
What was the actual driving force behind this programme ?
As far as I can see , it seems to have been shareholder value .
We will change this programme so that the driving force behind it is the future and innovation .
Madam President , Europe has major problems to overcome at present : unemployment , environmental pollution and many others , too .
The way to solve these problems , without a doubt , is for industrial production to be made environmentally compatible , turning out products that can be sold on the world markets , relying on the ability of the European workers to come up with innovative ideas and technically sound solutions .
The auto-oil programme is a project along these lines , and I believe the objective can be achieved if the amendments proposed by Parliament in the Lange , Mamère and Eisma reports are accepted as they stand .
I should like to thank all three rapporteurs for their efforts , and I would also like to point out that things like a car that covers 100 kilometres on three litres of fuel were still a joke only a few years ago . People used to think it was impossible to achieve such levels of reduction and innovation .
The Mamère report deals with fuels , and I believe some very important decisions can be taken here , because a better fuel in a less good engine brings an immediate improvement in air quality .
But ' 3 litre ' cars , motor vehicles that run better on less fuel , are only going to be a practical possibility if we can also improve the fuels .
This improving of fuel quality , incidentally , is one of the points where the better environmental standards in the three new Member States might be achieved .
That would at least be a step towards an adjustment in the other direction .
Regarding the strategies proposed by Mr Eisma , the essential thing is for these strategies not just to be described , not just for the industry to be given a clear framework , but for the revision and implementation to be equally functional .
No good legislation ever comes about without revision , and we will only be able to achieve the binding values that Parliament has proposed for 2005 if we keep a constant eye on how everything is being implemented .
Madame President , the proposal for a directive on fuels is satisfactory in principle , since it seeks to bring about improvements in the quality of the air and to protect people against atmospheric pollution .
In Finland , very substantial , and successful , efforts have been made to encourage the use of lead-free petrol and I can tell you that the quality of Finnish fuels already exceeds the proposed standards .
However , the proposal for a directive completely disregards climatic conditions .
It takes no account of the specific situation of Finland as the northernmost country in the European Union , the coldest and the one with the widest temperature disparities .
In the proposal for a directive , summer begins on 1 April and ends on 30 September .
I am pleased to see that the amendments I tabled in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy concerning derogations with regard to the winter and summer periods have been taken into account in the form of amendments tabled by the Green Group .
In April , in Strasbourg , it is summer .
In southern Finland , spring may already be fairly well advanced , but in northern Finland , i.e. more than 1000 km further north , this is certainly not the case .
This is why an adequate degree of flexibility should be introduced into the arrangements for the transition to the winter or summer period , a degree of flexibility which would be determined at national level .
1997 offers a good example of the need for such flexibility : in Helsinki , in southern Finland , the temperature yesterday was -12º .
Without this flexibility , this directive would serve to keep diesel vehicles off the road in Finland and make daily life impossible .
That is certainly not its objective .
I should like to see the Member who imagines that he or she could travel by car in Finland at the moment using summer-quality diesel fuel .
In Finland , we need winter-quality fuel , with a cetane index of 46 , rather than 56 as envisaged in the original proposal for a directive .
The inclusion in the directive of a fuel suitable for use in an Arctic climate would eliminate this problem .
This is an important issue that we are discussing here today , and let us bear in mind that this is the first reading .
That is why now is the time to adopt our stance , and perhaps one should also say to deliver our opinion .
I think it must be quite clear that Parliament now has to take its stance , so that it has a definite position to fall back on when it comes to the second reading .
For the Dutch presidency , this is the number one priority in environment policy and climate policy .
The Auto / Oil Programme is quite evidently a result of that .
And I can tell you that the Netherlands - the Dutch presidency - is waiting for a strong expression of opinion from this Parliament .
As far as the proposal from the Commission is concerned , however , it is hard to avoid the impression - and this is all very well in itself - that close consultations have been taking place with the industry .
But where were the consumer organizations , the environmental experts and the health specialists ?
Fortunately , we still have a democracy and a European Parliament .
And that is what we can do here : Europe is a village , because Mr Mamère from France , Mr Lange from Germany , Mr Eisma from the Netherlands and also Mrs González Álvarez have sat down together and clearly reached an agreement . Do you believe in Europe as a village ?
It does exist - people work together there , they reach clear judgements and these are now going to be put to the vote .
Let me also make a personal comment , because this is what all this is about .
I wonder how many of you have already had something to do with air pollution and health - I certainly have done .
I have sat up at night in hospital with a one and a half year-old almost suffocating from asthma , with waiting rooms full of children where the doctors told me that the number of asthma patients in Amsterdam had increased tenfold over the last decade , and people say that all this has to do with the air pollution , of which cars are clearly a cause .
I believe that Parliament must adopt a stance on such an issue , because it is no laughing matter , I can assure you of that .
We may not be able to achieve a strong external policy , but surely in our own internal market , we cannot make this kind of mistake again .
I would therefore call on the other groups to adopt a clear stance in this first reading .
Madam President , Parliament has previously shown its strong commitment to the environment as far as cars are concerned .
The regulations governing emissions were considerably tightened in 1989 in accordance with a proposal from the Commission at that time .
With hindsight we have reason to be thankful for that .
In the same way I am convinced that Parliament 's proposal for tighter restrictions now at a time that we are considering the Auto / Oil programme is also well motivated and will lead to a cleaner environment .
I fully understand the Commission 's attitude that a thorough analysis of the cost of the different measures is required together with a comparison of benefits in terms of a cleaner environment and the saving of lives .
But it was very clear from questioning the environment committee that new computer data opens the way for more extensive environmental measures .
This applies to the quality of fuel , where it is possible to achieve lower sulphur levels at a lower cost , which also has a strong environmental impact .
It is also important that the use of fiscal incentives to achieve lower sulphur contents is not prevented .
Under normal circumstances this would not be a threat to the free market .
The proposal put forward by Parliament on the use of fuel in private cars is , in my opinion , unrealistically tough .
I have more faith in progress towards lower use of fuel with the help of fiscal incentives .
This can then be directed towards new technology , in the form of electric cars and hybrid cars for example , which can bring about radical reductions .
The motivation behind Parliament 's demands is carbon dioxide emissions .
I think it is reasonable to compare such measures with other initiatives which will produce the same effect .
A reduction in fuel use of one tenth of a litre per 10 kms by every private car in the EU will certainly reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
But the same effect can be achieved by replacing four coal powered power stations with nuclear power .
The carbon dioxide emission from all private cars in the EU could in theory be compensated for by thirty or so reactors replacing coal power .
It is my opinion that it is important to look at environmental issues as a whole .
Madame President , vehicle exhaust emissions are currently the largest single source of atmospheric pollution .
This is why it is precisely this source of pollution which must be tackled if we are deal effectively with a problem which affects many Europeans , i.e. polluted urban air which poses a danger to health .
European consumers are extremely well informed about the technological scope for improving the quality of the air .
This is why heavy pressure is being exerted on the automobile industry and oil refiners - people are calling for environmentally more friendly cars and cleaner fuels .
As this debate has shown , both are needed , and this also goes to explain why the Auto-Oil programme covers the whole issue of the technical development of vehicles and the improvement of fuels .
However , by taking measures to improve the quality of fuels , urban air quality can be improved more rapidly than by waiting for the arrival on the market of new , better cars .
The Auto-Oil programme presented by the Commission was substantially improved during its consideration in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , something for which thanks are certainly primarily due to the rapporteurs .
Parliament is proposing , for example , that the Community should adopt a new way of thinking , involving the use of tax instruments to achieve better air quality at a reasonable price .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection also adopted binding minimum standards and objectives for reducing emissions between 2000 and 2005 . This system has , for example , led to substantial improvements in the quality of fuels in Finland .
In order to encourage everyone else , I can say that this has been achieved in a short space of time and at a genuinely reasonable cost .
Admittedly , transitional periods may perhaps be required in certain countries , but these are more acceptable than a failure to comply with the objectives fixed for the period 2000-2005 .
If we are not to lose out in the future , we must show the rest of the world the way forward .
Madam President , this has been an exhaustive , but also a very good , useful debate that we have had on four major proposals .
Three , concerned directly with the Auto / Oil Programme , and one to supplement them .
It is also a characteristics of the three proposals that they have been produced as a result of cooperation between three commissioners , so I will deal with the reports of Mr Eisma , Mr Lange and Mrs González Álvarez , and Mr Papoutsis will deal with the report by Mr Mamère .

The Commission was pleased to read Mr Eisma 's report and we thank him for his splendid work .
Car emissions are clearly the most important source of the many pollutants that spoil our environment and the health of our people .
And those affected most badly are often the most vulnerable members of our society , namely children , the elderly and the sick , as Mrs Van Putten has just reminded us .
The Commission wishes to resolve these problems to do with air pollution , and we wish thereby to improve the quality of life , particularly in urban areas .
We have taken a great step forward with the announcement of a future strategy for combating emissions from cars and with the proposed legislation for implementing that strategy .
I am therefore very pleased that Parliament , in its draft report , starts by expressing its satisfaction with the Commission 's announcement and the corresponding proposed legislation , and I am also grateful for the many encouraging and positive comments that this debate has produced .
In the report Parliament criticizes the preparation of the technical basis for the Commission 's proposal , namely the joint programme with the oil industry and car manufacturers , which we refer to as the Auto / Oil Programme .
Both the Commission and the two industries recognize that the Programme could have been better if there had been better participation , and the Commission would want to ensure that this occurs in the sequel Auto / Oil Programme II .
However I feel that Parliament has concentrated a little too much on the additional improvements that might be made , and not quite enough on the positive elements .
Many of the points contained in Mr Eisma 's report also appear in the Mamère and Lange reports , and I will come to these in a moment .
However there are some points in Mr Eisma 's report which I would like to look at more closely .
Firstly the Commission sees as very important the problems with noise and CO2 emissions from road traffic .
We are also discussing here today the Commission 's announcement on CO2 emissions from cars , and Parliament is also in the process of considering the Commission 's Green Paper on noise .
One aspect of Mr Eisma 's report I find worrying , and that is the statement that the Commission should have based its strategy on a cost / benefit analysis rather than on cost efficiency .
The Auto / Oil Programme is based on directive 94 / 12 / EEC , one of the first directives concerned with the procedure for joint decision-making between Parliament and the Council .
This expressly states the Commission must base its proposal on cost efficiency , which is what we have done , so it causes problems when Parliament now says that some other basis should have been used .
The Commission believes that , by its strategy for combating car emissions and the related proposals , it has fulfilled its mandate under directive 94 / 12 / EEC , and this was accepted by Parliament and the Council .
I will not move on to comment on Mr Lange 's report .
The proposal which the Commission has brought before the European Parliament and the Council talks about lowering the limits for the emission of harmful pollutants by 40 % by the year 2000 with regard to the approval of new cars .
Moreover the introduction of new procedures for the control of vehicles in use , the compulsory fitting of self-diagnosis systems and a new test for limiting evaporation emissions will further reduce daily emissions from vehicles in use .
I will now comment on the Commission 's position regarding the Lange report .
But first I would like to thank Mr Lange for the mammoth task he has performed in so short a time , work which is of the highest quality and technically well founded .
Many of the technical and political ideas in the Lange report are interesting , and it is very likely and possible that they will be included in the European Parliament 's and the Council 's final decision .
But we must recognize that we are at the beginning of a difficult negotiation process which also involves the Council .
That is why at this point in the discussion the Commission wishes to express reservations about the most sensitive proposals in the report .
But I would like to state which proposals the Commission can accept .
The report contains a number of proposals for tax concessions which many other speakers have mentioned in this evening 's debate .
The provisions for tax concessions in the directive on emissions are a compromise aimed at fulfilling two of the EU 's objectives : a well functioning internal market , and protection of the environment .
The Commission has proposed improving the existing provisions on taxes with a further phase of concessions .
According to Amendment No 34 of the report , tax concessions which one Member State wishes to introduce apply to both phases , not just to one or the other of these .
I can therefore accept the proposal provided that the concessions apply only to motor vehicles that fulfil the EU requirements laid down for 2000 and 2005 .
Therefore Amendments Nos 91 , 92 and 94 , which are not in line with Amendment No 34 , cannot be accepted .
Amendments Nos 19 , 24 and in part 35 of the Lange report are accepted apart from amendment of the statement .
The report recommends changing the requirements on self-diagnosis systems , which we abbreviate to OBD , with respect to access to the information from these systems by independent repairers and spares manufacturers .
The purpose of the Commission 's proposal was clear , namely to make it possible for everyone to obtain a speedy diagnosis and repair of faults in emission systems so that emissions from motor vehicles are kept down .
Some of the amendments contained in the report may however improve the Commission 's proposal , so I am able to accept the following amendments in full : 67 , 68 and 85 , and the following in part : 14 , 78 and 81 .
I can accept all the amendments which relate to the test procedure for evaporation emissions , namely 53 , 54 , 55 , and in part 56 , 57 and 58 .
I can accept other minor amendments or changes of wording concerning Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 7 and in part 30 , 52 , 64 , 86 and 89 .
I would like to make some comments on the amendments which the Commission is unable to accept at the present time .
The report proposes tightening the limits which will apply as from 2000 and changing the reference fuel used in the test .
These limits are a sensitive issue and they will be discussed until the last moment , since technology is always developing , which means that greater environmental benefits can be achieved at lower cost .
Moreover there is a close correlation between emission limits , the properties of fuel used in tests and the quality of commercial fuel , so they must be considered together .
At the present moment I am unable to accept the report 's amendments .
In the report the Commission 's so-called guideline limits for 2005 are made compulsory limits , in addition to which the limits are tightened .
Compulsory limits have the advantage that they give a clear signal to the motor industry and to spares manufacturers , so that they can adjust their research and development activities effectively , and several of the speakers this evening have stressed the importance of this .
But this presupposes that better fuel is available throughout the market .
This requires further examination .
I cannot anticipate the results of these investigations , so I am not in a position to accept the amendments .
Under all circumstances the Commission has resolved to carry out an Auto / Oil Programme II .
One of its purposes will be to confirm or revise the limits for 2005 as soon as it possibly can .
The report also proposes a new test procedure which would reduce emissions under cold weather conditions .
The Commission has already expressed its interest in such a test and will evaluate it in the ongoing debate ; it will also be examined in the Auto / Oil Programme II .
At the moment , therefore , I am unable to accept the report 's amendment .
The report proposes another procedure for the control of motor vehicles in use .
This is not in line with the principles of the EU type approval system and cannot therefore be accepted .
The Commission 's proposal on the control of motor vehicles in use is an important step forward along the way towards better emission control with the help of testing , harmonized at an EU level , and the control is carefully adapted to the existing provisions on type approval and monitoring to ensure that production complies with the approved type .
The report proposes that it be compulsory for self-diagnosis systems , i.e. OBD , to be fitted to diesel cars as from 2000 .
Today the car industry and firms which supply it with components have less experience and knowledge about selfdiagnosis systems for diesel cars than they do for petrol run cars .
But the knowledge we have today does not indicate clearly that we will have the possibility of self-diagnosis systems for all diesel cars by 2000 .
Since we are putting forward proposals for self-diagnosis for petrol run cars , I cannot really see why we should not be able to introduce it for diesel cars , though in this case over a longer period .
Therefore I cannot immediately accept the amendments on selfdiagnosis systems for diesel run cars .
The Commission cannot accept increase of the durability requirement from 80 , 000 km to 160 , 000 km .
With the existing technology we cannot keep emissions down both when the vehicle is new and after such a long period of use .
Moreover the Commission has found other measures which will significantly improve the pollution boundary , namely - and we have already touched on this - by introducing self-diagnosis systems and by monitoring vehicles in use .
It is too early yet to change the mandate of the Auto / Oil Programme II , for which the Commission naturally has full responsibility .
Therefore I cannot accept the amendments discussed in this context until we are some way down the road .
I realize Parliament is disappointed that we are unable , at this moment , to accept all the amendments proposed , but I would have to say that we have only just introduced a process whereby further discussion and collaboration can take place in the future .
So I must conclude my speech by addressing the last amendment , namely the question of CO2 emissions from cars .
I would like to start by saying I am pleased that Parliament shares the Commission 's views on CO2 emissions from cars , and that Parliament supports our initiative to come to grips with this important problem , and I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs González Álvarez for the work she has done in the preparation of her report .
But even if we share the same views on the problem , we do not seem to have the same understanding of what is technically possible .
Madam President , we all know that it is possible to build a car that uses 3 litres per 100 km .
The problem is that the target we have set applies to the average new car sold on the market , not to the individual cars themselves .
We therefore consider the target of 5 litres per 100 km , as we look ahead to 2005-2010 , somewhat ambitious , and we would expect to consider alternative targets when we are sufficiently clear about future possibilities .
The other point on which we disagree has to do with the methods to be used .
The Commission does not believe that compulsory standards are the right way , which is what the Environment Committee is proposing .
To set standards will be very difficult technically and it could even have consequences that work against our objective of reducing CO2 emissions .
If , for example , a standard is imposed which is based on a vehicle 's weight , the car manufacturers might simply choose to comply with the standard by making their cars heavier .
In our view , an agreement with the car manufacturers is the right way ahead .
Parliament 's draft resolution lays down a requirement for further steps to reduce CO2 emissions from road traffic , and this we can only endorse .
Of course it would mean changing the way we use cars and that we develop a more environment-friendly transport system .
The Commission will examine Parliament 's proposal with great interest in this area .
I am aware , Madam President , that this has taken rather a long time , but these are major , important proposals and I hope I have covered most of the questions raised during the debate .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to compliment Mr Mamère on his report .
With this proposal the Commission is seeking to harmonize and improve specifications for petrol and diesel fuel in the framework of the Auto / Oil programme .
As you know , we assessed in that programme the cost of the various measures via which the necessary reductions in emissions could be achieved .
We chose the economically most efficient measures which include the cleaner fuel specifications that we are proposing to bring into force in the year 2000 .
In addition , the Commission , as you know , plans to return to the matter at the end of 1988 in order to propose a set of stricter specifications for fuels to take effect in the year 2005 .
As regards the inter-relationship between fuel quality and new advances in engine technology , such as catalysers for dealing with oxides of nitrogen , there is still great uncertainty about the economically most efficient linkage between sulphur concentrations and the design of new technology vehicles .
For that reason the Commission believes that it is still too early to fix limit values for fuel quality for the year 2005 .
We believe that by the end of 1998 , on the basis of the second phase of the Auto / Oil programme which , as you know , is already under way , we shall have the requisite additional information for the taking of a decision at that time on recommended fuel standards for 2005 .
At the same time , however , this present proposal allows the Member States to use special fuels , if necessary , as a means of tackling particularly pressing air quality problems in specific zones such as large conurbations .
The characteristics of the special fuels will depend to a large extent on the particular nature of the air quality problems at the selected locations .
For that reason the Commission does not think it feasible to attempt to lay down harmonized standards for special fuels at the Community level at this stage .
Furthermore , we are sure that the quantities of special fuels used will be relatively small , and therefore we do not anticipate that the use of such fuels for local purposes will have any serious market effect .
The Commission also recognizes that a very powerful mechanism for encouraging the marketing and use of cleaner fuels is provided by tax incentives .
The Community already has a framework within which the Member States are empowered to impose varying levels of consumption taxes on different fuels to promote , of course , environmental objectives .
This framework is set out in Directive 81 / 92 / EEC relating to the level of special consumption taxes that may be imposed on petroleum products .
Many Member States , including Sweden , Finland and Denmark , are already using taxation measures based on this directive to encourage the use of cleaner fuels .
As you will also be aware , the Commission approved , a few weeks ago , a proposal on the harmonization of taxes on energy products which is based on the reasoning of this older directive .
In view of the fact , therefore , that Community provisions on taxation measures already exist , the Commission has seen no need to restate them in this present proposal .
The Commission proposal also provides for a ban on the marketing of leaded petrol .
This is necessary because leaded petrol represents a serious source of lead pollution .
The Member States were urged to encourage the use of lead-free petrol via Directive 85 / 210 / EEC in the middle of the eighties .
We therefore consider a ban on the marketing of leaded petrol in the Community after the year 2000 to be quite in order . We recognize , however , that the ban may create significant short-term problems for some of the Member States , and , in view of that , we have provided for the possibility of a derogation of limited duration in order to give those Member States slightly more time in which to make the necessary adjustments .
The Commission also agrees that the fixing of the air quality values , on which the economically efficient proposals on fuel quality are based , must take account of the need to protect health and the environment .
I can therefore assure you that we shall be paying serious attention to this principle in our future proposals .
The Commission is also receptive to the concept mentioned by Mrs Matikainen-Kallström of taking account of Arctic climatic conditions in the fuel specifications .
After proper study this concept could be incorporated in future via a special text .
Madam President , the Commission can accept certain of the amendments which improve the proposal but do not alter the basic approach .
We can accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 6 , the final part of Amendment No 1 , the second part of Amendment No 8 , the first part of amendment No 10 and the first part of Amendment No 31 .
In addition , we can accept the amendments which extend the range of tasks in the second phase of the Auto / Oil programme .
These are Amendments Nos 22 , 23 , 37 and 38 .
I am sorry to say that the other amendments are not acceptable for the following reasons . First of all , Amendments Nos 7 , 9 , 35 , 36 , 60 and the second part of Amendment No 8 work against the cost-effectiveness criterion as the basis of the proposals .
That criterion is already laid down in Directive 94 / 12 / EEC . Secondly , we cannot accept Amendments Nos 11 , 42 , 43 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 59 and 62 because they specify measures which have been shown not to be economically efficient in the first phase of the Auto / Oil programme .
Thirdly , we cannot accept Amendments Nos 44 and 48 because they introduce measures which have not been adequately studied or in connection with which there is not , as yet , the requisite scientific data , but which will be attended to , however , in the second phase of the Auto / Oil programme .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 4 , 18 , 20 , 21 and 34 because , in our opinion , they are not compatible with the methodology proposed for the second phase of the Auto / Oil programme for achieving an economically efficient package of measures to apply from the year 2005 .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 19 because they disregard the provisions of Directive 92 / 81 / EEC on the use of tax incentives in regard to fuels .
Amendment No 25 is unacceptable because it does not allow reasonable timescales for derogations granted in connection with the ban on the marketing of leaded petrol .
Amendments Nos 28 , 29 , 32 , 39 and the second part of Amendment No 31 are not acceptable because they introduce additional procedures which , in our opinion , are unnecessary .
Amendments Nos 5 , 16 , 26 , 27 , 30 , 33 , 40 , 41 , 49 , 53 , 58 and 61 cannot be accepted because , in our opinion , the problems they refer to are not substantive .
The first and second parts of Amendment No 1 , the first part of Amendment No 8 , the second part of Amendment No 10 and Amendments Nos 14 , 15 , 17 , 24 , 54 , 56 , 57 , 63 and 64 cannot be accepted because they introduce details which are either unnecessary or require further technical scrutiny .
I would like to emphasize that even though some amendments cannot be accepted today the Commission nevertheless appreciates that the European Parliament is putting forward interesting ideas for further examination in the decisiontaking procedures that lie ahead .
The Commission has proposed fuel specifications for the year 2000 .
Parliament has indicated the need to encourage cleaner technologies via the introduction of cleaner fuels and has proposed values for diesel sulphur , for example , as low as 50 ppm .
I believe that examination of the way in which the introduction of such cleaner fuels , of which adequate quantities are available , could be achieved as early as possible can be incorporated in the framework of the overall package of measures that the Council and Parliament finally decide on .
And thanks to you too , Mr Papoutsis , for your remarks .
I call Mr Lange .
Madam President , if I may I would like to ask the Commissioner for one clarification . In my translation it says that the auto-oil II programme has begun .
I don 't see how that can be the case , because the mandate for it has only just been granted by legislation in Parliament and the Council .
So , if that 's right , it can 't have started yet .
Madam President , there has clearly been a misunderstanding .
Obviously , we are discussing the Auto / Oil programme and the Council 's mandate is , of course , required , as the honourable Member himself pointed out earlier .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Discrimination based on sex
The next item is the report ( A4-0115 / 97 ) by Mrs Ghilardotti , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0340-C4-0539 / 96 ) on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex .
Madam President , even though Article 119 and six directives adopted since 1975 constitute a firm legal basis for equal pay and equal treatment between women and men , and a very large number of judgments have been given by the Court of Justice in the last 20 years , women continue to suffer discrimination , and one of the main problems which they have to face is precisely that of proving that discrimination based on sex still exists .
For that reason , back in 1988 , the Commission put forward for the first time a proposal for a directive on the burden of proof , and the European Parliament approved it with a few amendments , on the basis of a report by Mrs Larive .
The Council discussed this proposal on a number of occasions and in 1993 an understanding was reached between eleven Member States , but as the legal basis consisted of Articles 100 and 235 of the Treaty , which call for unanimity , the proposal could progress no further .
In the meantime , as I said , the Court of Justice has given a large number of judgments in this area , so it is a matter of importance that there is now this new proposal for a directive , which is actually based on the judgments of the Court and initiated through the Protocol on social policy , so that it should be easier to reach agreement on the final text .
This again underlines the need for the Protocol on social policy to be incorporated in the Treaty , because otherwise we would be faced with the second directive on equal treatment not being transposed in the United Kingdom .
This directive is important , and Parliament demonstrates this through the report - because existing case-law has not been uniformly applied in Member States and many women have been , and still are , faced with problems even where there appears to be a prima facie case of discrimination .
As regards the content of the proposal for a directive , I think that it is based on three closely interlinked points ; the proposal will not , therefore , be effective unless the directive contains all three .
What are these three fundamental points ?
Firstly , the definition of indirect discrimination ( Article 2 ) : this is the first time that this concept has been defined in Community legislation .
Secondly , the extent of the shift in the burden of proof , provided for by Article 4 : we are looking at , and debating , not a reversal of the burden of proof , but the sharing of the burden between the female worker and the employer .
Thirdly , the procedures laid down in Article 5 , which we regard as vital , because they are pivotal in the light of the problems which have arisen in some Member States following non-implementation of the regulations in force .
Both the Commission , in its proposal , and the Committee on Women 's Rights , when it prepared this report , examined the Court 's judgments in great detail .
The amendments that we are proposing have precisely the objective of making the legal aspects of the problem clearer and more explicit , because this is a technical directive which needs to be very precise and clear from a legal point of view .
In particular , the amendment to Article 2 clarifies the concept of indirect discrimination , which is not yet fully recognized by any national courts .
I would mention that in only three Member States - Italy , the United Kingdom and Ireland - is there a definition of indirect discrimination in national legislation , and the proposals for amendments which we are presenting relate in particular to a judgment which was a milestone in this matter , namely ' Bilka ' ; similarly , the amendments to Article 4 , which highlight one of the fundamental elements in shifting the burden of proof , namely transparency , relate to the ' Danfoss ' judgment .
Another important point is the sphere of application : we add a reference to the directive on parental leave and we regard as fundamental a new paragraph , based on Article 6 of the Social Protocol , specifying that this directive will not prevent positive action measures from being adopted .
I should like to conclude by asking the Commissioner to comment on these amendments , in the belief that , thanks to them , the proposal will contribute towards reducing the number of infringements of the principle of equal treatment , which are still all too common and too evident in many Member States .
Madam President , this particular proposal has taken up a great deal of various Members ' time .
Mine was spent originally on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and then , subsequently , as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and then I took part in the rather shambolic vote in the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I have to be very careful to stick strictly to my brief as draftsman for the Economic Committee .
I shall therefore restrain my normal exuberance on this matter and simply tell you what the views of the Economic Committee were .
The Committee on Women 's Rights largely ignored the amendments of the Economic Committee .
I cannot say I am very upset about that but other members of the Economic Committee might well be .
There was , in particular , one amendment , which my colleagues on the Economic Committee adopted .
It was an amendment to Article 6 , which stated : ' A fund shall be established at European Union level to allow individuals to bring test-cases before their national courts with a view to clarifying the enforcement and implementation of the current Directive . ' This particular amendment went on to say : ' This fund shall be financed under the provisions of the fourth medium-term Community action programme on equal opportunities for women and men ( 1996-2000 ) . '
The Committee on Women 's Rights rejected that amendment .
I have to congratulate the committee on having done so , because had that amendment gone through , it would have caused quite a lot of anxiety in the Commission , let alone in the Member States .
We have not finally decided , of course , how we are going to react to this particular proposal but I would be very interested - if I could momentarily step out of my role as draftsman for the Economic Committee - to ask whether the Commissioner has had the opportunity to read the opinion of the European Parliament 's jurisconsult dated 19 March 1997 which , among other things , makes the point that if this proposal goes through , the law applicable in the United Kingdom will be more favourable to women than that which would henceforth apply in the other 14 Member States .
I would like to have the reaction of the Commissioner to that statement by Parliament 's legal advisers .
Madam President , may I start with a general comment : when significant Community legislation is drafted there is an ultimately political purpose behind both the Commission 's initiative and any action taken by this Parliament .
But in carrying out our legislative function under the treaties we must respect the limits that are set for us and the principles of good legislative technique .
In this way we will produce legitimate , clear and effective Community laws .
In that context I consider the Commission 's initiative appropriate and well grounded in the treaties and I think the political objective should take precedence over the technical and legal questions in this first reading .
Having said that , from the technical and legal point of view , the proposal for a directive does prompt reservations and - to be blunt - criticisms , particularly in respect of the burden of proof , the non-transparent decisions under article 4 , and the procedural rules under article 5 .
The plaintiff 's burden of proof is established in the proposal in terms which are not only entirely alien to legal technique , but - this is the most serious point - highly imprecise .
Above all , the facts are not presented as evidence to the courts , but are alleged .
This may be a defect in the Spanish translation , but the relevant procedural point is that they are not alleged , but proved .
And according to the Commission 's text , the facts to be proved are those which support the presumption of discrimination .
So one or more indicative facts must be proved as the basis for constructing a legal presumption of discrimination .
This raises technical and practical problems : technical because if discrimination can be established through a legal presumption , there is then strictly no need to apply any rule on the burden of proof , the purpose of which , precisely , is to respond to the situations where the facts are uncertain .
The practical problems derive from failure to determine the facts the proof of which is sufficient grounds for the presumption of discrimination .
The rule on the respondent 's burden of proof also suffers from lack of precision .
And these same arguments imply that a special rule for the case of the non-transparent decision systems should apply not to the respondent 's burden of proof but to the plaintiff 's , to facilitate the lifting of the latter , which is actually the problem being addressed .
Amendments Nos 21 and 22 have been presented to escape these difficulties .
On article 5 , as I said , I agree with the political purpose behind this rule , but I have to express my doubts from the technical and legal point of view .
That is , I think it can certainly be disputed whether the legal basis chosen provides sufficient coverage for some typical measures , especially as it is optional as well as vague .
Finally , Madam President , Mr Commissioner , referring back to my initial remarks , I suggest we vote in favour of the report as a whole - including article 5 , which I have criticized - expecting , as I said at the start , Parliament 's political position to prevail in this first reading over legal and technical issues , which we should nevertheless bear in mind .
Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , who is also a member of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , for an excellent report and for the fact that she has taken note of so very many , although not all , of the proposals which arose from this committee .
First I would say that this an important Directive .
It is above all important bearing in mind that there is already good legal praxis but this legal praxis is not followed up in every Member State .
Secondly it is important because we have at last secured a definition of indirect discrimination .
Now that I have emphasised the positive aspects , and the committee is indeed being very positive , I would like to take up two points about which I have some doubts .
One is amendment proposal No. 18 , second paragraph , where it seems that certain types of occupation are to be excluded .
I do not think that this is a good thing .
It opens the way for misinterpretation which is very dangerous .
This could be applied to both sexes , we could say that women cannot be policemen , for example , or men cannot go into childcare .
I could envisage some Member States using this text in such a way .
The other section which I would like to raise is Article 4.1c which was not discussed in the social committee but went through as a matter of course .
I know that there has been discussion about point 4.1c in the Council and that the majority of countries want to remove this point while others want it to remain .
By removing point 4.1c the discriminated person 's options are reduced , the plaintiff 's options are weakened as this point states that the plaintiff does not need to prove that the defendant is in the wrong .
So if we remove point 4.1c the plaintiff must consequently prove that there has been wrongdoing which makes it more difficult for the discriminated party .
I think that this is unfortunate .
Parliament is usually progressive and usually follows the line taken by progressive countries .
But in this instance the Commission has been more progressive than Parliament .
I think this is particularly unfortunate .
Otherwise , I think that this is a really first rate proposal .
Madam President , progress often moves at a snail 's pace , and as far as this present draft Directive is concerned we can hope that the snail will make some progress .
For many years , equal pay for men and women has been enshrined in Article 119 . And yet there is constant discrimination against one sex .
That sex happens to be the female one .
Women still earn an average of 30 % less , and as we were able to see in the recent Kalanke case at the ECJ , there are wide divergences in matters of positive discrimination .
The burden of proof is a critical point for ensuring that women are better represented in the professions .
We Social Democrats , including our male members , have therefore been campaigning for a considerable time for a Directive reversing the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex .
In the present draft , the Commission has at least set an important target for the next stage .
For us Social Democrats , this Directive is a further step towards a social Europe .
Now the Council must make a move , and not persist in its hesitant attitude .
We hope that the result of this report by Mrs Ghilardotti - whom I sincerely congratulate on my own behalf and that of my group - will be that working women are better able to assert their rights and that they benefit from an improved legal status when it comes to recruitment , promotion and pay .
I would ask certain Christian Democrats , and especially the employers ' associations , who are still trying to make deletions here to think again about what they are doing .
The aspects which Mrs Ghilardotti has highlighted - the strictest possible definition of direct and indirect discrimination , the shifting of the burden of proof onto the employer or dividing it between the complainant and the employer , which is a key statement in Article 4 of the Directive , and the procedures in Article 5 - should be endorsed tomorrow with the largest possible majority .
I believe this will enable us to win back much of the confidence that the female electorate should have in us as Members of the European Parliament .
And I hope there will be a large vote in favour of this report .
As Mrs Ghilardotti has already said in her excellent report , we have a substantial amount of case law and six directives on equal treatment , but practical experience shows how difficult - or even impossible - it often is to prove this unlawful discrimination .
The employer as defendant has the relevant evidence and information , and often does not have to reveal it .
And the national judges frequently have difficulty in understanding and applying the concept of indirect discrimination .
The ELDR Group therefore supports this directive , which shares the burden of proof among both parties and clearly defines the concept of indirect discrimination .
Rights on paper are being turned into rights in practice .
As the rapporteur said , back in 1988 , I was the rapporteur on the first draft legislation , which was blocked systematically by the United Kingdom with its ' favourable ' law , as is still happening today .
I find this incomprehensible , because no respectable firm has anything to fear from this legislation .
Anyone with a clear conscience can go along with this perfectly well .
Because this legislation - and I say this also to Mrs Lulling - creates no new requirements for undertakings , it has no direct effects , and no woman , Mrs Lulling , will bring proceedings just for fun , but only if she has been wronged .
The directive codifies the case law of the Court of Justice and ensures that it will be consistently applied .
Who can have any objection to that , apart from Mr Cassidy ?
The Liberal Group very much hopes that after the British elections on 1 May , the new British Government will also take up the directive .
British women too are entitled to the same treatment as all the other citizens of Europe .
Finally , I should like to compliment Mrs Ghilardotti once again , and also the Dutch presidency , which is working hard to ensure that the directive will be approved on 17 June , so that it can then enter into force on 1 January 2000 and European women will have a better chance of judges applying the European law on equal treatment properly , and complying with it .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mrs Ghilardotti on her report and our group will vote for the report , as well as the amendments from the Committee on Women 's Rights .
We think this directive is needed to implement the principle of equality , which is turning out to be so difficult at this century 's end . The principle of equality is not sufficiently guaranteed by the case law of the Court of Justice , and this has been demonstrated repeatedly by union representatives .
This proposal for a directive introduces very positive elements : the need to establish a definition of indirect discrimination , the compatibility between the application of the directive and the application of positive programmes or measures to protect women , their application before the year 2000 and follow-up application in the Member States , with a progress report to the Commission every three years .
I sincerely hope that Parliament will approve this directive and that we do not have to wait another eight years for another proposal .
I also hope that , in the future , when the treaty has been revised , these issues can finally be dealt with by a majority and not unanimously .
Madam President , I too welcome the Commission 's proposal to introduce a shift in the burden of proof in cases of discrimination in 14 of the 15 Member States .
The Court of Justice has been quite unequivocal in its judgments in recent years , and this proposal is in fact no more than the logical outcome of these judgments by the Court .
The Committee on Women 's Rights has brought the proposal even further into line with the case law of the Court , which indeed also applies to the United Kingdom , and I am pleased that Mr Cassidy has also grasped this , after all the efforts in the various committees .
Mrs Ghilardotti has certainly done an excellent job .
In this case , it is the Council which represents the fly in the ointment : while it is true that the Dutch presidency is doing its best to get this directive through the Council smoothly , it is also true that it is not having a great deal of success , and I should like Commissioner Flynn to bring us up to date on the state of the discussions in the Council .
It would appear that the Council wishes to trim this proposal to the bone and to include neither the social security directives nor indirect forms of discrimination in this directive .
That is not only bad for the policy on equal treatment , it is bad for the image of the European Union , and it is also in conflict with the case law of the Court of Justice . I hope that today and tomorrow , the Commission and Parliament will take joint steps together to prevent this .
Madam President , I should first of all like to congratulate the Commission on drawing up this much needed proposal for a directive to stamp out long standing injustices which everyone was aware of but which could not be proved .
I should also like to congratulate Mrs Fiorella Ghilardotti for the excellent report which she drew up on such a legally thorny issue which might well prove to be so important for those suffering injustice , especially women .
This draft directive is of great importance for a country like mine , where attempts have long been made to obtain similar legislation , so far without success .
The fact that the European Parliament has approved this report could be decisive for future developments in this situation , either because the Portuguese Parliament decides now to adopt similar legislation or because the Council of Ministers for Social Affairs comes to accept the new proposals and they are required to be incorporated in national legislation .
The distribution of the burden of proof is a fundamental principle of justice , since it allows the weaker party , which is affected more seriously by unfair and unjustifiable decisions , to have the benefit of much broader means of proof .
The proposal for a directive now under discussion and the amendments tabled will make it compulsory for employers too to prove that they are not discriminating on grounds of sex .
Situations in which it is clear to everyone that women are manifestly under-represented in companies - as is the case with the Banco Comercial Português , where the administration says it does not discriminate in selection on grounds of sex , but where the number of women working is one eighth of the general for Portuguese banks - will no longer be possible because the firms will then have to explain their action .
The inclusion of a clear definition of indirect discrimination , the possibilities for the information to be made available to those suffering discrimination so that they can defend themselves and assert their rights and the control which the Commission and the European Parliament are to have over situations which already exist , will turn this directive into one of the major instruments for making equality of opportunity between men and women into a reality .
I shall therefore vote with great pleasure for this report .
Madam President , for 20 years now , the campaign for women has been waged from Europe , which means that everyone knows , no matter which Member State they live in , that Europe is the champion of equal rights and equal opportunities for men and women .
Many women have benefited from this , and that is as it should be !
At the moment , there are still a number of disadvantages for women in the labour market .
Often , they can only combat these disadvantages with great difficulty , whether their action is against employers or indeed their own authorities .
I have to tell the House that in my days in the Second Chamber , as a member of a government party , I played a part with all the women in the government party and the opposition , and those in the trade unions , to bring a number of the cases mentioned here to a successful conclusion at the Court of Justice .
This means that for the PPE Group - and we have discussed this at some length - there can be no question of the 1979 directive being excluded from this legislation , since that would take the heart out of it .
You may be sure - and I say this to my colleagues too - that the proposal which is now before the House will in any event also be supported by the PPE Group in the final vote .
And not just by me , but by other colleagues too , such as Mrs Palacio , who has looked at this from a legal standpoint and has raised a number of questions .
She has already spoken on the subject , and other colleagues will be doing so as well .
We have some doubts about Article 4 , and also Article 5 - not Article 5 ( a ) , but 5 ( b ) .
What is being asked of small employers here is very difficult .
All of us as MEPs are small employers too .
Furnishing the burden of proof as it is defined here is no easy matter .
I should therefore like to hear from the Commission how the discussion in the Council is proceeding .
Do I understand correctly that , under the leadership of the Dutch presidency , not one Member State is willing to accept Article 5 in this respect ?
What would happen if an alternative were to be put forward to Article 5 ( b ) ?
I am just wondering that out loud .
In any event , in the final vote tomorrow - although we might vote differently on Article 5 ( b ) , not least in the light of the discussion we are having here - this directive which will benefit both men and women in European society can also count on the support of the PPE Group .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Ghilardotti report constitutes a comprehensive study of the subject , and after the important things that have also been said by speakers from the various groups it is difficult for me to add anything worthwhile .
I would , however , like to mention two points which , in my view , are non-negotiable .
These are transparency and access to information .
It is well known that indirect forms of discrimination exist in all of the Member States .
That type of discrimination , which usually operates against women , is difficult to prove .
The objective should be to remove all discrimination based on gender , particularly in the areas of employment and insurance .
I agree totally with the rapporteur 's proposal that the Member States should be obliged to comply with the directive by 1 January 2000 .
In order to bring immediate results it will also be necessary to have constant monitoring of the implementation of the directive .
Transparency must be available for all citizens , but especially for women and all social groups , with regard to decisions and measures which affect them directly , and it must apply , specifically , to methods of recruitment , reasons for redundancy and compliance with maternity law and other such areas .
The problems caused by the absence of transparency are particularly severe .
Those problems generate other problems , such as lack of witnesses or the reluctance of people to act as witnesses and the inability to produce satisfactory evidence when documents are withheld by an employer . These in turn can often lead to exploitation by barristers when the female litigant is inadequately informed as to her legal rights and feels obliged to accept a compromise in order to keep her job .
We are speaking here of flagrant repression of the person and of human rights , that is to say .
As a final point I emphasize that the existing positive actions must be kept in place . Thank you for listening to me .
I await the Commissioner 's replies to us .
Madam President , Commissioner , a directive on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex is greatly welcomed by many women 's associations and individuals , and has been long awaited .
In the past , the European Court of Justice has had to use the legal expedient of case law to close a loophole , whereas now this Directive can clearly improve the situation regarding the burden of proof in cases of discrimination on the basis of sex .
Clear legal principles which are equally binding in all Member States are something I very greatly welcome , especially when they concern discrimination against certain individuals .
In the past , there were many differences between the rules applied in the various individual States .
So we are concerned here not so much with a political resolution as with radical intervention in the legal systems of the individual Member States .
Perhaps it will be made easier for women to go to court in cases of discrimination and lack of opportunity .
I hope this Directive will be really helpful to women and will not further reinforce the reservations and doubts employers have about appointing or promoting women .
There are a few points in the report which increase my doubts about its practicability .
I refer in particular to Article 5 and to Amendments Nos 15 and 16 .
And now a word on procedure .
We worked on the Commission 's proposal , as we are required to do .
After hearing from us , the Council long since amended basic text , so that we may be calling for something which is no longer up for discussion at all .
Unfortunately we were unable to stop the work in committee and demand the resubmission of the present version .
I hope , Madam President , that in future the work done by the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament can be better and more effectively co-ordinated .
Madam President , the proposal for a Directive reversing the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex has already been under discussion for 10 years .
I hope we are finally getting there , and that this directive will be approved .
In my work as a personnel consultant I very often came up against these problems , whether in connection with appointments or promotions or pay , and so I know better than most how difficult it is for the women concerned to prove their point - I know that they were unable to succeed in their claims because they were women .
Those women who did go to court had to expend a great deal of effort and time to produce the necessary evidence , and most of them were then unsuccessful in their actions .
The fact is that employers , even the so-called ' small ' employers , do start from a stronger position .
Until now , they have not needed to keep detailed records of the discrimination they practised .
So I , too , hope that shifting the burden of proof away from the complainant onto the respondent will be adopted by a large majority in this House .
That would be an important step towards equal treatment of men and women within the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , equality between men and women often exists on paper only , with far too little reflection in reality .
Equal access to employment , education and advancement , equal pay and equivalent company welfare schemes have already been laid down in European directives .
But the rules of evidence for proving discrimination based on sex are unsatisfactory .
The snail 's pace of progress - as Mrs Gröner so rightly described it - will only improve when the victims of discrimination are no longer required to prove it .
It must be a matter for those against whom the complaint is made to prove that they have followed the principle of equality .
The rules governing the burden of proof are still far from standardized between the Member States .
Common rules need to be agreed , and need to cover indirect discrimination as well as direct .
The discussions on the Ghilardotti report were anything but simple , both in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and in the Committee on Women 's Rights - I am a member of both .
One situation that caused confusion , and still does , is that the Council seems long since to have begun discussing totally new proposals .
I absolutely agree with Mrs Glase here , and I would like to ask the Commissioner what basis we are now supposed to be using .
Problems still remain .
Article 5 - and I refer here especially to Article 5 ( b ) - represents a radical interference with national legal systems .
However necessary it may be to have procedures that clearly establish what the facts are , it is still inadmissible for the right to information to become a pretext for a witch hunt .
The European People 's Party cannot agree to some of the amendments .
To single out just one , Amendment No 8 , whose definition of indirect discrimination goes far beyond ECJ case law .
In any case , an alleged internal necessity cannot be allowed to justify indirect discrimination .
Even so , we do agree with the objectives of Fiorella Ghilardotti 's report .
It is intended to send a clear signal calling for the further reduction of discrimination and more equality of opportunity , especially in working life .
Madam President , as we approach the end of this night sitting , I can only support those colleagues who are saying that we are genuinely pleased with the fact that , after ten years , a directive is at long last being produced .
For us , this has always been one of the top priorities , I would point out .
It is just a pity that we have to do this with a handful of Members at a quarter to midnight - one could say that the clock has reached five minutes to midnight .
If I may add something to today 's debate , I should like to say that I was slightly annoyed by the doublespeak which has often dominated the discussions on the need for this directive , and which is then interpreted by the lobby - especially UNICE , but I have also heard it from a number of Members of the House - to the effect that not many people are happy with it .
The main argument which is used is that the case law of the Court of Justice surely speaks for itself , so that we do not need this directive at all .
So what have we actually been discussing here for the last ten years ?
If that is so , then I wonder why the lobby has been so violently opposed to it ?
Of course , the Court of Justice has done some excellent work in recent years on the definition of indirect discrimination and on the shifting of the burden of proof .
But the problem is that the national courts and national legislators have not always been equally careful in following the case law of the European Court of Justice , let us make that quite clear .
And moreover , there is a tendency for the Court of Justice quietly to reconsider the steps it has taken .
So in my view , it is a good thing that we finally have a solid legal basis with a clear definition , proper procedures , and a broad scope covering all the directives on equal treatment .
I am also annoyed by the fact that a number of Members are still arguing that Article 5 is out of place in European legislation .
I cannot understand this .
We are not talking here about the harmonization of legal procedures between Member States .
So this has nothing to do with third-pillar issues .
If information can be something that is not necessary , which it cannot be made compulsory to supply , then I wonder where the Commission stands with all its proposals on information and consultation , because then we cannot ask that from the Member States either .
I would end by saying that I hope the Council will not trim the directive , because otherwise we shall have to reconsider our position at second reading .
Madam President , there is still a long way to go to achieve equality in a Europe of women .
Positive discrimination in favour of women is after all forbidden by the European Courts .
Women in Europe are subject to discrimination both at work and in society as a whole .
Women have lower wages than men , they find it more difficult to get management appointments and have difficulty in gaining promotion .
In addition it is difficult , as many have pointed out this evening , for us to prove this fact , the fact that many of us really do experience sexual discrimination both in our every day lives and our political lives .
It is particularly hard for us to prove that discrimination takes place at work .
So I would like both to thank Ms Ghilardotti and congratulate her on her report as we will find it easier to take action as a result of this report .
It has almost always been necessary for the discriminated person to prove unfair treatment , but of course it would have been better if we could have gone just a little further and perhaps , as we heard earlier , included Article 4.1c which was present in the Commission 's proposal .
Despite this I do think that this report is a very good one and I thoroughly support it .
Of course , equality is not just an issue covering women and our rights , but is also a problem which concerns the whole of society .
Shared responsibilities , both at work and in the family mean a better quality of life for both men and women .
Mrs Ahlqvist , I think you were the only speaker who managed to stick to your allotted time !
All the others have over-run .
Commissioner Flynn has the floor .
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking all those who have contributed to the debate .
The proposal you will vote on has a very long history , as has been said , although it was only formally submitted to the Council in June 1996 .
The first proposal of the Commission on this issue dates back to 1988 and was then based on Articles 100 and 235 .
Since then no agreement had been reached on that proposal , so the Commission withdrew it .
The current proposal is thus now based on the agreement on social policy annexed to Protocol No 14 on social policy annexed to the Treaty and , in particular Article 22 thereof .
The main objective of the proposal is to consolidate the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice by shifting the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex .
It aims at establishing a clearer legal basis for women wishing to challenge apparent discrimination against them .
Before I explain the intentions of the Commission as regards the proposed amendments , let me make two preliminary statements .
Firstly , I want to thank Mrs Ghilardotti and the whole Committee on Women 's Rights , as well as all the other committees involved , for the enormous amount of work achieved in a very short time and to thank you for the support you have given to the Commission 's proposal .
It is with great pleasure I hear you talk of the need to have the protocol taken into the Treaty .
You have my total support for that .
Secondly , I wish to confirm to you today that the proposal you have examined is exactly the same proposal examined by the Member States within the Council .
That proposal is not obsolete and there is no other proposal on the Council table .
The negotiations in the Council have , in fact , led Member States to consider modifying some provisions of the Commission 's text .
But this is the usual procedure and we intend to press it to take on board several of your amendments before it reaches the common position .
In this respect , I would also like to stress that the common position will not be adopted at the Social Affairs Council on 17 April .
It will only be done at the Council in June .
This will allow plenty of time for your amendments to be fully considered .
Let me turn to the amendments .
I am very pleased to inform you that the Commission is prepared to accept the majority of them .
Further , nearly all the amendments which are not acceptable to the Commission are of minor importance .
Mrs Lulling asked me to go through the amendments and I would like to do that .
Amendment No 1 cannot be accepted since the word ' sex ' rather than ' gender ' is used in all the other directives and in the judgments handed down by the Court .
Amendment Nos 2 and 3 are not acceptable , because the references they aim to insert via two new recitals are really too far from the procedural objective followed by the Directive and there would be no corresponding provision in the text of the articles .

The deletion proposed in Amendment No 10 is not acceptable , although it would have been very tempting to accept it , because it would automatically bind the legislator in the future , which is not legally or politically acceptable .
The words that you propose to add to Article 3 ( 1 ) in the proposed Amendment No 11 are not acceptable , because it appears that they would confuse the now clear reference to the procedures which would be affected by the Directive .

Amendment No 13 on Article 4 ( 1 ) cannot be accepted because the wording in the Commission 's text derives directly from the case law , in which no distinction has ever been made between indirect and direct discrimination in this respect .

Amendment No 16 on Article 6 is not acceptable , because it would give the impression that the list in the article is exhaustive , which is not the case .
Finally , Amendment No 18 cannot be accepted , because I accept in principle Amendment No 17 , the content of which is broadly similar .
I would wish to review the precise wording of the reference to positive action in Amendment No 17 , but I have no difficulty in accepting the principle : that the implementation of this Directive in no way justifies an absence of positive action measures .
The Commission 's revised proposal will reflect just that .
As I have already mentioned , the Commission is ready to accept the majority of the proposed amendments and , in particular , those which are intended to strengthen the central provisions of the proposal .


Amendment No 4 on recital 10 and Amendment No 9 on Article 3 ( 1 ) ( a ) are obviously acceptable as they update the Commission text .
The parental leave Directive 96 / 34 was not adopted when the proposal was submitted to the Council but it should now be included in the scope .
I would like in particular to express my appreciation of Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 , whose purpose is to strengthen the definition of indirect discrimination , which is at the very heart of our proposal .
They insert a useful complementary reference to the words used in the case law .
Amendment No 12 concerns another central provision - Article 4 ( 1 ) ( a ) - and is partly acceptable .
The first part is acceptable , in particular the insertion of the words ' a fact or facts ' may prove to be very useful in practice .
On the contrary , the last part of the amendment would create confusion in the provision as it seems to imply an opening for justification of a direct discrimination , the existence of which would already have been established .
That part of the amendment would represent a step backwards as compared to the current jurisprudence .

Amendment No 14 relates to Article 4 ( 1 ) ( c ) and is in line with the case law as it deletes the reference to the intention to discriminate .

Amendment No 15 is of a linguistic nature .
I have already indicated that I accept the principle of Amendment No 17 , which contains a less extensive reference than Amendment No 18 to positive action and it can be accepted for the reasons I have already given .
Finally , we can accept Amendments Nos 19 and 20 , which relate to Article 8 on the implementation date - that is the 1.1.2000 instead of 1.1.2001 , and insert a new provision calling for a report on the application of the Directive .
However , I would like to amend slightly the wording of the latter amendment and for practical reasons it would be useful to substitute the words ' two years ' after the implementation date for 1.1.2002 .
The two amendments that came in late - Amendments Nos 21 and 22 - relating to the formulation of wording concerning the shifting of the burden of proof do not really achieve any improvements in the proposal and they would really confuse and make less clear the situation for national judges .
There were quite a number of points made .
I will just quickly run through some of them .
I would like to thank everybody for all of the points .
All were relevant but some in particular should be answered .
Mr Cassidy made the point about the jurisconsult of the European Parliament .
I have taken note of that .
But I would like to say to Mr Cassidy that the point was made on the hypothesis that the proposal would be watered down .
It would not be our intention that the proposal would be watered down .
This particular directive will not apply in the United Kingdom .
It is a cause of some relief to us all that national procedures there are already reasonably positive in the points that are covered by this particular proposal .
I would like to turn now to Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi . We are satisfied that our formulation of the sharing of the burden of proof is clear and correct .
It reflects , in fact , the case law of the Court of Justice .
Our legal service is quite satisfied as to its legal orthodoxy .
Mrs Lulling made a particular point concerning Amendment No 8 .
I have to say to her that it is all right to require a Member State to show that a provision corresponds to a necessary aim of its social policy .
Otherwise , there would be no check on legislative revisions even where they are potentially discriminatory .
There was also the question you put about the multiplication of possible litigation .
I do not think that is the case .
What we are talking about here is fairer rules when cases come to court .
We have the case law already in place .
This particular directive and proposal is really procedural .
Mrs Van Dijk inquired as to what the particular state of play was in the Council .
That was also mentioned by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mrs Glase .
The only proposal , as I have already said , formally on the table with the Council is our proposal .
It cannot go any further until it has Parliament 's opinion on that matter .
The important thing to say is that the main elements of the Commission 's proposal are still in the text that is being discussed , that is , the shift of the burden of proof and the definition of indirect discrimination .
I would say to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Thomas Mann that there is nothing wrong with Article 5 ( b ) .
All it says , really , is that parties to legal proceedings should have access to the information they need to argue their case .
That is surely fair .
As to what is happening in the Council , the discussions are ongoing .
It is true to say - I say this to Mrs Van Dijk and Mrs Lulling as well - that quite a number of the Member States have doubts about including Article 5 .
However , it would be my intention to maintain this provision in the revised proposal .
I reiterate my thanks for all the work that has been achieved .
It has all proved very useful and fruitful .
It is reflected in the fact that the Commission accepts almost all of your proposed amendments on Articles 2 ( 2 ) , 3 ( 1 ) ( a ) and 4 ( 1 ) ( a ) which are the three central provisions of the proposed directive .
We are making very considerable progress in this proposal .
Mrs Gröner summed it up very well in one sentence . I would like to thank her for it .
I would also like you , Mrs Ghilardotti , particularly , for the efforts you have made in this regard .
Mrs Gröner said - and that is the way I feel about it as well - that women can defend their rights in a better way if we pass this legislation .
Madam President , the Commissioner 's replies seem to me to be satisfactory .
Judging by what the Commissioner has said this evening , the Commission has grasped the basic objective of our work : the strengthening and clarification from the legal point of view of the fundamental elements of this proposal for a directive : that is to say the definition of discrimination , the burden of proof and the retention of Article 5 , which relates to procedures , in other words the three elements which form the substance of the proposal .
Credit institutions
The next item is the report by Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn ( A4-0058 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Article 12 of Directive 77 / 780 / EEC on the co-ordination of laws , regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions , Articles 2 , 6 , 7 and 8 and Annexes II and III of Directive 89 / 647 / EEC on a solvency ratio for credit institutions and Article 2 and Annex II of Directive 93 / 6 / EEC on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions ( COM ( 96 ) 0183 - C4-0258 / 96-96 / 0121 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I concentrate on the three amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Commodities are important for the EU and British economy .
Producers , for example those in the agricultural sector , use commodity futures to lock in a known price at which they can sell their future production and so eliminate price uncertainty .
Industrial companies , large and small , use derivative contracts , for example in metal futures , to service their manufacturing needs .
In setting capital charges , we need to ensure that they are proportionate so that EU firms and markets remain competitive to the benefit of both producers and end-users - and of the EU economy as a whole .
The proposed capital charges for commodities credit risk have been set by banking regulators in Basle - there is nothing wrong with that - and the proposed charges make sense for banks .
In theory the same charges should apply to both banks and investment firms .
But in practice the respective regulators view the risk differently .
The purpose of my amendments is to ensure that a proportion of capital regime can be developed to meet the needs both of the commodity firms and of those who use their services in the EU .
The difference between banking and securities ' regulators can be illustrated by reference to what the respective regulators see as core business .
A bank , for example , will have expertise in bond markets , which are at the core of the business .
The banking regulators will also have considerable experience and expertise in these activities .
They will , therefore , be aware that , for example , emerging market debt is more volatile than the European government bond markets but will also know that most banks ' business is in less volatile bonds and so set the capital charges accordingly .
Commodities are not a core business of a bank and so banking regulators are unlikely to have direct experience of these markets .
Therefore , banking regulators will tend to be more conservative in their approach to setting capital charges for commodities .
The opposite is true for securities ' regulators of a firm with commodities as the core of the business .
They have experience of commodities markets and would want proportional capital charges , which reflect the expertise of the firm and the difference in volatilities .
It would not make sense for the securities ' regulator to impose charges relating to highly volatile oil products on a firm diversified in metals , which have much lower volatility .
My amendments would give time for the securities ' regulators to consider a proportion of capital regime for commodities .
In the meantime , the amendments ensure a minimal level of capital for commodities risk at the EU level .
Mr President , this is a proposal which will amend three directives , namely the directive on coordination of credit institutions , the directive on the solvency ratio for credit institutions and the directive on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions .
I take the rapporteur 's point that this is not simply a minimal change , that the issues at stake are technical and complex .
I congratulate both the draftsperson Mr Harrison and the rapporteur Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn for getting to grips with these highly technical and complex matters .
The first change is to the banking directive which provides for exchange of information with non-banking supervisory authorities in third countries .
With the solvency directive there is a proposal to put churches and religious communities in the same position as public authorities .
This is because it is the custom in certain countries like Germany for the churches to have a tax-raising power .
In addition , there are several proposals to reduce the weighting on specific subjects from 100 % to 20 % or 50 % or other figures depending on the issue at stake .
The capital adequacy directive is very important .
It ensures that credit institutions are solvent and it is an important consumer protection measure for the people of Europe .
Again , this is an amendment to ensure that capital is adequate for over-the-counter trading .
All this illustrates the importance of Parliament 's work .
Although it may appear to be rather obscure , all the measures which are being changed today in our debate and in our vote will help to protect the general public and to make sure that their savings are safe .
In a number of cases in Britain we have seen people 's savings being at risk and therefore I commend both the work of both the rapporteur and the draftsman and hope Parliament will vote for the report .
First I should like to thank the committee responsible and in particular Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn for their very good work on a highly technical and complicated proposal .
I am pleased about their very positive attitude to this proposal .
I take it as a further sign of the convergence of the views of the European Parliament and the Commission in establishing proper prudential regulation , in particular for credit institutions ' and investment firms ' activities in the field of derivative instruments .
The Katiforis report of September 1995 on financial derivatives was a landmark in progress towards combining our efforts .
The Commission proposal before you responds to the approach put forward in this report .
Amendments Nos 1 and 2 are very helpful clarifications .
They are welcome and contribute to the quality of this piece of European legislation .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 both address the complex problem of capital requirement - the requirement for great risks inherent in commodity derivative instruments .
The amendments would allow competent authorities for a transitional period to apply significantly reduced capital requirements for different categories of commodity derivative instruments held by investment firms .
Such a capital regime would be in contradiction to the basic principle of equality in the treatment of credit institutions and investment firms .
Similar risks should be treated in the same way , irrespective of the type of institution which is exposed to the risk .
The Katiforis report highlighted the importance of this principle .
Having said this , I should like to emphasize that the Commission is of course fully conscious that the sensible application of principles sometimes requires appropriate exemptions .
However , any such need for exemption , be it in the form of a transitional period for specific institutions or in some other form must be and , indeed , can only be assessed within the framework of work pending on the capital adequacy directive .
Only in the context of this work is it possible to deal consistently not only with commodity derivative instruments and the associated credit risks but with all credit and market risks from all commodity-related business of credit institutions and investment banks .
I expect the Commission to adopt the proposal amending the capital adequacy directive in the next couple of weeks .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Conservation of fishery resources
The next item is the second report by Mr Adam ( A4-0122 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources ( COM ( 96 ) 0296 - C4-0388 / 96-96 / 160 ( CNS ) ) .
Thank you Mr President . It is quite important before we start this debate that we hear from the Commission whether they are still maintaining their position which was indicated at the committee on Monday .
If I could just refresh the Commission 's memory , the annex to the report says that ' pursuant to Rule 56 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure and following a request from the committee , the Commission representative stated that , for the time being , the Commission services were not working on any new proposal for technical measures ' .
Now that is the most extraordinary statement in itself , but I want to know if that is the position of the Commission before we embark on this debate .
Mr President , the position of the Commission has not changed .
Mr President , the reason why this is so important is that , if that is the position , that means that the Commission will force the Council to act by unanimity on these proposals .
I just think that Parliament should know that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , just two points : first to say that we support the Adam report , which represents a compromise , but it is a compromise at least involving Members from the two largest political groups in this House and it is a reasonable compromise .
In the first place we need to get the message clearly across that fisheries resources are not limitless ; just recently the FAO even pointed out that over 60 % of fisheries resources were being over exploited .
Secondly , in specific cases , as in the case of our amendment - and I should like to thank Mr Adam for having supported it - it was possible to place a protected area of juvenile fish under Community protection throughout zone CIEM IX , which is important for the preservation of this species .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our assent to this report on technical measures to conserve fishery resources is , I believe , a good example of responsible action by Parliament within the institutional framework of the Community .
It was very difficult to arrive at a credible and constructive text .
The conservation of fishery resources , the reduction of the number of immature fish being caught , the protection of breeding grounds and the differentiation made possible by technical measures are aspects of the effort to protect nature which is indispensable in today 's fisheries sector .
However , the difficulties already experienced by the Council in formulating its position are bad omens .
The Council would do well to take an example from the responsible behaviour of Parliament .
For all the technical difficulties involved in this case and the delicate economic issues associated with them , we have succeeded , by dint of hard talking and the constructive input of individual Members , as well as of the political groups , in tabling a document today of which , after numerous amendments and tough negotiations , we can be justly proud .
It is up to the Commission and the Council now to pick up the thread of our proposals and above all to embrace the democratic spirit in which they were made .
Admittedly , the proposed compromises are not yet perfect .
Nevertheless , we are quite sure that they do constitute a significant improvement on the present situation and contain the minimum , indeed more than just the minimum , that is needed to halt the gradual extinction of certain species and the abuses that obviously do occur .
The technical measures to conserve fishery resources undoubtedly mean sacrifices for fishermen and fishery businesses , sacrifices which must be duly recompensed in the fullness of time .
The technical measures we are approving here represent a new step on the road towards the preservation of fish stocks and of a balanced marine ecology .
But they are only one step on the long and arduous journey upon which we have decided to embark .
The oceans are a magical world but also a vulnerable world .
They offer scope for many economic activities and countless opportunities for sporting activities and , last but not least , are part of a natural world that we must not destroy .
The purpose of our work is to make the best possible use of this living environment and to protect its riches in such a way that the livelihood of those who depend on fishing will be safeguarded for all time to come .
Mr President , the proposal for a regulation presented by the Commission is intended to perpetuate stocks while improving the protection of immature fish .
One would have to be insane not to subscribe to this objective which represents the best assurance for all fishermen for the future of their trade .
A certain number of rules should therefore be adopted .
These rules should be simple and clear , in order to be easily monitored .
Their usefulness should be demonstrated by incontrovertible studies .
They should be compatible with socio-economic realities .
They should be equitable in their effects for the different trades and different fleets .
In fact , it is apparent that no socio-economic evaluation has been carried out .
If nevertheless adopted , these measures risk having a disastrous effect on the profitability of the businesses , calling into question the very existence of some of them .
In this proposal , I note a certain number of sections which seem unacceptable to me .
The increase in basic mesh size is too great .
The range of banned mesh sizes is not positioned correctly , nor is it wide enough to allow a clear separation of pelagic and demersal fisheries .
The restricted areas proposed for hake are also unacceptable .
Their demarcation and their effectiveness have not been the subject of prior studies .
In fact as the Scientific and Technical Committee on Fisheries has stressed , the measure would have considerable socio-economic consequences for certain small fleets .
As far as the Bay of Biscay in particular is concerned , the combination of the measures affecting fishing tackle - added to the restrictions - would be perceived as discriminatory since it would close down a major part of the fleets concerned .
Regarding the single net rule , it would pose major practical problems for multi-purpose vessels .
These problems are all the more acute when these vessels operate far from base , which also makes this measure discriminatory by giving an advantage to other fleets the home ports of which are closer to the fishing areas .
In conclusion , most of the intended measures have been proposed without prior experiment .
The absence of evaluation of their effects on businesses and stocks , as well as their cumulative nature can only lead to their wholesale rejection by the fishermen .
In fact , putting such a plan into practice requires a minimum of support on their part .
For these reasons we will vote against this proposal unless certain amendments which we shall table are taken into account by this Parliament .
Mr President , this is a very important subject for the fishing industry and for the marine environment generally .
One of my fellow MEPs , Sir James Goldsmith , was in my constituency in the UK earlier this week putting forward various views about the fishing industry .
I am interested to see that he has maintained today his 100 % record of turning up and defending the interests of the British fishing industry ... by his absence here !
Technical measures have been recognized by the industry as being one of the most important areas for progress .
Although a number of the proposals put forward by the Commission are far from perfect , I congratulate Mr Adam on the effort he has made to put a compromise together in order to present to the Commission a coherent view of the Committee on Fisheries .
Even though this view , in many of our opinions , may also not be perfect in many ways , I congratulate him on his move forward .
Discarding is one of the obscene outcomes of the Common Fisheries Policy and many other fishing management regimes - it is not unique to our own .
Moreover , it is one which the public cannot understand , and which the industry does not like - although I would say the industry is not completely innocent itself in that area .
At any rate it is an area in terms of marine environment that we have to move away from .
I see this particular proposal as an interim measure towards a European policy that actually bans discarding altogether .
There are such regimes in Norway and New Zealand that actually outlaw discarding which , although it still goes on , is probably thereby reduced from some 40 % , as Mr Adam mentioned , down to more like 20 % .
That would be , at least , a major improvement in terms of what we are trying to achieve .
What really comes out of this is that we really need greater enforcement and greater political will to enforce amongst all Member States .
To achieve that , at the end of the day we also need a far more regional fishing policy within Europe rather than the unified sort of system that we are trying to impose at the present moment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , the introduction of new technical measures for the conservation of fisheries resources is , naturally a complex question .
On the one hand we have different local customs and traditions , some clearly more predatory than others .
On the other hand the scarcity of stocks gives rise to and exacerbates mistrust between fishermen , who sometimes legitimately suspect that third parties are using different practices or that there are no general and transparent controls and tallying methods applied .
The difficulty of the matter lies essentially in pedagogical reasons , in confidence and transparency , in matters bound up with income , already very low for fishermen and their families as a whole .
Everyone , without exception , is agreed - and the fishermen are the first to acknowledge it - that fewer juvenile fish must be caught - either by means of checks and tallying of the relevant trade and consumption or by the elimination of more predatory techniques , or by the use of nets which technically keep their shape and are of an acceptable size , or by intensifying and extending scientific research in order to determine exactly for all species when the season should be closed , or by throwing the fish back to guarantee a survival rate , or lastly by the setting up of multilateral computerized and sufficiently verifiable checks .
The objectives to be achieved therefore irrefutably require the progressive introduction of new provisions plus appropriate follow-up of implementation , particularly as regards the financial aspects .
The report does indeed suggest some technical measures which could improve the situation of conservation of stocks quite apart from some others which appear difficult and complex to apply .
The progressive implementation of the new regulation , should the amendments be approved , is guaranteed by the amendment which our group tabled providing for the possibility - requirement - of having a transitional period for implementation , which we hope the Commission and the Council will accept .
It therefore seems apparent that the discontinuing of certain methods or drastic changes in others might entail different costs for those trapping and fishing .
Some of them are directly bound up with direct investment which fishing equipment might entail ; others are concerned with the drop in income which might be occasioned by , albeit temporarily , by new methods because of the smaller catches .
In this respect , ladies and gentlemen , let us be clear : either the problem must be faced squarely and investment made giving real aid to change fishing methods and to provide compensation for any drop in income , or this legislation , like any other , will be resisted , will be difficult to apply and will not achieve the objectives which all were and are agreed upon .
The Commission 's document unfortunately omits this point .
Mr Adam 's report - and I take this opportunity to congratulate him for the mammoth task he had to accomplish to produce the text we are discussing today - deals with the question , we feel , in only a rudimentary way , not clearly or directly enough , whereas it should be the essential factor for the success of the practical implementation of the new technical measures for real effective conservation of fisheries resources .
Mr President , this report is on the Commission 's proposal to change the technical measures governing fishing .
As such , it deals with one of the three most important pillars of fishing in the EU , along with control measures and the capacity of fleets .
Laudable as the proposed changes are , in many ways they are merely tinkering around the edges .
If accepted by the Council and actually implemented by fishermen , they will doubtless result in fewer juvenile fish and nontargeted species being caught and discarded .
So they are a step in the right direction .
But even with these measures , EU fishing fleets will still catch enormous quantities of unwanted fish which will simply be thrown away , often dead .
The Council shows every sign of sticking to its old tradition of watering down these proposals so that the improvements in fishing will be even less than is hoped for .
Also under discussion , although not in this plenary session , is the renewal of the multi-annual guidance programme , which has also been stalled due to the Council 's inability to make a decision .
Technical measures assume an even greater importance in the likely event that the Council will not adopt a rigorous programme to reduce fleet capacity .
It is interesting to look around at other regions of the world to see how they deal with by-catch problems .
Many countries are light-years ahead of the Community .
Among the measures used in different regions are : the use of observers to monitor a fishery and temporarily close it when there are too many small fish ; banning the discarding of fish ; and requiring the industry to submit plans on how they themselves will conduct the fishery in order to keep discards low .
I am sure that the Commission is perfectly aware of these other approaches but they are convinced that the Council and the fishing industry do not have the interest or the courage to explore other ideas .
Yet until the EU is able to come to grips with the severity of the problem of discards , and accepts that they are both unnecessary and wasteful , no real progress will be made .
This is a very serious matter , for the use of selective fishing gear occupies a prominent place in both the UN Agreement on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and the FAO code of conduct for responsible fishing .
These documents , the first of which is actually a legally-binding treaty which has been signed by the EU and all Member States , calls for measures which are more progressive than those which the Commission is requesting .
Thus the package being considered here is not the final word .
I am sure that we will be discussing this issue again in the near future .
I would also like to clear up a misconception .
The Greens are not against fishing or trying to close down fisheries to protect some species .
Rather we feel that fishing must be conducted in a way which not only provides food and employment for local people , but which does not cause severe damage to the marine eco-system in the process .
This can be done .
I also want to speak very briefly about driftnets , for their use is dealt with under technical measures .
In 1991 the Council banned the use of driftnets longer than 2.5 kilometres in all regions except the Baltic Sea .
In recent years the presence of both national and EU patrol vessels has more or less succeeded in enforcing the 2.5 kilometre length limit , except in the Mediterranean .
I have been told that the EU no longer plans to send out a patrol vessel this year in either the Atlantic or the Mediterranean .
I would just like to ask the Commission if this is true .
This situation shows that technical measures must be clearly thought out and that we should not allow for any loopholes or evasion .
Mr President , on the substance of this report , I fully support the objectives of conservation and so do fishermen right across Europe .
But what we have here is a severe procedural problem .
As Mrs McKenna has just said , it is common knowledge that the Council of Ministers has already moved on from the Commission 's position .
There is , in the corridors of power in Brussels , discussion about a Council compromise .
When I use the phrase ' corridors of power in Brussels ' , it emphasizes how powerless this Parliament is if we are agreeing to discuss measures which have already been superseded .
That was the purpose of the point of order I made at the beginning .
The Commission is asking us to take decisions within a strait-jacket .
Yet within a matter of months there is every likelihood that the position will have moved on .
I would much rather that this Parliament was discussing the real proposals rather than the ones which have already been unofficially superseded .
So we have a grave problem here .
We also had the problem in committee that , because of the so-called compromise that was reached between the two big groups , a whole block of amendments was put through on a ' take it or leave it ' basis .
My fishermen certainly have grave problems with certain of those amendments , for example , Amendment No 11 , which is quite crucial on the two-net rule and on mesh size .
This approach to a complex and vital subject is not , to my mind , a democratic and satisfactory way to go about it .
I have tabled Amendments Nos 76-80 , which I hope the rapporteur and Parliament will support .
We simply recall the agreement between the Council , the Commission and Parliament about consultation .
This says that they will have to take Parliament seriously .
I hope that these will be duly endorsed by Parliament .
However , the only safe way to make sure that we come back to the subject when it is up for real discussion is to reject the entire proposal .
I signal that now as being the position which I would take .
Let us look now at some of the substantive points .
There is always this debate about the differences of opinion between the scientists and the fishermen .
This points very clearly to the need to have both sides brought together and more resources put into cooperation .
Each side tells you stories about the other side .
Occasionally you can get a fisherman who has been out on a scientific boat for a week - I spoke to one recently in Shetland - and he comes back and tells you that his viewpoint has changed .
Likewise the viewpoints of the scientists can change if they get together with the fishermen and find out that they are not all baddies , intent on destroying stocks .
That is vitally important because one of the big problems in the industry is a lack of confidence .
I would support references made by a number of colleagues to the need for decentralized management .
That is also part and parcel of the business of restoring confidence amongst the fishing communities on the whole question of how to conserve fish stocks .
With these remarks I would reiterate that there are some grave procedural problems .
We have to get it right so that in the long-run the fish stocks of Europe are conserved and thereby the fishing communities saved .
Mr President , after being laid before the Committee on Fisheries , the proposals from the Commission concerning technical measures still seem unacceptable to us .
Our group will therefore persist in a critical approach with regard to them .
Indeed it must be remembered that the technical studies , essential to form the basis of relevant conservation measures , are far from having been carried out in their entirety , and that fishing gear technology is evolving faster than European legislation .
The Commission 's proposal does not take account of the actual rate of selectivity of fishing gear .
One may find it surprising , for example , that it is totally silent with regard to the famous Naveran net , so devastating for the stocks of hake in the Atlantic .
Instead of taking account of the selectivity of fishing gear , we are told about restrictions in the Bay of Biscay .
But does the Commission know that with this proposal it is again calling into question a certain number of traditional fishing activities , including that of crayfish ?
Instead of implementing flexible and evolving legislation , suited to local peculiarities and tied to the actual evolution of stocks , in collaboration with the fishing trade and national administrations , the Commission is proposing rigid and uniform legislation to us , liable , in addition , to be hijacked by a certain number of factory fishing operators .
Instead of taking account of the realities and peculiarities of fishing areas , we still come across the same desire for uniformity by the Commission , as if it were not aware that North Atlantic fisheries operate on specific stocks , whereas South Atlantic fisheries are multi-specific .
The rate of selectivity per species is therefore obviously not the same for the North as for the South .
No legislation can bring this natural state of affairs into question .
It is necessary , therefore to set out from these facts to define adaptive legislation which will therefore work .
Rather than establishing technical constraints which are costly for the industry , why not simply ban the selling of immature fish ?
Our group has tabled , at the request of Mr Goldsmith in particular , 21 amendments to the effect I have just described .
Our proposals are not palliatives . In fact , the future and credibility of the European policy on fisheries is at stake .
One day fishing will have to stop being managed in such a uniform and centralising manner .
The CFP will indeed continue to meet with the hostility of the majority of the industry as long as it shows itself incapable of effectively preserving traditional small-scale fishing , which is at the heart of social and economic life and the source of a great number of direct and indirect jobs in many coastal regions of practically all Member States of the European Union .
The proposals made by the Commission , insufficiently revised by the Committee on Fisheries , run the risk of achieving the opposite objective , in increasing the loads which already weigh down small-scale fishing and intensifying industrialisation of the fishing sector , to the detriment of economic activity and employment in our coastal areas which are already suffering the handicaps of being on the periphery .
Mr President , if our amendments are not accepted our group will vote against the proposal for legislation .
Mr President , chance has decreed that we have three excellent reports on the problems of fishing : the report from our colleague Baldarelli , who states the problem of reconversion of fisheries , and more exactly , of 680 Italian swordfish fishing boats in the Adriatic , also raising the question of drift mesh nets ; Mr Kinderman 's report which aims to complete our blue zone integrating Sweden and Finland to it from 2002 ; finally Mr Adam 's priority report .
As our colleagues have said , we are obviously all in agreement about overcoming this problem of fishing stocks and their management , all the more so since the 100 million tonnes fished each year cause disquiet with all the experts , - and Maurice Aubert of the CERBOM in Nice in particular .
It is enough to see what is happening to Canadian cod which is suffering weight loss and to hear the warning cries from the FAO .
From this it is understandable that the Commission is proposing legislation to guarantee biological security , by providing for an increase in mesh , or even a possible reduction in the number of nets , the banning of fishing in certain areas , restrictions or certain periods .
All this is understandable .
It is true that everyone is shocked by the problems , be they discarding immature fish or the production of fish meal as was practised at one time in Peru , in particular , with otherwise very limited bacteriological quality .
Nevertheless , the problem is that measures are perhaps not suited to the scope of the question .
Indeed it concerns the high seas , with the freedoms guaranteed by international law , in particular , the freedom to fish .
From now on , it is right , certainly , for us to impose measures relating to drift mesh nets in the Bay of Biscay on ourselves for the size of mesh or the number of nets , but there are the Korean , Japanese and Russian factory ships , which plunder without imposing measures on themselves .
Therefore would having a POP No. 4 from 1997 to 2003 , not create inequalities to the detriment of our own fishermen ?
I think there are three avenues for the futures : firstly to develop small-scale fisheries and distinguish them from industrial fisheries .
Secondly , to have the fishing industry evolve from one of gathering fish to one of farming - and there is the crux of the problem of aquaculture , limited to 12 million tons per hour currently in the world .
Finally and above all , to envisage a world solution to the problem , within the framework of a convention similar to that of Montego Bay , but specific to fishing and not simply a general Montego Bay convention .
Indeed the same applies perhaps to fisheries as to the common currency : it may be suited to Europe but the market itself has become global , and fish are not aware of the limits of the European Community .
Mr President , I really think that we should congratulate ourselves on the parliamentary work which , together with the excellent work by the rapporteur , Mr Adams , and his dedication to this report , allows us to submit today , for approval by the House , one of the most important Commission proposals for a regulation as far as fisheries is concerned .
This has taken months of work , in many cases starting completely opposing positions , but the responsible manner in which the members of the Committee on Fisheries have grasped the implications for every fishing sector of the proposed technical measures has enabled us to present a consensus-based text today aimed at improving substantial aspects of the proposal .
The Commission submitted a proposal whose best point was its simplicity compared with the previous complex text . This will facilitate its implementation and the introduction of courageous rules , although in many cases these are too drastic .
Parliament has respected the original spirit , adapting it to what we believe to be the current situation regarding the fleet , and avoiding the trauma that would be caused in many cases by the immediate entry into force of the Community proposal .
Innovative conservation measures such as square-mesh netting , single nets and other rules to ensure greater selectivity as regards fishing gear have been understood and respected , while transitional periods and flexibility criteria have been introduced to ensure the gradual adaptation of fishing boats , fleets and even Member States which rejected them flatly in the original Commission text .
In a fishery such as that of the Community where there is such a variety of fishing undertakings , species and types of fishing , in many cases with strong popular support , the acceptance of a rule which will lead to a single management method must , by necessity , engender a lot of tension and debate .
The consensus reached is perhaps not perfect , but it will result in a rule that is much more acceptable for those who have to apply it , which is the only realistic way of ensuring that a rule is complied with .
Therefore I think that the work of Parliament has been very important in taking the step that will bring the Community fishery closer to a management model that will guarantee the conservation of resources and the survival of a healthy fishing sector in the long term .
I think that this is its best point and I ask the Commission to take account of the suggestions - which I believe are very realistic and timely - put forward by this House .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Adam , who had a very difficult job - I do not want to go into the history of it - and I welcome the Commission 's initiative .
Needless to say , I , like all my colleagues and , indeed , like all fishermen throughout Europe , support the principle of technical conservation measures .
But do not take it from that that I accept many of the specific recommendations in the proposals .
Unlike the controls for a reduction in fishing effort , TACs and quotas , which are designed to have direct impact on stock levels , technical conservation measures have the specific task of protecting juvenile fish and , of course , spawning adults , so as to reduce the threat to future yields .
That is a very laudable objective , whether it is mesh size , minimal landing size , closed areas , closed seasons or protection of endangered species .
Remember that all these measures will require additional funds from the fishermen .
I believe the Commission has an obligation to assist them .
I want to highlight the fact here once more that Ireland is one of three countries , together with the UK and Denmark , to have taken steps to propose technical conservation measures to the Commission .
What about all the other countries which talk about conservation measures all the time and have made no proposals ?
Ireland has taken a leading role in the introduction of technical conservation measures for its vessels and if stock levels off its coast have been depleted , I must point the finger firmly at the Member States which have no regard for technical conservation measures , stocks and the future of young fishermen .
I am particularly concerned about young Irish fishermen .
Many Members know which states I am referring to .
Technical conservation measures must be in a language that is simple and readily understood by fishermen .
There must be consultation and there was insufficient consultation with fishermen .
When some Members consulted with fishermen and put down reasonable arguments and reasonable amendments , what happened ?
They were totally disregarded !
It seems that the two major parties in this House vote against the amendments tabled by the smaller parties irrespective of whether they are logical or otherwise .
What are we doing here today ?
We are voting against all of them en bloc because we are wasting too much time in this Parliament talking about fishermen and their future !
This is totally wrong !
There is no conservation dividend .
There is no set-aside for fishermen whereas there is set-aside for farmers !
We accepted this in principle here last year .
Why is it overturned now by the two major parties ?
Have they no interest in technical conservation measures , unlike many of the smaller parties ?
It is time for a major review of the common fisheries policy - an immediate review .
Bring it forward , not tinkering with the edges , and give back to countries like mine what we rightfully deserve , which is a fair deal from the common fisheries policy .
Other countries , particularly those who came in the 1980s , tried to take over the west coast and then come here and try to give the impression that they are interested only in technical conservation measures .
Give the Irish a fair deal !
Mr President , this is a very difficult area for fishermen and all involved in the industry .
Firstly , I should like to pay tribute to the rapporteur .
I know he worked long and hard to try to find a solution to many of these grave problems .
Whether he has succeeded or not depends on one 's particular point of view but I want to pay tribute to him for the long , hard and diligent work he engaged in to find a compromise and a way forward .
This Parliament owes him a debt of gratitude .
When one speaks of conservation and looks at TACs and quotas and all the other areas which affect the fishing industry , to a large extent one enters a minefield where there are no easy solutions .
The truth is that if there are no fish in the sea , there is no future for the fishermen of today or for their successors .
So , we have to find a balance that will suit the fishermen and the industry on one hand and the scientists on the other .
I have a problem with this and that is the conflict between what the scientists say and what the fishermen say .
Somewhere along the line we have to reach a stage where the scientists pay more heed to what the fishermen are saying .
After all , they are the people who are out there day after day fishing round the shores of the European Union .
They are the people who have a good idea of the situation and they must have a future in the industry .
The ones I speak to tell me that they want the industry protected .
Unfortunately , the Commission seems to be more interested in confrontation than cooperation .
I must admit that I have major concerns about the Commission proposals before us and the effect they will have on the industry .
I also have concerns about how they will be implemented and how they will be policed .
I listened with great interest to Mr Macartney 's comments .
If his remarks are correct - and I hope the Commission will address the point he made - we are discussing today something that is already 3 , 4 , 5 or 6 weeks old .
And the Fisheries Commissioner is not even here - with the greatest respect to the Commission officials , the Fisheries Commissioner should be sitting there .
We , who are interested in the fisheries industry should be able to have an exchange of views with her , get the truth from her , get her to tell us what the situation is .
She is the person who ultimately has responsibility .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the present motion for a Commission regulation covers a very wide and heterogeneous field by dint of the varying nature of the fisheries resources .
Such a diversity of resources necessarily implies a whole range of different fishing methods .
Therefore , faced with such a situation , this regulation could succeed only if it followed three fundamental principles : first taking sound scientific proof as its basis , secondly being realistic in application , which presupposes that is has been appropriately negotiated with the Member States and economic operators in that sector and thirdly that implementation should be on a decentralized basis .
I even think that it will achieve results in practice if it is strictly applied to all types of fishing , since resources are more plentiful on the continental shelves closest to the coast .
On the other hand it is important to remember that this might all prove to be in vain unless financial resources are provided for conversion of fishing equipment and methods and unless appropriate tallying methods are used either at Union level or at the level of the Member States .
As regards Portugal , I welcome the fact that the rapporteur has taken account of some of our major concerns , specifically the designation of a protected fishing area along our coastline .
I thank Mr Adam for his remarkable work .
Finally , I should like to stress that these methods are inalienable from the multi-annual fisheries guidance programme , the famous FGP-IV , the parameters of which need to be set with care and consistency in all Member States .
I hope that in this matter the next Council of Ministers will finally shoulder its responsibility .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Adam because he has made an effort to be flexible in order to attempt to improve a Commission proposal which is not acceptable as it stands .
The Commission justifies its new technical measures by the wish to prevent the capture of juvenile fish - something we all agree with - but these measures are , essentially , of two types : to improve the selectivity of fishing gears and to restrict the activity of these .
It is obvious that the Commission proposal consists of a set of restrictions solely intended to reduce current catches in order to alleviate the adverse effects of the Common Fisheries Policy , which did not live up to expectations as regards conservation of resources .
The failure of the Common Fisheries Policy is due , among other things , to the quite ineffective control policy which did not manage to prevent the activities of boats infringing the rules .
The lack of selectivity is not due to the size of the nets in current fishing gears but to the increasingly frequent use of illegal gears by Community vessels , which cannot be prevented due to lack of political will .
Let us be sincere : can the Commission prove that juvenile fish are caught with regulatory nets ?
What scientific reports and studies is the Commission using as a basis to establish closed periods and zones in certain regions ?
Experience has shown - as is logical - that undertakings do what they can to survive .
The effort to survive in many cases involves the committing of infringements - which in most cases go unpunished - of which the Member States , which are responsible for the controls , are aware - and of which the Commission is almost always aware , justifying its failure to act by alleging , rightfully , that it has no powers as regards control .
In view of this , what about the undertakings which scrupulously fulfil the technical rules and have to compete with others which do not ? What are they to think and how are they to act ?
What is the point in complying with and toughening up technical measures if the whole sector knows that failure to fulfil these is not penalised and that this is the real reason for the capture of juvenile fish ?
I think that only those measures compared in scientific studies and tested , and above all which can be controlled and are acceptable from the point of view of controls , should be implemented .
This is really the only solution if we are to have an economically viable , socially responsible fisheries policy which will ensure a balance of resources .
Thank you Madam President . I think the debate here reflects some of the mistrust that exists between fishermen in the different regions of the Community and I have to say regretfully not only between the people involved in the fishing industry but between the national authorities who have not complete confidence in each other 's capacity or willingness to police the system .
I want to thank Mr Adam for his report .
He has made a valiant effort to find a compromise and I want to say also that I do not go all the way with the sort of criticism that is continually levelled against the European Commission for its efforts in trying to reconcile conflicting interests .
Particularly in the UK and Ireland we have this hysterical criticism of every effort that is made and the national politicians fail to give moral support to the Community effort to resolve the problem .
The reason why we have a common fisheries policy is that we have a common resource and it cannot be managed by the states individually , so we have to reconcile ourselves to the fact that we have to cooperate and find solutions .
Some people oppose every single measure .
They recognize , or say they do , the need for control but they oppose every single measure that comes forward .
The Commission is then forced to produce the unpalatable solution which at the end of the day it is up to the national governments to reject or accept .
But if the Commission did not make these unpalatable proposals then the national governments and the national politicians would have to face up to their own responsibilities .
If you talk to the people involved in the fishing industry for three minutes , privately and quietly , you will find they all recognize the danger that exists and they all accept the need for measures to improve the situation .
It is true some regions of the Community have better measures .
In the Irish Sea , the Irish and UK Governments have agreed better measures in advance of Community progress and they are to be congratulated on that .
I think everybody has to recognize that , at the end of the day , if we are to have more fish , to give more quotas to fishermen , then the only way we can do that is to accept the hard decisions in the short term .
I believe if we do that there is evidence to show we can catch ECU 3 billion worth more of fish in Community waters .
If we could do that , then we could try some reallocation of quotas to those people that feel hard done by .
I want to refer to one major abuse that this does not provide for and that is fishing for mackerel in the western waters with factory ships where four times as many mackerel are being discarded as are being caught because of the higher price for the more mature fish .
This is a disastrous destruction and even if it means placing an officer on every ship we have to stop that .
Fishermen and the fishing industry will have no confidence in us while they can see this going on and the culprits not being arrested .
Madam President . Mrs Bonino regrets that she cannot be here today because of the Council meeting .
She had sent a letter to Parliament proposing a change to the agenda but Parliament did not find this possible so I will transmit the message from her .
The technical measures for Community Atlantic waters have not been sufficient to achieve the objective of minimizing the catch of young , immature fish .
These measures have been amended 19 times but the basic problems are still the same .
In 1995 taking into account this background and the international context of an increasing awareness of the need to improve the management of fish stocks , the Commission presented a communication on the implementation of technical measures in the common fisheries policy in which the Commission concluded that the status quo is not satisfactory and suggested a number of improvements in the technical measures to improve the exploitation pattern of Community stocks .
Member States have basically agreed with the main conclusions of this report .
The European Parliament reacted quite positively too .
The Commission undertook to present by June 1999 a new proposal on technical measures .
The Commission sincerely congratulates Parliament and especially the rapporteur , Mr Adam , on the revised version of its report on the technical measures proposal .
The Commission regards the revised report as concise , to the point and constructive .
A number of the amendments unerringly identify certain technical deficiencies in the text of the proposal that had been overlooked by the Commission .
Other amendments contain additional suggestions that the Commission regards as useful .
The Commission accepts the following amendments : No 1 as a recital and Nos. 10 , 11 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 23 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 and 73 .
From Amendment No 11 it is clear that basically Parliament supports the Commission 's proposal as regards the one-net and two-net rule .
The Commission is especially pleased with this as it feels that this element of this proposal is extremely important .
The Commission largely agrees with the spirit of the following amendments but finds them factually flawed or out of context and therefore cannot accept them : Nos 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 12 , 15 , 22 , 47 , 59 and 66 .
The contents of Amendments Nos 24-30 , 49 , 50 and 75 form part of the on-going negotiation process with the Council on the technical details of the annexes to the Commission 's proposal .
As the Commission does not want to pre-empt this discussion it is not in a position to accept these amendments as they now stand , although the Commission agrees with part of their contents .
The remainder of the amendments are not acceptable to the Commission because the Commission does not agree with their contents .
Again the Commission thanks Parliament for its constructive contribution to the ongoing debate on the technical measures proposal .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The debate is closed .
Diversification for Italian fishermen
The next item is the report ( A4-0095 / 97 ) by Mr Baldarelli , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 96 ) 0682 - C4-0037 / 97-96 / 0308 ( CNS ) ) on a specific measure to encourage Italian fishermen to diversify out of certain fishing activities .
Madam President , before I speak on this subject , as we have received various requests for referral , I should like to know how the Commission would react if the report were in fact to be referred back to committee .
The Commission would like Parliament to give its opinion today .
Madam President , on behalf of my group , I ask for this report to be referred back to committee .
Would anyone like to speak in favour of this motion ?
I call the Commissioner .
Perhaps I should emphasize that the 1997 fishing season is about to get under way .
To allow for an immediate halt to the activity in question , it is crucial that decision is approved by the Council meeting of 14 and 15 April .
It is possible only if Parliament gives its opinion today .
For this reason the Commission is against referral back .
I call Mr Görlach .
Madam President , we know that the Commission is in favour of Parliament deciding today , and the same no doubt applies to the Council .
But on this question , as every group is aware , there are widely differing views in Parliament , and there are good reasons for that .
Even if the Fisheries Council is about to meet , Parliament would be doing itself no favours in relation to the Council position if we were to vote tomorrow .
We should run a real risk of being unable to give an opinion that enjoyed clear majority support .
Nothing will happen , even if the fishing season is about to start .
If we take a few more weeks here , that will truly have no significant effect on the new fishing season .
For these reasons I support Mr Baldarelli 's motion .
Madam President , I think it most unfortunate that Mr Baldarelli has proposed referral back to committee at this stage .
My understanding is that there are some technical difficulties on compensation to the Italian fishing fleet which is a separate issue between the Italian Government and the European Commission .
The funding is there because the funding is already approved under regional policy etc .
That is not the main issue .
The main issue , as far as we and Parliament are concerned , is whether we are going to have any influence whatsoever over the Commission 's proposal and the Council 's decision .
If we do not take a decision today , this Parliament will be acting as a eunuch because the Council can move forward and take the decision without the opinion of Parliament .
I , therefore , am afraid I have to oppose Mr Baldarelli 's proposal because the interests of Parliament are greater than the issue itself .
We have now heard one speaker in favour of Mr Baldarelli 's procedural motion and one against .
Under Rule 129 of our Rules of Procedure , a vote is to be taken right now .
( Parliament decided to refer the report back to committee . ) Mr Imaz San Miguel on a point of order .
Madam President , I would like you to check whether , under the Rules of Procedure , a quorum is necessary for this vote .
No , that should have been moved before .
If someone had made the request before the vote , we should have established that , but nobody did .
Mr Tamino on a point of order .
Madam President , I should like to point out that Mrs McKenna had asked for the floor but no one has found out what it is that she wanted to say .
Mr Tamino , under the Rules of Procedure one speaker speaks in favour of the motion and one against .
Mr Görlach has spoken in favour , Mr Provan against ; thereafter , according to the Rules of Procedure , a vote is taken .
So in this case I could not call Mrs McKenna to speak on the motion .
Please accept that fact .
Madam President , it wasn 't just a question of making a statement on the matter in hand but also , possibly , asking for the quorum to be checked .
Unless you check whether Members had another request to make , obviously you will not allow them to make it .
I am sorry , but we have adhered to the Rules of Procedure , and this is precisely the procedure they prescribe .
Madam President , I simply wanted to say that I asked to speak before the vote , but the President did not allow me to do so .
I just want to say now that the reason why I asked to speak was to request her to check if there was a quorum .
No , Mr Imaz San Miguel , I called those who asked leave to speak on this motion , and I did not see your signal .
I am sorry about that .
My staff to the right and left of me here did not see you signalling either .
Fisheries management in the Baltic
The next item is the report ( A4-0094 / 97 ) by Mr Kindermann , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0489 - C4-0017 / 97-96 / 0244 ( CNS ) ) introducing arrangements for the management of the fishing effort in the Baltic Sea .
Madam President , the proposal before us has to do with the integration of Sweden and Finland into the common fisheries policy .
The principle of free and equal access to the waters of the Member States does not apply to either country , since there are no Community arrangements yet .
The aim of the proposed Regulation is to introduce such a Community arrangement for the Baltic area as a first stage in the gradual inclusion of Sweden and Finland in the common fisheries policy .
In essence , it provides for the fishing effort undertaken by Community vessels in each Baltic fishery to be monitored by the Member States on the basis of logbook records .
The arrangements are to apply to fishing vessels of more than 15 metres ' length between perpendiculars .
The fishing effort of vessels shorter than 15 metres will be assessed globally for each fishery .
This is largely a matter of a posteriori observation of the fishing effort , for which the Commission proposes some administrative measures , particularly in the domain of data collection .
The Committee on Fisheries supported the proposed Regulation in principle .
It enables Sweden and Finland to be integrated into Baltic fisheries and is therefore a first important step towards the full integration of both new Member States into the common fisheries policy .
Unfortunately , the Commission proposal does not stop at its proclaimed purpose of monitoring the fishing effort but goes beyond it in several respects .
In particular , I believe that the linkage established in Article 2 ( 2 ) between fishing permits and pre-existing entitlements to fish and the fact that Article 2 ( 3 ) fixes the number of vessels at the status quo figure constitute unacceptable restrictions of the fishing effort .
We regard this as an inadmissible encroachment on future decisions regarding future fleet strengths .
And particularly in the Baltic Sea , where there are only four regulated target species , one of which ( herring ) is in a very healthy state , we believe that such a provision is unwarranted .
The Council , however , is entitled at any time to limit the permissible fishing effort for any fishery if the condition of stocks so dictates .
And further problems are posed by the definition of fisheries given in the annex .
Since the fisheries system set out there is not only intended for the collection of data on fishing efforts but also as a framework for a possible Council decision on restriction of the fishing effort , as emerges quite clearly from Article 5 , the significance of the definition of fisheries undertaken here by the Commission must not be underestimated .
It is too rigid and , above all , too bureaucratic , and it does not reflect the existing pattern of fishing in the Baltic .
Nor is it necessary , in order to manage the fishing effort , to undertake a territorial breakdown .
For the purposes of this Regulation it would be quite sufficient to treat the entire Baltic Sea as a single area .
Our only concern in this context is to have fishery records subdivided by target species .
I reject the Commission annex in its present form and believe that the simplified system I have proposed is completely in line with reality and above all that it is consistent with the interests of the fishermen concerned .
Madam President , there is still a great deal of agitation over the last decision on the Baldarelli report .
As the responsible coordinator , I really must say at this point that we shall probably see something happening now that none of us wanted , namely the intervention of the United States in the Mediterranean , which will harm Italian fishermen and hence the Community fishing industry in general .
In that respect Mr Görlach 's comments were inappropriate and did not look far enough ahead .
But of course my task is not to give another opinion on that report , particularly since we have now sent it back , but rather to comment on Mr Kindermann 's felicitous report .
Mr Kindermann rightly stated that it is high time Sweden and Finland were integrated into the common European fisheries policy .
Sound proposals to that end have been tabled by the Commission .
Be that as it may , Mr Kindermann has seen fit to suggest two improvements .
He has tabled amendments to that end , and the Group of the European People 's Party fully supports those amendments .
On the issue as a whole , I must add that the Commission is seeking a fleet limitation , but we in the PPE Group feel that this is misplaced .
A restriction of the size of fishing fleets like that proposed by the Commission is in fact currently being laid down in the Multiannual Guidance Programme MGP IV , and this should not be forestalled in such a manner .
Moreover , we can see that the Baltic fisheries are in exceptionally good shape .
The annual report for 1996 on the German fishing industry produced by the Federal Ministry of Food , Agriculture and Forestry , for example , states that fish stocks in the Baltic are continuing to recover .
This applies especially to the codling population .
Stocks of herring and sprat continue to be very healthy .
When , incidentally , do we ever hear such good news from the fisheries sector ?
The second point of criticism in Mr Kindermann 's second amendment relates to the fisheries structure .
The Commission proposal does not seem terribly practicable in this respect .
The rapporteur reemphasized this point very clearly and proposed a logical alternative .
In general terms , I should like to stress that with the accession of Sweden and Finland the Union has two new littoral States of the Baltic Sea among its members .
This means that four of the nine States with Baltic coastlines are now members of the Union .
That will simplify fisheries management in the Baltic as a whole and make it more efficient , because the same set of rules will apply .
It is not only for that reason that we relish the prospect of future enlargements of the European Union , especially since we believe that fisheries policy is but one aspect of European policy , and we must ensure that we create equal terms and conditions for all .
Thank you , Mrs Langenhagen .
With regard to your opening remark , I had no option before , because those who voted decided by a majority of one vote - that is how close it was - to refer the report back to committee .
That is exactly what will happen , which means that it is no longer on today 's agenda .
Madam President , firstly , I would like to thank Mr Kinderman for his hard work and for the fact that he has put forward a really essential amendment proposal .
Sweden and Finland are both small countries .
The EU is large , but is proposing a much more detailed system than was previously applied in the Baltic Sea .
I may be wrong but perhaps it is a good thing that it is not the Commissioner with responsibility for Fisheries who is here today to listen to our points of view but Commissioner Liikanen instead .
I think these are very important views and the Commission should listen to them and take heed of them .
We have overstepped the limit where fishing capacity exceeds the reproduction level of fish in most of our waters .
Therefore the requirement for sustainable fishery means that we must limit our fishing efforts in various ways .
We have 50 years of experience of a simple limit on the West Coast of Sweden and more recently in the Baltic Sea .
We have limited the number of fishing days , had a break during the summer and have been able to use the coast guards as an effective means of control as they could tell us that when fishing boats were not supposed to be out , fishing boats were not out .
Now we are creating an uncontrollable system which will be impossible to live up to .
I do not think that that is a good thing .
But now we have something which I am very pleased about , Mr Kindermann has put forward a proposal which simplifies the system proposed by the Commission .
I would like to say that one requirement for the Commission 's proposal to be used in the Baltic Sea is that we use the proposal now put forward by Parliament which I am certain will gain a majority .
Otherwise we will have to oppose the proposal in its entirety .
Madam President , I come from the North and am not in the habit of passing on congratulations for reports unnecessarily .
But I would like to congratulate Mr Kindermann because he has made some good amendments to the proposal .
I also note that he has said that there is a good supply of Baltic herring so we must be able to increase our efforts to fish herring from the Baltic Sea .
This bodes well for the discussion on continued herring fishing for fodder purposes in the future .
We need to fish for herring in the Baltic Sea in order to counteract eutrophication .
Without fodder fishing we cannot do this effectively .
The rapporteur 's proposal is to replace the appendix with a simple table ; this is necessary and welcome .
It is the best of the proposals now under discussion and I really hope that the Commission can support the proposal .
It also corresponds to the coastal fishing which is typical in the Baltic Sea .
If the regulation is passed it will be some very rare good news from the EU for the fishing industry in Finland as we will then be able to register boats or fishermen and put an end to the crazy system of fishing peaks with everyone going out at the same time to fish which leads to reductions in prices and difficulties for fishermen .
Finally , I would like to comment on an eternal problem : In the report herring is translated as sill in Swedish and silli in Finnish , the Baltic Fishermen will have a good laugh about this .
It ought to be strömming and silaaki respectively , and the same applied for the Appendix .
I hope that this can be corrected .
, Member of the Commission - ( FI ) Madame President , as I stated earlier Commissioner Bonino would have liked to have been here today , but at the moment she is attending a meeting of the Consumer Affairs Council .
She sent a letter to Parliament informing it of the situation , but unfortunately it proved impossible to change the agenda in such a way as to enable her to take part in the debate . I will therefore read out her answer :
The Commission welcomes the constructive approach adopted by the Committee on Fisheries and the rapporteur , Mr Kindermann .
It bears witness to the desire to end the transitional period for Sweden and Finland in connection with the Community 's Baltic fisheries policy .
If the parties concerned want open-ended lists of fishing vessels , the Commission will not oppose this .
However , longer lists would increase fishing capacity , which may be at odds with structural policy , in particular the multiannual programmes .
Although the Commission is prepared to accept the thinking behind these amendments , the latter are nevertheless not consistent with Community fisheries policy .
With regard to the annex , the Commission feels that a simplification would be better from an administrative point of view .
However , if this amendment were to be adopted , valuable knowledge would be lost , particularly as regards endangered species of fish .
I will of course inform Commissioner Bonino of the points raised in the debate so that she can take them into account in her further consideration of the issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.37 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon . )

Votes
Madam President , perhaps someone from the PPE Group would also like to comment on Amendment 2 .
The first part of both amendments is identical , and we each actually wanted to withdraw the second part of our respective amendments .
I do not know whether that message came across .
If the PPE Group withdraws the second part of its amendment , I shall also withdraw the second part of ours on behalf of my group , and we should only need to vote once on the identical first part .
Madam President , as Mrs Wemheuer has already said , we in the PPE are also going withdraw the second part of the Garriga Polledo amendment , amendment No 2 .
Madam President , it is sometimes tragic when the two large groups in the House agree to delete an important part of an amendment .
This is happening now with the second part of Mr Wynn 's amendment .
It is no good simply to say that we need controls ; it is better to add that if the controls do not prove effective , appropriate action must be taken , and that is precisely what the second part of Mr Wynn 's amendment says .
For that reason , my group would like the second part to be retained .
May I ask for a vote on that ?
Mrs Müller , it is quite clear .
Your group is continuing on its own with this second part of the amendment .
I will therefore put the first part of Amendment No. 2 and of Amendment No. 1 which is identical to the vote by roll call .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , excuse me , I had already asked to speak before the vote , but since the problem is likely to recur , my intervention is not without purpose .
Amendment No. 53 added something to the paragraph .
It was to this amendment that the request for a roll call was directed .
We should therefore have voted on the amendment first .
In doing as you have , first the initial text , then the amendment , you have introduced confusion in people 's minds .
I would be surprised if the request for a roll call is directed to Article 3 , part 3 , first paragraph of the directive .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , indeed , it would have been possible to proceed either way , but it appears to me that the vote was quite clear to everybody .
Regarding Amendment No 63
. ( FI ) Madame President , I have been asked to make a small oral amendment clarifying this amendment .
I should like the word ' and ' at the beginning of the sentence to be changed to ' but ' .
This does not change the substance of the amendment , but clarifies its thrust .
The relevant sentence should thus read ' but in arctic climate conditions the summer period extends ' etc .
If you are now wondering why such a matter should be raised , the explanation can be found in the fact that the Member States with arctic climates were not yet in the EU when the Auto-Oil programme was drawn up .
Nobody described this situation better than the former President of Finland .
He stated in this room , before Finland 's accession to the EU , that when the cherry trees are blossoming in Strasbourg , people in Finland are still going cross-country skiing ..
This is the situation today , 10 April , in Finland .
In order that matters be quite clear , the oral amendment woud state : ' the summer period extends from 1st April to 30th September of each year , but in arctic climates etc . '
( The President noted that there was no opposition to the tabling of this oral amendment ) - Regarding Amendment No 64

Madam President , I am informed by the British Foreign Office there is a factual error in Recital M. I would therefore like to propose an oral amendment to which I have the agreement of Mr Dupuis and Mr McMillanScott , to say : ' welcoming the announcement by Chinese authorities that they will sign the International Covenant on Economic and Social Rights and are studying the possibility of signing the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ' .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to the tabling of this oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I am looking at the agenda for today .
I really think that if we are going to get into the regular habit of continuing votes from lunchtime at 6 p.m. , then it should say so on our agenda .
It has been common practice for that not to happen .
The votes at 5.30 p.m. are for the urgencies .
It does not indicate we will just carry on voting with everything that is left over .
I think we should in future make it clear on our agenda what we intend to do with regard to votes .
Mrs Green , to my knowledge , it is indeed what the agenda for the week stipulates , in any case , since it is what I have seen in it .
I checked in this Thursday 's agenda which states : ' 6 p.m. ( or after the Rule 47 votes ) possibly continuation of the morning 's votes ' .
This appears , therefore , in the draft agenda for the week , which embraces the various days , and in the agenda for this Thursday as well .
We think that it should have been emphasised in this report under the heading ' Agricultural Charges ' that it is not just the charges for cereal crops and rice which are unacceptable but also the other sections of the CAP as well .
Point 24 ought , in my opinion , to end with a demand for a reform of the whole agricultural policy with a view to a real slimming down of subsidies .
Dankert report ( A4-125 / 97 )
We think that this report ought to take up the issue of the money wasted in this Parliament moving between Brussels and Strasbourg .
It ought also to highlight the enormous costs connected with the new building work which is now being completed in both of these places .
It is money wasted in this fashion which seriously damages the Union 's reputation amongst the people .
Mamère report ( A4-96 / 97 )
One cannot but approve these two proposals from the European Commission , which are part of an overall ' Auto / Oil ' strategy based on a cost-effectiveness analysis in concert with the sectors concerned .
They are directed at reconciling legitimate environmental concerns , in order to guarantee better air quality in our cities and the constraints of industry in the Community .
However , the new demands imposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection seem to us to be too restrictive in the current state of technological and scientific research .
They compromise the initial balance too severely .
The French delegation will support the proposal from the European Commission , while qualifying it with constraints judged to be realistic .
It is convinced that this first reading is opening a debate which can lead to a reasoned improvement of the text .
It would be advisable , in fact , to reserve the possibility of adjusting the mandatory standards due in 2000 , at a second stage in 2005 .
This method would allow verification of the effectiveness of the measures thus applied , taking into account technological advances which may be expected and the effects of other sources of pollution .
First of all , there is cause for self-congratulation on the ' Auto / Oil ' initiative , the objective of which is to achieve a significant reduction in air pollution by 2010 .
This proposal constitutes the outcome of a global strategy , based on a cost-effective approach and on agreement with the principal sectors concerned .
However , it appears that certain improvements aimed at re-establishing the balance of the initial proposal were necessary at this stage of the proceedings .
In fact , certain demands from the rapporteurs , which I judge to be realistic , may contribute to reinforce the effectiveness of these measures .
In particular , the average life of a road vehicle in the European Union being twelve years and pending the renewal of existing vehicles in Europe to meet the new demands , it is necessary to improve the quality of fuels more rapidly to avoid penalising consumers .
I remain nevertheless convinced that the setting up as of today of mandatory standards for 2005 does not constitute the best solution .
In my opinion , it would be more reasonable to proceed by stages and thus to benefit from the evaluation of the standards already in force .
Choices must not be made now which would bind our industries , while technology is evolving rapidly .
I am sure it will allow us to carry out a differential adjustment of the standards for 2005 , with greater pragmatism nevertheless with regard to technical progress achieved .
in writing . Improved fuel quality is extremely important both for public health and the environment and the competitiveness of industry .
By improving the quality of fuels , the quality of the air can quickly be enhanced , in particular by reducing emissions from older vehicles .
The Commission based its proposal on one-sided advice and outdated information , with the result that the objectives set are much too timid .
The Commission 's approach based on cost-effectiveness failed to take account of more recent research showing that small particles pose an enormous threat to health .
The Commission 's calculations also disregard external environmental costs .
The Finnish and Swedish Governments recently commissioned a study which shows that the Commission has overestimated the costs of a switch to the production of environmentally more friendly fuels .
The new Nordic Member States had no opportunity to influence the Auto-Oil programme , with the result that their exceptional , cold climates were not taken into account .
Just before Finland 's accession to the EU , the former President of Finland , Mauno Koivisto , pointed out in this room , that when the cherry trees are blossoming in Strasbourg people are still cross-country skiing in Finland .
That is the case today , 10 April , although , according to the Commission proposal , summer has already started in Finland !
However , at the instigation of the Greens , Parliament has decided to amend the Commission proposals by expanding the fuels directive to include flexible arrangements for fixing the summer and winter periods on the basis of differing climatic conditions .
It is also proposing the incorporation of a special cold-weather test in the automobiles directive .
The further consideration of the directive must encompass a study to determine whether a quality classification should be introduced for machinery or whether the Commission should indeed draw up a separate proposal .
The Commission has not yet determined how the various factors , i.e. engine technology , the chemical composition of fuels and specific environmental conditions , can best be combined with a view to reducing emissions from machinery .
Lange report ( A4-116 / 97 )
The report takes an overall view of the issue of reducing emissions from motor vehicles .
The Swedish Social Democrats are very positive about the proposals presented in the report .
But we would point out that we think that amendment proposals Nos. 25 and 39 are too strict in format .
To focus solely on the use of fuel without paying any attention to large cars constructed with safety as a priority is , we think , wrong .
On the other hand we can envisage a system which within reasonable constraints could stimulate the consumer to chose a fuel-efficient car and to press for both small and large cars .
We think that this perspective is missing in relation to the requirement for lower fuel use in the report .
Our view on this matter concerns not only Mr Lange 's report of course but also the report by Ms González Álverez .
Mr President , I am extremely concerned , as are many of my colleagues , about problems linked to air pollution , especially in urban zones and I believe it is necessary to react strongly to show the correct way to all participants involved .
That is why , on the question of petrol and diesel fuel quality , I voted in a manner which generally follows that of our Committee on the Environment and which requires an effort on the part of the refining industry which I do not underestimate .
But I believe that this effort is necessary and that it can bear fruit quite rapidly .
Moreover , we must not lose sight of the fact that quite often , observance of these standards may be achieved by the addition to petrol of substances originating from bio-fuels , such that our stringency with regard to existing fuels - as explained very well last evening by my colleague Edouard des Places - also encourages green fuels .
On the other hand , I have adopted a more qualified stance on the Lange report relative to motor vehicles and I remained content to support the proposals negotiated with the manufacturers , who are already making significant progress .
I believe indeed that a decision must not be taken without evaluating the overall situation of the industry .
The European automobile industry - the largest in the world - is working in a market currently subject to many tensions and which is even in recession in certain countries due to the uncertainties of our compatriots with regard to the future .
Now the Commission has chosen this time to open frontiers completely for the importation of automobiles .
In less than three years , at the end of 1999 , Japanese sales in Europe will be entirely unrestricted .
Meanwhile , the quotas which were decided upon are being circumvented by Japanese factories set up in our midst and , in addition , they are being constantly increased by the Commission .
As an example , we have just learned that on 26 March last , the allowance for Japanese vehicles to be imported into the European Union has just been increased for 1997 .
One cannot ask our industry to rise rapidly to the level of world competitiveness and at the same time overburden it with new costs .
Let us not forget that the producers in third-party countries which are not subject to the same disciplines in their own markets can build up reserves and use them as a launch pad to conquer Europe .
It is necessary to be aware of these realities of international competition , at least as applied to us by the free-market-ism predominating at the Commission .
Atmospheric pollution causes anguish to our fellow citizens and there is no question of our being content with lamentations .
We must act !
Along with this , the problem of unemployment has reached the limit of what is bearable , our industries are fragile and there are grave risks of a major crisis .
When entering into the question of pollution of motor cars , economic and environmental aspects must be taken into consideration .
The current standards must therefore be made more stringent taking care not condemn the European car industry .
It is not easy to avoid ' pollution peaks ' in our cities at the same time as ' Vilvorde type ' closures .
It is based on these principles and trying to combine them as intelligently as possible that I have reached my decision on how to vote .
In this way I have supported the Executive Commission 's proposals which seemed to me to be courageous and balanced .
I hope that at the end of the long process opened with our vote today , new standards will be arrived at which are severe but realistic .
The European Parliament has today adopted a comprehensive proposal on how we can significantly improve air quality in the EU .
It introduces a significant tightening up of the limits and requirements applying to the production of new cars - and we fully support these requirements .
It is clear that these requirements have a price .
And industry has complained greatly about this .
But they must understand that the value of human health cannot be set lower than that of a heap of metal on wheels .
We want these improvements for the sake of our health and the environment in the EU .
It is therefore necessary to have more rigorous limits .
Industry must also realize that these improvements will not only mean a competitive advantage in the long term .
The European car industry needs to improve now in order that it might compete with Japan and the USA in the next few years .
In these car-producing countries particularly rigorous requirements have already been introduced for new cars .
This is an example we should follow .
What we need are initiatives that will bring home to consumers how important their style of driving is - e.g. in terms of acceleration and speed .
If we can encourage Member States to promote more environmentally conscious driving , good driving patterns will soon follow .
The cars of the future will be more suited to our circumstances and environment , this is the aim .
We , as politicians , need to introduce requirements , and both industry and consumers need to understand their responsibility .
The automobile sector is responsible for over 25 % of petrol emissions .
The air in our cities is impossible to breathe , cars are flooding our streets and lorries are paralysing our motorways .
The principles on which environmental policy is based are accepted but not implemented .
The prevention of contaminating emissions , the internalisation of external costs in the transport sector and the protection of public health and of the environment are fundamental requirements of our citizens .
Our Parliament must assume its responsibility .
In the specific case we are dealing with today of measures to reduce atmospheric pollution , it must be firmly asserted that the position defended by the European parliament is aimed at protecting the health of our citizens and preventing the continuing increase in the really harmful effects of acid rain , the deterioration of historic monuments and the widespread pollution in our entire ecosystem .
Urgent measures are required .
Everyone should be aware that it is technically possible to improve the quality of fuel and that this is a precondition to making numerous technical improvements to engines .
It is a logical sequence of events .
As citizens we demand pure air for breathing .
This involves trying to have ' clean cars ' which must be fitted with sophisticated catalytic converters .
But in order to have clean cars , we need quality fuel .
Improving the quality of petrol and diesel is an essential factor in the technological improvement of vehicles .
Moreover , the use of quality fuels has immediate beneficial effects .
The European Parliament 's proposals are not simply good intentions .
They are objectives which can be achieved and are being put forward in order to protect the health of citizens and the environment and to ensure the competitiveness of the European car industry in the global market .
González Álvarez report ( A4-117 / 97 )
We support these two reports as they form an important part of the work in Europe towards a better environment .
But we cannot support the European Parliament demand for average fuel use of 0.5 ltrs / 10 km for the year 2005 and 0.3 ltrs / 10kms for the year 2010 .
These limits would kill off a large part of the European car industry .
Technical development in recent years together with the use of fiscal incentives has enabled large reductions in average fuel use to be made .
This is the way forward for the future as well .
Politicians must keep within realistic limits if significant environmental objectives are to be achieved .
I fully support this report which is sponsored by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection of the European Parliament .
It is imperative that the European Union charts an overall strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from cars in order to save greater amounts of fuel and thus help lower atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases ( of which the EU accounts for 12 % in world terms ) and hence limit the climate change now occurring .
I would note in this regard that one of the key recommendations of the Rio de Janeiro Environmental Conference in 1992 was that measures should be implemented to keep CO2 emissions by the year 2000 at 1990 levels .
To attain these objectives the EU must implement the following measures : swift implementation of the auto / oil package which includes a proposal for a directive laying down limit values for car emissions as from the year 2000 ; implementation of a directive on fuel quality specifications ; introduction of a European Commission proposal to reduce limit values for exhaust emissions ; introduction of the agreement with the European motor industry and EU car importers to cut the fuel consumption of new cars .
Under this agreement , which provides for a system of checks , manufacturers will be obliged to reduce average CO2 emissions from all new cars within a predetermined period ; encouragement of consumers to purchase the most fuel-efficient models by introducing tax breaks ; and there needs to be better consumer information about CO2 emissions by means of an appropriate labelling system .
In conclusion , although resolute action needs to be taken at a world level , it is up to the European Union to set the example both internationally and at a Community level in protecting against CO2 emissions .
The debate and Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez ' report again bring into focus the importance of agreeing a long-term environmental programme which takes into consideration the impact of CO2 and other toxic emissions and the need to improve fuel economy and reduce our dependence on existing non-renewable resources .
My main interest is to ensure that future EU energy programmes make meaningful provision for the development of a fuel industry based on renewable energy resources .
Europe 's energy dependency has increased from 44 % to 52 % and we still have to tap into our renewable energy resources .
This must change .
Renewable energy resources are land-based . Land is our greatest national resource and is the only one capable of generating the raw material for alternative energy .
Alternative energy provides the opportunity for the most profitable and environmentally acceptable non-food use of land .
This in turn would boost rural renewal with the creation of employment for our rural communities .
Such technology is already in place , with vehicles running on fuels such as bio-diesel .
The cost-effectiveness of establishing a fuel industry based on renewable resources is dependent in the early stages on the attitude of this Parliament and national governments .
Of course it is vital that we establish a tax regime conducive to the establishment of such an industry .
I believe the loss of revenue through reduced excise duty would be offset by the increased economic activity generated by the new industry and savings through fuel imports .
Renewable energy could also be linked in a positive manner with our forest development programme , thus ensuring the maximum utilization of the by-products of the forestry sector .
Ghilardotti report ( A4-115 / 97 )
Madam President , I am in favour of a reasonable and practicable accommodation of the burden of proof in the cases of discrimination , direct or indirect , based on gender .
I have not , however , been able to vote either in favour of certain amendments or in favour of the report , because it goes well beyond that which is necessary or wise to contribute to a more correct application of Community legislation in the area of equality of treatment and equality of opportunity of men and women .
Talleyrand stated that anything which is exaggerated is insignificant .
If the exaggerations and legal incongruities contained in the text which was voted upon here at the first reading were to be retained by the Council - which fortunately will not be the case - such a directive would nevertheless run the risk of not remaining insignificant to women , since it would discourage employers from conducting an active policy for the employment of women .
Now women , Madam President , who cannot find employment any more , are no longer at risk of being discriminated against by their employer .
Is that the outcome we want ?
I hope not and I await the second reading for the damage to be put right .
We think that the issues dealt with by the report , equality between women and men and a smoothly functioning labour market are extremely important .
The committee and its rapporteur have put forward what is essentially a good report but we think that the report contains an important omission , namely support for the Commission 's proposal for Article 4.1c.
The Commission 's proposal for Article 4.1.c includes de facto an important factor to improve the position of the plaintiff when allocating the burden of proof in cases of sexual discrimination .
By proposing that 4.1c is removed from the Commission 's proposal , Parliament risks helping to strengthen the position of the less progressive States in the Council which would be unfortunate .
We also think that amendment proposal No. 18 in the report , which concerns Article 7.2 ( new ) could be interpreted and used by certain Member States to exclude people of a certain gender de facto from a number of occupations .
We think therefore that the effect of amendment proposal No 18 could be that the report would include a proposal which opposes one of its basic aims , namely to provide a good foundation for a real step forward for equality between men and women and a modern labour market .
This is an example of a European Commission proposal which will lose jobs - mainly for women .
According to the European Parliament 's own legal experts , its effect will be to reduce the protection of women in the 14 countries who have signed up to the Social Chapter .
Paradoxically , British women enjoy better protection under our own Equal Opportunities Act , under British and European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) Case Law and under the Treaties .
The Commission proposal reduces that protection which is one reason why the British Government applied the veto to the original proposal. the Commission is trying to outflank the British by using the Social Chapter .
Both the Labour and Liberal Democrats in the current election campaigns have promised to sign up to the Social Chapter .
British women beware !
Another objection is that the wrong Parliament Committee - Women 's Rights - has led on this proposal .
Gender discrimination is not only a problem for women .
Men suffer from it too .
Men have to wait longer for their pensions than women .
In London , men cannot get their transport passes until 65 whereas women get them at 60 .
This proposed Directive should have been referred to either the Committee on Social Affairs , Employment and the Working Environment or the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
A further objection is that the Commission proposal is badly drafted .
I have compared the English , French and German versions .
They differ in a number of important respects .
For example , the English version refers to the ' prima facie ' evidence of discrimination .
Neither the French nor German versions use that wording . ( Oddly , only the English version uses Latin ! )
The Commission has ridden rough-shod over the opposition of the main employers ' organizations in the European Community - UNICE for big companies , UEAPME for small and medium-sized firms and EUROCOMMERCE for the distributive trades .
They fear it will become a malcontent 's charter .
One bright spot , however , is the defeat of a proposal put forward by British Labour members to set up a special European fund to finance employees who wanted to sue their employers .
Already in 1957 , Article 119 of the treaty instituting the European Community stipulated : ' Each Member State provides ..... the application of the principle of equality of remuneration between male workers and female workers for the same work ' .
Four years before the beginning of the XXIst century , women 's salaries are still significantly lower than those of men , and this in countries where they are in a majority of 52 % , where they represent nearly 40 % of the active population and where more than 90 % of them are salaried .
This , also in countries which advocate democracy and equality .
It is true that since 1975 , six directives for equality of remuneration and treatment between women and men have allowed a solid legal base to be established which has been generously interpreted by the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
Unfortunately , the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice has not been applied uniformly in the Member States .
It is therefore high time , in 1997 , for a directive to be adopted , which finally obliges the employer and no longer the plaintiff , to prove that the difference in salary between men and women does not arise from a difference of gender .
The advantages which this directive offers are manifold : it defines indirect discrimination which does not lie in considerations linked directly to gender , but in matters of fact , neutral in appearance .
By the very nature of the directive , Member States are required to transpose and therefore to introduce the measures necessary for its implementation into their internal legal system .
The directive must be applied in matters of recruitment , promotion , remuneration and social security .
However , the ' reversal of the burden of proof ' is not total ; the plaintiff must first establish the points of fact which allow the existence of discrimination to be presumed .
Whilst strongly approving of this directive , I regret , however , that it is not more ' demanding ' and that the reversal of the burden of proof is not total and actual .
Does this directive have a reason for existence ?
A PPE member from Luxembourg is of the opinion that this is not the case .
It is for this reason that she defended the employer 's views in Committee on Women 's Rights and she introduced amendments directed at emptying the directive of its purpose .
I do not share this point of view .
Moreover , nor does the government of Luxemburg .
On the contrary , I am of the opinion that , in the long struggle of women against all discrimination based on gender , this legislative text will make it possible to obtain from employers the information necessary to establish the existence of discrimination .
While certain Member States have legislation which already goes further , it is obvious that a vigorous directive is required on a European scale , in order to create a clear legal basis .
The Luxemburg socialists declare themselves to be clearly in favour of Mrs Ghilardotti 's report .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the Ghilardotti report on the proposal with respect to the Council 's directive on the burden of proof in connection with discrimination on the basis of sex .
The Danish Social Democrats take a positive view of the rapporteur 's report which is a step towards an effective safeguarding of the principle of equality .
One of women 's greatest problems is precisely that of proving that they have been discriminated against on the basis of sex .
Therefore it is a positive step that the legal definition of indirect discrimination be clarified .
However it is also important that the proposal 's area of application be clearly worded so that it includes aspects of sex discrimination in the employment market - including hiring , promotion and salaries .
As the rapporteur has pointed out , salaries should also be covered by the directive , since discrimination on the basis of sex often has to do with the issue of salaries - especially when salary statistics in Denmark show that on average women 's salaries are 60 , 000 Danish kroner lower for the same work of the same value .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance voted for Mrs Fiorella Ghilardotti 's report and is eager to congratulate the rapporteur on her remarkable work and her courage .
Indeed it requires a lot of courage even today to become involved in the question of equality between men and women .
We also have difficulty in accepting that the question which we are tackling is still a current one .
For , if we are inclined to make a statement on the question of the burden of proof in the case of discrimination based on gender , it is because this discrimination still exists .
And therein lies the whole problem .
Nevertheless the European Union has had the concern for equality of treatment between men and women close to its heart from its inception .
Article 119 of the EEC Treaty stipulates it and has given rise a series of acts directed at improving the lot of women so that inequalities no longer exist between the sexes .
The European Commission has made this matter one of its priorities for more than twenty years .
Where then does this problem come from ?
The Council itself does not stop the flow of texts directed at assuring equality of treatment between men and women .
Only it is known that the Council cannot go far in the event that one or other Member State considers its interests are at stake .
This is the explanation for everything .
This is why since 1988 no decision has been taken to resolve the question of the burden of proof , while a text had been submitted to the Council , and the European Parliament had stated its opinion .
Nearly ten years of obstruction , and the necessity to resort to other procedures more limited in scope .
The subject on which we have just legislated , as so many others , shows the extent to which institutional reform is necessary .
If we really want an effective and just Europe , it is time to implement majority rule for all legislation .
I hope the IGC will achieve this .
In any case reality requires it .
The ARE has voted for this text , in order to contribute to the introduction of clear and precise regulations in this essential field , a real equality between men and women and we profoundly regret that this report can only include 14 Member States .
Equal opportunities for men and women and equal treatment at work ought to be considered as a matter of course .
It ought to be equally obvious that every country may draw up their own regulations in this area .
I have voted for the report on the premise that the regulations in the Directive are the minimum standards which give every country the right to draw up or keep their own regulations .
This is also stated in the report and it is on this premise that I have voted for the report .
A shift in the burden of proof from the plaintiff to the defendant is a complex issue , so it comes as no surprise that it has led to very detailed discussions both here in the House and within our group .
The advantage of this is that our position has been given extremely careful consideration , and we were in no doubt that we should vote for the resolution .
Some people have tried to claim that this is all about a dispute between employers and workers , and of course it is perfectly true that the two sides of industry expressed different opinions when they were consulted about this proposal .
Instead of simply underlining this difference , however , the PPE Group felt it was better to get straight to the heart of the matter : there is actually no suggestion of introducing new rights - it is simply a question of making the principle of equal treatment and equal opportunities for men and women , as laid down in the Treaty and in seven directives , legally enforceable where necessary .
It is also not an entirely new departure , since the basic idea behind the directive has already been set out in the case law of the Court of Justice .
It is not even really a reversal of the burden of proof , but simply a shift , so that in proceedings between an employer and a worker , say , or between someone covered by a social security system and the authorities responsible for that system or the regulator in the field , each of the parties is required to make available any information they possess which is relevant to the burden of proof .
The directive simply makes it easier for a person who goes to court to enforce an individual , subjective right .
It is also a means of ensuring respect for a principle which is of such great social importance that it transcends the subjective rights and individual interests of those bringing proceedings .
It is therefore of great political significance .
The only regrettable aspect is that the legal basis was finally taken from the social protocol , which means that this directive will not yet apply in the UK , creating further divisions in our social Europe .
Resolution on Albania
Madam President , anything but a multinational force to protect humanitarian aid !
This is a typical military force which will occupy ports , airports , lines of communication and stations ; which is proposing to intervene to restore public order , to disarm the population , to protect and secure President Berisha and the Fino Government , and to prepare , in 60 days ' time , for political elections .
Add to that the clear intent of the Italian Government to use force to seal every point at which Albanian refugees can illegally embark for Italy .
What is under way here is a dangerous political and policing operation , camouflaged by the humanitarian mandate , on the orders of the government in Rome , discredited and incompetent , which is no longer in any position to guarantee anything except the weakness and vagueness of its own ideas .
The Dutch presidency , moreover , yesterday summarized the situation , cynically , as ' A somewhat unenviable mission ' .
Madam President , today 's approval in this House of the OECD 's so-called humanitarian military mission to Albania marks an unhappy coincidence .
It is , in fact , exactly fifty-eight years since Fascist Italy began its occupation of Albania .
But , of course , it is not this historical reminder , as fortuitous as it is improbable , that prompts the Italian component of the Communist Renewal Party in the GUE Group to express its outright disagreement with the compromise text approved a short while ago .
While expressing the deepest understanding of the requests and pleas put forward by the forces of democracy in Albania , we are unfortunately in no doubt that the OECD mission , under Italian control , will not only fail to provide them with any satisfaction or support but will eventually cause damage - not irreparable , we trust -to the cause of democracy , the return to normality and the restoration of peace in Albanian society .
This military intervention - because it is a military intervention , in the absence of any food or health emergency - marks the culmination of what the Herald Tribune today calls a sequence of tragic errors by the Italians .
We can only hope that these errors will not have fatal consequences for a friendly people who have suffered all too much in the last fifty-eight years .
We Communists , in Italy and in Europe , will continue to do what we can to ensure that this insane military undertaking is over as soon as possible , without further tragic consequences for that population beyond the Adriatic .
We are voting against the joint resolution tabled by the six political groups .
We totally reject the logic of intervention in the affairs of a third country , via the dispatch of a multinational military force , that is expressed in the resolution signed by the conservative and social democratic groups of this Parliament .
The EU is persisting with its unacceptable policy of supporting the forces which have led Albania into its present predicament and is trying to salvage what it can from the autocratic , anti-democratic and thieving regime of Berisha whom the EU itself elevated and imposed on the Albanian people with disregard for the consequences .
Instead of demanding that President Berisha resign forthwith and that the international bodies contribute to compensating the Albanian people for the losses they have incurred as a result of being robbed by the pyramidtype saving schemes that were aided and abetted by European and American profiteers , instead of insisting that the just demands of the outraged Albanian people be met and that committees of the people be allowed to participate in the restoration of democracy and in the economic reconstruction of Albania , the resolution of the European Parliament advocates intervention in the internal affairs of the country and seeks yet again to stop the Albanian people determining their own fate and future .
The conservative and social democrat forces are using the stance of their political stable mates in Albania as a pretext for giving wholehearted support via this resolution to armed intervention , mandated by the UN but with the Italian Government as the chief instigator , aimed solely at facilitating a share-out of zones of influence in Albania and in the Balkans generally .
We utterly reject military intervention in any form , particularly in the Balkans where the presence of foreign forces in all , or at least most , of the countries is increasing the risk of wider destabilization in an area commonly known as ' the powder keg of Europe ' .
We are against legitimization and consolidation of the logic promoted by the new order which involves the elevation of military intervention to the status of a necessary condition for the settlement of internal and international problems as a means to furthering imperialistic interests via a military presence and the force of weaponry under the guise of ensuring the distribution of humanitarian aid .
It was with great fervour that this House discussed the sending of armed troops to Albania in order to achieve peace and security .
But a military operation in Albania is a difficult task and could cost many lives , something which cannot be measured in terms of money .
The greatest problem , and everyone agrees on this , is how to disarm the population .
The idea which I presented was that the European Union should establish an office for the purchase of weapons in Tirana .
It would be much cheaper for the EU countries to buy the people 's weapons from them than to force them to give them up .
Albanians could also then receive some form of income which may help , to some extent , to relieve the losses which many of them suffered when they were duped into participating in pyramid selling schemes .
Resolution on Hong Kong
We have abstained from voting on the Hong Kong resolution .
In doing so we want to emphasise that the criticism directed in the resolution towards the action of the Chinese People 's Republic is correct .
The protection of democracy and human rights is taken as read as far as we are concerned .
But we do not agree with the format of the resolution as regards point 6 .
We see no reason for the EU and its Member States to co-ordinate its action on this matter with the USA .
This is why we have abstained from voting .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item on the agenda is the debate on highly important topical and urgent issues .
The next item on the agenda is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0294 / 97 tabled by Mrs Hoff and others on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists on the Treaty of Union between Belarus and the Russian Federation ; -B4-0297 / 97 tabled by Mr Ferri and others on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party on the Treaty of Union between Belarus and the Russian Federation ; -B4-0380 / 97 tabled by Mrs Lalumière on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance on the Treaty of Union between Belarus and the Russian Federation ; -B4 0319 / 97 tabled by Mr Bertens on behalf of the Group of the Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party on the Treaty of Union between Belarus and the Russian Federation ; -B4 0326 / 97 tabled by Mr Schroedter and Mrs Aelvoet on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament on breaches of democracy and human rights in Belarus ; -B4-0329 / 97 tabled by Mrs Sornosa Martínez on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on the Treaty of Union between Belarus and the Russian Federation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Members of the Commission , we all hoped that another urgent debate on the political situation in Belarus would not be necessary .
We hoped that President Lukashenko would find the path of reason from the irrational route he himself had chosen to follow .
We hoped that the long-overdue acceptance of democratic ground rules in Belarus would become a reality .
There are many models of democracy , but all of them accept fundamental human rights such as respect for the democratically elected Parliament , freedom of speech and assembly , freedom of the press and the exercise of democratic control .
Human rights and the exercise of democratic civil liberties are not a luxury reserved for decadent Western societies which cannot afford to have countries undergoing political and economic upheaval .
They are the civil rights of a humane global community .
Critical ideas are the salt of a vibrant open society .
Freedom is for everyone .
We hoped that a solution would develop which would reflect the situation before the referendum .
We hoped that sweeping economic reforms would be introduced , so that the financial and economic aid packages assembled by the IMF , the World Bank , the European Union and the United States could finally be put into effect .
We hoped that the partnership and cooperation agreement as well as the interim agreement between the European Union and Belarus could be implemented .
The aim of our European policy is not isolation but rather the fulfilment of our responsibility to use financial and economic aid measures in support of our ideas .
The attempt to foster closer regional cooperation between two friendly States such as Russia and Belarus is legitimate .
It is to be feared , however , that this union treaty is a geopolitical defensive strategy against the eastward enlargement of NATO .
Mr Primakov has already spoken of lessening the impact of the NATO enlargement .
My concern is that this is playing on national fears and that the surrender of national sovereignty might one day appear desirable .
Regional approaches and cooperative arrangements should not be defensive strategies but should allow each party to develop as a reliable partner of all neighbouring States , of the European Union , the United States and other international partners and of international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , all of which are prepared to help in what is admittedly an incredibly complex and historically unparalleled process of integration into an existing world economic system .

It is to be hoped that the present draft treaty between Russia and Belarus will lead to a broad national debate , a debate which should be open , democratic and controversial .
We call on the Commission to use the joint statement to examine the impact of these developments on our agreements , and we ask the Commission explicitly to include this examination in the mandate of its joint factfinding mission with the Council and to inform us of the results .
In addition , the report of the fact-finding mission should be delivered to Parliament as soon as it is available .
Despite the massive demonstrations which have taken place , President Lukashenko has got his way and has signed a Treaty of Union with the Russian Federation .
The way in which this treaty has come about is typical of the authoritarian behaviour and attitude of the Belarus Government .
Fortunately , the new liberal ministers in Russia managed to have the scope of the treaty considerably reduced , and its evolutionary nature allows for further debate and consultation before there is any further integration .
The new treaty is only likely to be successful if it is rooted in an environment of respect for human rights and democracy , if it allows criticism from the press , and if it is accompanied by a humane policy towards minorities .
None of this is in place at the moment .
Fortunately , the Belarus Government has promised improvements , and has said that it is prepared to cooperate with the Union on the basis of the Kosto committee 's proposals .
The Union must be ready to provide help , and our efforts are needed to promote security and stability in Eastern Europe .
Greater efforts are needed from the Belarus Government before the partnership agreement can be approved .
Mr President , since November there have been huge changes in Belarus .
My last visit in March opened my eyes to a change that had never been apparent during my previous visits .
The way in which this treaty is being handled and the lack of public consultation are manifestations of this change .
The reality in that country is that parliamentarians are being convicted , imprisoned and fined , although on paper they continue to enjoy immunity .
That is why I believe we must not miss the opportunity to invite these parliamentarians here .
Mr Lukashenko 's reply to us is very telling , for while he was writing his reply , these arrests were taking place .
The free press is in a no-win situation .
The latest threat is that the newspapers - the only free voices left in the country - are to be closed down .
That is why it is essential that those measures in the TACIS democratization programme which are still possible should be implemented very quickly indeed and that access to them should be granted to all sections of the population .
The most difficult thing at the present time is to continue dispensing aid to the children who are victims of Chernobyl , and I receive numerous phone calls and complaints about the severe problems faced by the NGOs in trying to pass on humanitarian aid to the victims freely and without constant state interference .
I therefore ask the other groups to accept our oral amendment on this subject .
What is particularly disturbing and symptomatic of the development of Stalinism in this country is the creation of state youth organizations with some of the trappings of fascism .
It is important to conduct a dialogue , but the prerequisite of dialogue is the creation of conditions in which it can take place .
Another important point is that support should be given to the OSCE envoy who is initiating round-table talks in order to promote the restoration of dialogue with the forces of democracy , for it is also essential that these democrats be given due recognition from our side and that they do not become fair game for dictatorial actions .
May I just say that the Socialist Group accepts the oral amendment .
Mr President , only a few weeks ago I was in the chair as the oldest Member of the European Parliament , and I was aware then that anyone who is as old as I am will have seen many things and will also have seen the opposite of everything .
I can only say this to you : when I hear the news from Belarus , I am reminded very clearly of the spring of 1938 , when Hitler occupied Austria .
The selfsame approach , the selfsame technique , the selfsame language are being used here .
It is concealed totalitarianism , and there is another similarity , of which regrettably scant notice has been taken in our part of the world , namely the fact that the Weimar Republic in Germany collapsed at a time when the National Socialists and Communists together commanded an absolute majority in the Reichstag .
And however much Boris Yeltsin , to whom I might still ascribe a degree of goodwill , might squirm in this situation , we must not forget that in today 's Duma exactly the same combination of forces exists as in the German Reichstag of that time .
On the one side there is the whole faction around Shirinovsky , and on the other side there are the Communists , so that we again have an absolute totalitarian majority which , although it may not manage any positive action , is able to destroy any initiatives .
That is the terribly depressing thing about these developments in Belarus .
It is therefore imperative that everything possible be done to overcome this situation .
There is not very much we can do , but we should certainly make our point most emphatically , and we should devote the utmost energy to persuading other bodies , including our esteemed Council , to take immediate action on this issue .
Mr President , there are always masses of resolutions with which all our views can be broadcast , but if these resolutions are given no teeth , totalitarian dictators will make fun of them , if they heed them at all , but they will not take them seriously .
Just look at Mr Lukashenko 's repeated declarations , at the way in which he is dismantling civil liberties bit by bit .
Freedom of the press has virtually been eliminated , and parliamentarians , as Mrs Schroedter rightly said , have already been imprisoned .
We should therefore signal very emphatically our solidarity with these parliamentarians , with the opposition in Belarus .
And we should perhaps also demand that our Council finally adopt a decisive and resolute position in this situation .
That is really what is needed here .
I should like to conclude by expressing my sincere thanks to Mrs Schroedter .
She was one of the very first to go to Belarus and to see what was happening there .
I also remember that there were many at the time who ridiculed her , who thought she was imagining things .
But what she saw was no figment of the imagination ; it was a demon which , unfortunately , is more alive now than ever before .
Had we perhaps reacted more vigorously at the time , we might have changed something .
Possibly not , but we still ought to have tried .
I therefore ask the House to do everything in its power to exert pressure on Belarus , and on Russia too , so that the situation there can at least be brought partly under control .
The fact is that failure to do so may result in the long run in a terrible international catastrophe .
Mr President , like the other speakers , I fully appreciate the gravity of the situation both in the Federation and in Belarus , but I fail to see why we cannot discuss this in the context of our bilateral relations with those countries , or why we have to discuss it now , just because they have signed a treaty .
I would have preferred the House to discuss the implications for EU policy of the judgment handed down by the court in Berlin two hours ago , when the judge found Iran 's supreme state body guilty of the murder of four Kurds in the Mikonos restaurant a few years ago .
That is what we should have been discussing .
And what was this all-important dialogue that was never acted upon ?
That would have been topical , and we should also have discussed why the American Congress appears to be rather better informed than we are .
And who knows , perhaps we will shortly be having to take a closer look at the D 'Amato law ?
Our debates now tend to be generated by whatever happen to be the interests of our constituencies , by those NGOs which are the best lobbyists , by our fascination for distant and unverifiable events , and of course by the decisive power that is wielded by the large political groups .
Mr President , I would urge you to change the form and content of these topical and urgent debates .
I was in Geneva , the Council accepted our resolution on notification , and it pursued the debate on the ideas of the individual Member States .
I would urge you to talk to the political groups about reorganizing these topical and urgent debates , otherwise we shall end up going round in ever-decreasing circles , and that is surely not what anybody wants .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , the common resolution which is before us is not appropriate , for several reasons , in my opinion .
First of all , it prejudges the outcome of current negotiations , while the European Union awaits an imminent response from the government of Belarus on the concerns which it has expressed .
It appears that the government of Belarus is currently quite prepared to take account of the recommendations of the European Union .
By adopting this resolution today , we would be making a mistake detrimental to the responsible image which our parliament must show .
Secondly , the draft treaty between Belarus and Russia can only be analysed within the much wider scope of the re-structuring of the CIS , a problem which cannot be put to one side , but which is nevertheless completely forgotten in the common resolution .
This treaty creates a union open to other states ; it proposes a level of cooperation greater than that of the CIS and also , at the more involved level of the four way cooperation between Russia , Belarus , Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan .
It is necessary , therefore to put things back into context .
Thirdly , the common resolution seems to me to be rather devalued , it is no secret , by the presence , among the signatories , of Communists , who are not the best placed to give lessons in basic freedoms and the fight against totalitarianism .
Finally , it is ridiculous to speak of a government which consulted the people by referendum on 27 November 1996 .
Since when has an autocracy carried out referenda ?
In the whole of the history of Russia , I have never seen an autocrat carry out referenda .
It is enough to refer to the history books .
It would be preferable to postpone the vote on this common resolution , or failing that , not to adopt it .
The situation is really in the process of improving thanks to diplomatic discussions and I believe that hysterical or unilateral speeches coming from this chamber cannot but create a climate of mistrust between East and West , which will really do nobody any good .
Mr President , I can entirely endorse the views expressed by my colleagues Mrs Mann and Mrs Schroedter .
But there is one thing that I really would like to make clear here .
Russia is not a dictatorship .
Russia is on the road to democracy .
Of course it has not reached the same point on that journey as the democracies of Western Europe , the point at which we should wish it to arrive one day , both for our own sake and for the future of Russia .
But Russia is on the road to democracy , and we must support its progress along that road .
That is why one of the purposes and concerns of this resolution is to assess the effects that the union of Belarus and Russia would have on our relations with Russia .
The interim agreement with Belarus , of course , has been shelved , and rightly so , because a dictatorial regime is certainly in power there .
But we have a partnership agreement with Russia to ratify , and I hope that will indeed be done in the next few weeks .
Nevertheless , we in the European Parliament will undoubtedly have to reflect on our attitude to a parliamentary assembly of that Union if half of its members have no democratic legitimacy .
That should be at the heart of our discussions .
Mr President , the political and economic evolution of Belarus is certainly a cause for concern - particularly since the last referendum on the new constitution was held in November .
As has been pointed out , a fact-finding mission sent by the European Union concluded that such a referendum could be declared illegal and that the constitution did not establish an adequate separation of powers or the proper control and balance of these .
In response to the conclusions of the mission , which were endorsed by the Council of Ministers on 24 February , the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Belarus sent a letter to the Presidency the day before yesterday , the content of which will be discussed with the Member States .
The text of the letter sent by the Belarus Government contains two undertakings : one , to discuss with all the deputies in the 13th Supreme Council the constitutional changes necessary to establish a greater separation of powers .
Second , to discuss with the European Union the establishment of independent control over the functioning and possible improvement of the legal framework in force to protect human rights and the independence of the media .
The Belarus Minister of Foreign Affairs is travel to The Hague today to present Belarus ' official response to the Presidency of the Council of Ministers .
Also today , the Political Committee of the Council of Ministers of the European Union will discuss the political situation in Belarus .
If the European Union considers , finally , that the Belarus response is satisfactory , the Commission will examine ways of supporting activities and initiatives to help the Belarus authorities to redress the economic and political situation .
The Commission is monitoring closely the steps taken by Belarus to reinforce its integration with Russia .
Although the current text of the treaty is more of a declaration of intent than a basis for application , the Commission is naturally going to examine in detail the Treaty of Union signed recently between Belarus and the Russian Federation to see whether this is compatible with the contractual relations established with the European Union .
If it is to be acceptable , the said integration move must be totally voluntary , mutually beneficial , open to the outside world and compatible with international obligations without creating new points of dissension .
This is the view of the Commission and , naturally , I cannot give you any information at the moment on the contacts between the Belarus Foreign Affairs Minister or on the Political Committee of the Council of Ministers , because they are in fact meeting at this very moment in Brussels .
I have a supplementary question for Mr Marín .
Under what circumstances is the Commission prepared to enter into dialogue on the arrest of parliamentary deputies and similar flagrant abuses ?
The answer is in the text sent by the Belarus Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
In the letter by the Belarus Minister of Foreign Affairs , the first condition is , as I said , to discuss with all the deputies in the 13th Supreme Council , the current ' parliament ' , the constitutional changes needed to establish a better separation of powers .
The negotiations are under way today . The Commission and the Council of Ministers will be in a position to draw their own political conclusions once these negotiations are completed .
In any case , as usually happens in all negotiations , the fact that the Belarus Government has handed in a letter and the Minister of Foreign Affairs has come here to negotiate with the Presidency of the Council can be understood as a will to negotiate .
Mr President , I must apologize for not raising a point of order but asking another question . Commissioner Marín , do you know whether the Council will hand over the report of the fact-finding mission to Parliament and , if so , when that will happen ?

There will be no problem , Madam .
I wish to stress once again that the political leaders are meeting this afternoon to assess the proposal by the Belarus Government .
Once the meeting ends , you will be informed of the outcome .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The voting will take place at 5.30 p.m. today .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0288 / 97 tabled by Mr André-Léonard and Mr Bertens on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party on Zaire ; -B4-0298 / 97 tabled by Mr Tindemans and others on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party on the situation in Zaire ; -B4-0307 / 97 tabled by Mr Pasty and others on behalf of the Group Union for Europe on the situation in Zaire ; -B4-0309 / 97 tabled by Mr Hory and Mr Pradier on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance on the situation in Eastern Zaire ; -B4-0313 / 97 tabled by Mr Swoboda and others on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists on the situation in Zaire ; -B4-0327 / 97 tabled by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament on the situation in Zaire ; -B4-0330 / 97 tabled by Mr Pettinari and Mr Carnero González on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United Left - Nordic Green Left on the situation in Zaire .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , hiding in the forests of Zaire are hundreds of thousands of refugees , cut off from any hope of access even to the most basic humanitarian aid .
In the meantime , Zaire is torn by bitter conflicts involving , among others , foreign mercenaries , while many Hutu leaders who played a part in the massacre of the Tutsi in Rwanda are also active in the country .
What is the European Union to do in this situation ?
As a minimum , we can only deplore the inconsistency of European policy , in the Great Lakes region as elsewhere ; one is tempted to see this as yet another defeat for the common foreign policy , especially as regards the lack of co-ordination between the Council and those Member States which are also members of the United Nations Security Council .
There are , then , at least three things that must be done : the first is to call upon the United Nations Security Council to set up an international peace-keeping force with a mandate to protect the humanitarian organizations , to disarm the Hutu militias and to guarantee the frontiers recognized by international law .
The second is to underline the basic function which the Court of Arusha must undertake in the process of stabilization in the Great Lakes region , where the severe punishment of those responsible for the massacres of 1994 is essential in order to prevent fresh massacres from occurring .
As the third and last step , we must again insist on the creation of humanitarian corridors to bring aid to the hundreds of thousands of exiles and refugees who are now existing in appalling conditions in the forests of northwestern Zaire .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group intends to approve the compromise text on Zaire , because we support its calls for an end to the violence , the restoration of democracy and elections - as we would do anywhere - for a solution to the refugee problem , since around 200 people are dying every day , for an investigation into the massacres in eastern Zaire and action by the International Tribunal in the region , and for political negotiations and humanitarian aid ; we also support its calls for those who are creating obstacles on any of these issues to be clearly identified .
We take the view , however , that we should have made a more forceful statement about the future at this point , urging that since no serious steps have yet been taken to prepare for elections - such as organizing a census - the existing dictatorship should not simply be replaced by another one , and calling on the international community not to look favourably at the creation of African states on an ethnic basis .
We find it quite extraordinary that now , at the end of this outdated regime , we should be calling for , and I quote : ' a political solution to the crisis in Zaire ... without any external military interference ' .
Looking at this statement , one might wonder if it is meant to be a joke , especially since no mention is made of who is supposed to be financing or providing technical support for such military operations .
This is probably a historic moment for Zaire and possibly for the whole of Africa , and it is a great pity that our resolution is not pitched at the same level .
If it had been , we might have been able to map out a better future for Zaire in Africa .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how many resolutions have already been adopted , not just in this House but in other international institutions too , and how many more will be needed before we see the distant prospect of an end to the crisis in Zaire ?
Probably a great many , bearing in mind the frequently ambivalent language of some of those involved .
The Lomé Summit , held under the auspices of the OAU on 26 and 27 March , seemed to give grounds for hope , in view of the undertakings given by the official Zairean delegation and by the representative of the rebel forces , who accepted in principle the idea of a cease-fire and the opening of negotiations .
Unfortunately , as we know , the situation on the ground is very different .
The subsequent negotiations , held in South Africa and currently suspended , were unable to guarantee an ending of hostilities .
We therefore call upon the parties concerned to honour the undertakings openly entered into before the international community , and we demand that the necessary arrangements be agreed and adopted as soon as possible for free and democratic elections to be held under international supervision .
Apart from anything else , may I remind the House that elections were planned in Zaire long ago , before the conflict broke out .
The situation of the refugees in Eastern Zaire is absolutely terrible , and a solution can only be found if a genuine political will exists , especially on the part of the rebel forces .
We therefore call upon Mr Kabila to allow the refugees access to the supply depots , where they will be able to receive the necessary humanitarian aid ; and we also ask that the NGOs in the country should have the necessary power and freedom of movement to assist the refugees still scattered throughout its territory .
Regarding the report by the United Nations Human Rights Envoy , Robert Garreton , on the massacres committed by the rebel forces against the refugees , we demand that this matter be clarified , that the extent of the slaughter be determined and that appropriate measures be taken to ensure that justice is done .
Mr President , fellow Members , we have not associated ourselves with the signing of the motion for a resolution , but we will vote for it , since I am at least as despairing as the fellow Members that I have just heard .
It is once again a very important text , but which will mean nothing , because we have been overtaken by events and were not able , while there was still time , to be firm enough for the International Community to act .
Indeed , the rapidity of events has overtaken us , the resolutions on which we are voting today are no longer valid because Mr Tshisekedi 's government has fallen and been replaced by that of a new general .
Is this new government legal or not ?
We know nothing about it .
In brief , we are terribly behind .
What negotiations can be entered into since Mr Kabila has just stated that there will be no negotiations before Mr Mobutu 's departure ?
All this is becoming grotesque !
I would remind you , Mr President , that what matters to us here - and I approve of what Mr Tindemans has said - is that the protection of refugees should be assured .
It is not .
We know that they are dying in the forests , and now we see it .
We will then act again once it is too late !
What is this about ?
We have voted on myriad resolutions for access to the refugees .
There is no access !
We have Mr Ajello , the representative of the European Union , and he has no real say on the subject for the time being , in the negotiations .
Meanwhile there is in this resolution , even a Section No. 5 which condemns outside intervention !
But what does ' outside intervention ' mean ?
I had understood it to refer to Uganda , Rwanda , Burundi , but we ourselves asked for ' interference ' and I use the word in its positive sense .
In other words , before people died , we wanted a humanitarian intervention , not to hinder the political process , not to protect Mr Mobutu .
Nothing could be further from my mind than the idea of protecting Mr Mobutu .
You must admit that it is little ridiculous to ask that nobody should intervene , while those who are intervening prevent our access to the refugees .
All this seems desperately late to me !
Evidently , because it would ease our consciences , we shall vote on this resolution once again , then we will go home and watch the pictures on television , where we will see people die whom it was our responsibility to save .
Mr President , the news reaching us from Zaire is becoming more and more tragic , and really compels us to step up the humanitarian operation and , above all , to embark upon a strong political initiative directed towards Zaire and the entire Great Lakes region .
In fact it seems that we have reached a major turning point , in that after more than thirty years of savage dictatorship and plundering of his own country , the rule of Mobutu Sese Seko at least seems to be coming to an end - a rule that has been the primary cause of the denial of the most fundamental principles of democracy , systematic violations of human rights and the tragic impoverishment of what is potentially one of the richest countries in the world .
And yet , just yesterday , Mobutu committed a new act of autocracy , replacing the civilian Prime Minister with an army officer and demonstrating once again , if any demonstration were needed , that the existence of democratic institutions is nothing but a farcical sham .
Even so , the political and military structures of the regime are rapidly crumbling under the pressure exerted by the rebel armed forces under the leadership of Laurent-Desiré Kabila , which now control more than one-third of the territory of Zaire .
At present , fighting is continuing at Lubumbashi and in other areas of the country ; all the information reaching us suggests that there are thousands of casualties and hundreds of thousands of people driven from their homes , and that living conditions for millions of refugees , especially in the eastern regions of the country , are becoming more appalling day by day .
Faced with this situation , I believe the time has come to make a few unambiguous statements .
One thing that is certainly clear in this situation is that the problems of Zaire cannot possibly be solved by military action .
What is needed , then , for what it may be worth and for what the negotiators may be worth , is that the process of negotiation between the Zairean government and the rebels , initiated by the agreements signed at Lomé , should proceed rapidly and effectively to the point of an immediate ceasefire .
To achieve this , it is necessary that the mediation of the United Nations , outlined by Ahmed Shahnoun , should really be able to count on the co-operation not only of South Africa but of the entire international community , and especially the European Union ; when I speak of co-operation , I mean both political and material .
It has rightly been said that the future of Zaire must be based on a democratic government which will allow the material and moral reconstruction of the country ; anyone who believes it is enough to replace one dictator with another is making a grave error .
I would add that the humanitarian organizations must be able to obtain direct and immediate access to every region of the country and to assist the refugees , who , if they so wish , must be able to return safely to their countries of origin or , if they prefer , remain where they are now .
The overriding need is to ensure , in every country in that region , a framework of internal and international safeguards enabling the entire population to feel a sense of safety ; it is a task , then , for the United Nations , and for the countries represented there , starting with the Member States of the European Union , to prepare the ground for a peace conference and , especially , to resolve to send an international peace-keeping force .
I should like to conclude , Mr President , with a hope , or rather a request : that the European Union and all its Member States , starting with those who have had and still have direct political and economic interests in the region , finally to take on a positive and active role in resolving the existing conflicts and to refrain from supporting old or new ' friends ' who are neither respectable nor trustworthy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as regards the terrible plight of the refugees which various speakers have already mentioned , we have been saying for months now that we need to be able to get to them in order to help them .
But this has not happened , and had it not been for the blockade of Rwanda which was supported by the United States , we all know that the situation might have been much worse .
The fact that there was genocide in Rwanda , which I have always bitterly condemned , does not give anyone the right to do things subsequently which provoke further massacres .
I call them massacres rather than genocide , but they are just as serious .
It is a very serious issue .
Secondly , we are dealing with a very strange kind of war here .
Mobutu 's army is pillaging its own people and refusing to fight , while Kabila 's army is advancing without resistance and should certainly reach the capital .
We have seen examples such as the town of Buta , which was taken by one jeep and three soldiers .
It really is a most unlikely situation .
However , the main problem we are facing today is whether the international community is going to continue to recognize only those who resort to arms as having power .
This is the situation that has developed , with the result that once again the population in Zaire has been totally left out of the equation ; yet there are well-organized groups in various areas which have no connection with political parties but which do have their own ideas on what should happen to their country , and which want democracy .
I think it is our responsibility to ensure that the people are heard , and that those who resort to arms should not have all the power .
Mr President , the Mobutu dictatorship finally seems to be on the wane , partly because of the severe blows dealt to it by the military victories of the rebels in the east and partly because of an obvious political instability , as witness the events of yesterday , which delivered control of Kinshasha into the hands of the military .
My group would take a very favourable view of the fall of Mobutu , because we have always regarded the Zairean Government as the real source of instability throughout a vast area of the Great Lakes region .
Of course , the end of Mobutu is not in itself a solution to the Zairean crisis .
I think , rather , that precisely because there are so many problems we should pay careful attention to the efforts being made by the United Nations Human Rights Envoy in Zaire , Mr Garreton from Chile , who on returning from the east of the country claimed he had evidence of savage brutality and slaughter perpetrated by the rebels , and that he actually knew of numerous mass graves .
It will be necessary to take a very close look at these matters .
For this reason , I believe it would be right to call for the setting-up of an international commission of inquiry to shed light on the responsibility for the massacres , and their scale , and above all I think we need to make an appeal in the name of this Parliament , supported by resolutions , to the government in Kinshasa and to the rebels to respect the human rights of the civilian population .
Above all , we must call upon their leader , Kabila , to allow the humanitarian organizations to supervise the refugees , because this massacre of the innocents cannot continue and the international community must be allowed to intervene .
Finally , on the political aspect , I believe that the only solution to the crisis in Zaire lies through dialogue and direct negotiation between the government in Kinshasa and the democratic alliance for the liberation of Congo-Zaire .
All of this may help bring about that process of democratization in Zaire which I consider to be of the utmost urgency and necessity .
Mr President , I believe that no text , however excellent , has the right , at the end of the day , to ease our consciences - I agree with fellow Members who have stated this - but , as far as the substance is concerned , this text is directed to the Council , to governments and to the Commission together .
We have seen that the Mobutu régime is collapsing of its own accord .
It was not us nor was it western democracies that contributed to this .
But we have also seen the arrival of someone about whom I ask myself many questions - I want to talk about Kabila - and I think it is to him we must now address ourselves , telling him : ' Do not become the dictator that follows the dictator ! .... ' He must show total good will to try and save the refugees , to try and find a solution for the refugees .
He must give us evidence of what sort of régime he wants to institute in Zaire .
Will he at least observe human rights , will he at last inaugurate a democratic régime ?
We must , moreover , do everything , if he shows this good will , in order that a future be given to the Zairean people , because this is about these people , who have suffered much from the turmoil , who have suffered violence , who have suffered authoritarianism and to whom , maybe , hope can now be given .
But it is also us who have to build this hope , with the Zairean people .
Mr President , the confusion reigning in Zaire , the instability of the political situation and , of course , the dilution of principles revealed by certain behaviour , leads to a consensual analysis to stigmatise unjust economic and social policies , to deplore disorder and to condemn a régime which does not manage to convert itself into a democracy .
If there is friction , it is in fact on the following point : How to react ?
What to do , how to help end the obscene contrast between the riches of Zaire and the depredation of the Zairean people , whose collective inheritance nevertheless represents 10 % of world copper reserves - of 3 to 7 % purity against a world average of 1 % , 80 % of workable reserves of cobalt - the price of which has doubled since 1991 , and deposits of diamonds , gold and uranium . How to react ?
Two responses are on offer , each one defended with convincing arguments : the military response and the political response .
Apart from needing to get used to considering them as not always incompatible if force is required to serve clear political objectives - and it is our responsibility to compel our respective governments to assume theirs , - I will state quite clearly that my preference is for a political response , because , firstly , it is our responsibility as parliamentarians ; because , next , I believe it to be better to appeal to people 's intelligence rather than confining them in their fear and their rancour ; because , finally , I believe in those words of Martin Luther King , assassinated in April 1968 , which said that injustice anywhere threatens justice everywhere .
It is our responsibility to conduct a war of ideals , that is to say , a political war .
Mr President , we have to confess that despite the tragedy afflicting the mass of Hutu refugees we cannot find a shred of sympathy for those among them who were responsible for the massacres perpetrated against the Tutsi minority .
We do however believe that this chaotic situation must be blamed on the diplomacy of certain European powers which have acted more in the interests of their respective geopolitical and neocolonialist strategies than to bring progress and peace to the countries concerned .
After all , let us not forget the support given to the Hutu assassination squads , who owed their weaponry to the logistical support of a European state , and the recent dispatch to that region of a group of bloodstained mercenaries apparently to fight against Kabila 's troops .
To continue supporting Mobutu means closing one 's eyes to his inability to provide himself with ministers and government officials worthy of the name ; let us therefore take the side of Kabila , since the news reaching us from that region confirms his ability to handle the crisis far more effectively than his adversary .
That said , we believe that humanitarian aid , organized by the European Union and the UN , cannot be delayed , and we therefore support the content of the joint motion for a resolution .
Mr President , the negotiation of the agreements aimed at establishing global peace in the Zaire region must be conducted in the context of an international conference .
This has already been stated by the United Nations , the European Union and the OAU .
The declaration by the Presidency of the European Union of 17 February and resolution 1097 of the Security Council of 18 February are the most recent reference documents on this issue .
Nonetheless , bearing in mind that at the moment the focus of the crisis is the political future of Zaire , it is obvious that the internal stability of the country is a precondition for the success of any regional negotiations .
Therefore hostilities must cease as soon as possible and a dialogue must be started between all the political forces in the country .
Diplomatic pressure must be maintained to achieve a cessation of hostilities and establish a transitional government to resume and complete the process of democracy .
The European Union has always worked to achieve the success of this process and we are willing to continue backing it , if the situation permits .
In a second phase the political dialogue should be extended to the external agents who caused the military conflict in Zaire . A series of sub-regional negotiations should be launched under the aegis of the International Conference on Peace , Security and Development .
This Conference should be open to all the countries concerned and should be devised as a long-term process , not a brief , momentary event .
This is the general - and well-known - view of the European Union on the crisis in Zaire .
As for your speeches in this House , the Commission acknowledges , like you , that the military and political situation in Zaire is very volatile , very changeable and that , naturally , we will have to wait and see what happens .
But in any case we still think that , once the crisis has been quelled , the internal political dialogue within Zaire and the regional dialogue must become key elements so that a new Zaire can finally emerge in the next century , perhaps seeing its future in a different way .
At least that is what the European Commission would like to see .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner Marín .
The joint debate is closed .
The voting will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again it has proved impossible for a delegation from the European Parliament to visit the occupied part of Cyprus under acceptable conditions in order to form their own judgement of the circumstances under which the Greek Cypriots and Maronites are living in the enclaves there .
On behalf of the PSE Group , may I express our indignation as well as our condemnation of this latest affront by the illegal regime in northern Cyprus to the democratically elected representative body of the European people .
We know from numerous reports that the conditions under which the inhabitants of the enclaves live are tantamount to daily violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In the Vienna III agreement of 1975 , certain stipulations were made in respect of the enclaves .
In the 1996 reports by the UN Secretary-General and in his most recent report of 7 February of this year , it was again established that the Turkish Cypriot administration was grossly violating that Convention .
It was also established that these populations do not have access to adequate medical care , which is also a violation of the Vienna agreement .
The right to education accorded them in Vienna is also made largely impossible for them to exercise ; in Karpasia at the present time , one teacher is teaching all the children of every age group , there are no secondary schools , and boys and girls who attend school in the free part of Cyprus are not allowed to return home once they reach the ages of 16 and 18 respectively .
That is truly a flagrant breach of the provision in Vienna III on freedom of movement and the reuniting of families .
We emphatically demand that a delegation from the European Parliament , particularly under the aegis of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , be given the opportunity to form its own judgement on the spot and to produce a report .
We call on all bodies of the European Union and of the United Nations to play their part in ensuring that conditions for people in the enclaves are improved , but our overriding concern is that every possible step be taken to ensure that human rights are guaranteed throughout Cyprus , in other words that the occupation is ended and the island reunited .
Mr President , following the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 a specific agreement was concluded , the so-called Vienna III agreement , under which the rights of Greek Cypriots and Maronites lining in the enclave in the occupied territory were to be protected .
Twenty years have gone by since then , and in an official report the Secretary-General of the United Nations notes that the living conditions of persons living in the enclave are grossly unacceptable .
Three women teachers who have stayed to give lessons to children are encountering terrible difficulties , and out of the 20 , 000 people who were living in the enclave in 1974 , only about 450 remain , precisely because of the constant persecution that has gone on .
In addition to all of that , the Denktash regime has on two occasions effectively refused - once last year and once this year when the Joint Committee visited Cyprus - to allow Members of the European Parliament to take stock of the situation at first hand , because it was impossible for the Joint Committee to accept the conditions that Denktash sought to impose on it .
Mr President , I think that the time has come for us to take action - all of us , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission and , also , the United Nations - to see what can be done with a view to resolving this issue .
To see what can be done in real terms and not via declarations , because there have already been plenty of those and , as is all to obvious , they have achieved nothing .
For 23 years there has been no progress on the issue and we have actually moved backwards . Surely it is now time to reverse that course .
Mr President , as has been said , the drama being experienced by the Greek Cypriots in their enclaves in the occupied part of the island has lasted for more than twenty years .
No accord or resolution has been observed and , as Mrs Roth and Mr Hatzidakis said again three weeks ago , the Turkish Cypriot leader Mr Denktash , has placed unacceptable conditions on the simple visit to those in the enclaves proposed by the Joint Parliamentary Committee of which I have the honour of being president .
The situation is scandalous .
The European Union has set itself up as a champion of human rights all over the world , from India to the Argentine , from Brazil to Burma , but it is not capable of preventing serious and repeated violations of those rights perpetrated by a country which is a candidate for joining the European Union , three and a half hours away from Brussels by aeroplane .
Mr President , I wish that this resolution , on which all groups will certainly vote favourably , should not be a simple scrap of paper , but that it should become the prelude to concrete and decisive action on the part of the European authorities .
It would be a stain on our white shield of defender of human rights if this problem were only to end up being resolved by the death of the last of those in the enclaves .
We add our voices to those of the previous speakers and , of course , we support everything that is in the resolution .
Please allow me just to say two things that I think should be made very clear .
In Cyprus there has been ethnic cleansing , and it has been going on continuously : it was carried out by force of arms in 1974 and has been continued in a less violent manner ever since .
Out a total of 20 , 000 people who used to live in the enclave , there are now 500 , and this ethnic cleansing has been carried out so bravely by the army of occupation against children and old people .
That is one thing that we should not forget .
In connection with that situation there is another point that requires mention : the question of credibility or , rather , of the lack of it .
Agreements are signed and not adhered to , both by the government which supposedly administers the occupation forces in Cyprus and by the supposed local authorities .
Mr President , this lack of credibility , which is also evident in other respects , makes the approach of the European Union to Turkey itself and the involvement of Turkish Cypriots in the negotiations on Cyprus 's accession , which we support , extremely problematical .
Unfortunately , we can see that it is impossible for those negotiations to be got under way for the time being , and that is very disheartening .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the problem , of course , is familiar to everyone .
For that reason I do not wish to repeat what other Members have said .
Besides expressing our sorrow and anger at having to discuss this sort of thing yet again , we should also think about what we can learn from it .
I believe we can learn that the idea of borders as limes and fronts , which we in Europe have been exporting to the rest of the world since the imperialism of the Augustan Age and which is still coming back to haunt us , in the form of ethnic cleansing for example , is not a tenable concept .
Instead , we must argue within the UN for forms of strictly regulated confinement , for borders to be regarded as markings which can also contain transitional and overlapping areas , and for mutually binding human rights , which would rule out the type of thing that is now happening to the people of the enclaves .
If we succeed in that , we shall also have moved much further forward in our policy towards Turkey .
I can only comment once again that it is a great pity from this point of view that the Christian Democratic party leaders recently saw fit to try and add a Christian dimension to this notion of borders as fronts , as the limes of Fortress Europe .
That leaves me utterly dismayed .
Madam President , I am not going to start speaking until Mr Marin stops talking with Mrs Theato and decides to listen to the speakers .
Mr Marin is here to listen to the Members and to their questions and observations and to give replies and not to talk with Mrs Theato - probably about the budget and ECUs .
It is precisely because the Commission and the Council are only interested in ECUs and could not give a fig about human rights and human dignity that we are now left with only 500 Greek Cypriots and Maronites in the enclave out of the 20 , 000 who lived there in 1974 !
We pass resolutions here and you take not a blind bit of notice !
We speak and put questions and you treat us as if we did not exist !
What has been going on today is a disgrace !
I watched from the beginning .
You have not listened to a single speaker : Mr Monfils , Mr Papayannakis , Mrs Rothe , Mr Hatzidakis - you listened to none of them .
It is not worth my while to speak about anything because when you disregard human dignity and the rights of Members and the dignity of this Parliament what on earth can I expect from Mr Denktash ?
I have nothing to ask of Mr Denktash .
You have prepared a written reply for us .
You will get up and read it to us like a teacher speaking to pupils . You have lost all credibility .
I am ashamed for the Commission , ashamed !
Well , Mr Kaklamanis , you have said a thing or two against the Commissioner .
I shall now give Commissioner Marín the opportunity to reply .
I think the matter has now been settled .
The only thing we have not settled is the issue of the people in the enclave , and that is what we are talking about this afternoon .
The report by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the Commission on Human Rights confirms that the situation of these people is in stalemate .
For the last 22 years , the authorities in Northern Cyprus have been denying even the most basic human rights to Greek Cypriots there .
For the last 22 years , the Vienna III agreement which President Denktash of Northern Cyprus also signed has been violated .
Mr Monfils and his delegation from this House have already tried twice to visit the people in the enclave , and on both occasions the Turkish Cypriot authorities have either refused permission or have imposed unacceptable conditions at the last minute .
This resolution must make it clear to Mr Denktash once again that it is extremely important for us to visit these people .
As long as he continues to violate the human rights of the minorities in the north , he will continue to sour relations with the other community .
It is in the interests of both communities that a lasting solution should be found to the Cyprus conflict , that much is quite clear .
Respect for the Vienna III agreement is the least that the Greek Cypriots can expect of their neighbours , fellow islanders and fellow nationals .
Turkestan / China :
Madam President , the human rights situation in China is clearly poor and deteriorating further , as we can see from the developments in Eastern Turkestan .
But let me first make this point : this is the first time since Tiananmen Square that the Member States of the European Union have allowed themselves to be outwitted by China in the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
It is disgraceful that the Dutch presidency should have been shown up in this way after making a joint statement on behalf of the Fifteen .
The lack of any subsequent joint action , despite everything that was said , and the absence of any European resolution on the matter were a slap in the face for European unity , for the credibility of Europe 's foreign policy and its policy on human rights , and for anyone who thinks he is entitled to have his human rights respected .
The Union must now try to salvage what it can .
The Member States need to present a united front in opposing China 's attempts to have this issue taken off the agenda .
Next , and I shall be quite honest here , the Member States must support the Danish resolution .
Denmark is to be congratulated on taking this initiative , and China 's threats of reprisals are typical of its arrogant foreign policy and are a further reason for Europe to take a much harder line towards it .
The same hard line must also be maintained as regards the arms embargo against China .
It is trying to get the embargo lifted by offering major orders to France and other countries , but the Union must oppose this as vehemently as it can .
The imminent handover of Hong Kong and the situation in Tibet and Turkestan are just two of the many reasons why we must oppose any lifting of the embargo .
Madam President , I should like to begin by saying how delighted I am that the European Parliament is dealing with human rights in eastern Turkestan and hence also with human rights in China .
As an international body , we have a unique opportunity and an obligation , as Mr Bertens has already said , to be the first to adopt a clear position towards China , to tell the Chinese Government that we regard human rights and basic political rights as indivisible and that we therefore apply them as a criterion in our political action with regard to every country in the world with which we have dealings .
In this context I should also like to speak out quite clearly against the representatives of those countries which made it impossible to adopt this sort of position at the UN Human Rights Conference .
They speak constantly of a critical dialogue , but everyday reality shows that this is usually no more than a cover for economic interests and does not wrest a single concession from totalitarian States .
We only need to see how the butchers of Tiananmen Square are courted by the supreme representatives of the Western world .
But to move on to Turkestan , it must be said that the situation there is a veritable powder keg .
Anyone who , like some of my colleagues here , was able to listen yesterday to the words of Erkin Albdekin , the representative of the Uighurs in exile , must have begun to realize that there is a real need for us to take action here .
It is a time-honoured Chinese practice to use birth control and population transfers to create such a marked demographic imbalance that the homogeneity of an occupied country can no longer be maintained .
Hand in hand with that , of course , goes the destruction of culture and religion in the territory in question .
The politically motivated closure of the Koranic schools and the arrests of teachers of religion speak volumes .
Parliament clearly needs to act here , and I hope that many Members will be aware of this obligation .
Madam President , I think it concerns an important resolution and our friends in the Communist Group will not be able to say that we have been influenced by the American Congress , in so far as this is the first time that a parliament has taken a stand on the Eastern Turkestan Question , that is to say , the Chinese region of Xinjiang .
The situation there is dramatic : as Mr Habsburg has just stated , it is comparable to the situation in Tibet .
What is happening today in Eastern Turkestan is a veritable policy of genocide by ethnic dilution .
It matters that the European Union should take a stand on this subject .
It matters also that we should give another signal to the council , which unfortunately has done the exact opposite to what our Parliament asked and which has had an extremely divided attitude to the Committee on Human Rights in Geneva , as Mr Bertens has reminded us .
I think that it is particularly serious and that it underlines the absolute urgency of reforming our foreign and common security policy .
I think that one cannot continue like this .
New factors are added every day .
The French temptations to export arms have been mentioned .
One can imagine the temptations which this new French offensive in China will give rise to in other member states .
I think that the European Union must , as a matter of urgency , give itself a veritable European policy in field of foreign policy .
I believe it would be particularly important to have information from the Commission and to know what it is preparing for Amsterdam .
If not , in China , as in other parts of the world , all roads will lead to disaster and division , and therefore to the loss of what has been achieved in forty years of struggle for the building of Europe .
Madam President , Eastern Turkestan is just one of many problem areas for human rights in China .
As we now adopt , after the Hong Kong resolution yesterday , another resolution which concerns China we know that the Chinese are listening .
We have already received a written complaint from the People 's Republic of China 's representative to the European Union .
One of the things which it says is that they cannot accept our interference in China 's internal affairs .
I hope that the worthy representatives for China have read today 's agenda and realises that we interfere in internal affairs all over the world where human rights are concerned , we are not conducting a campaign against China , we are fighting a campaign for human rights .
Human rights cannot be swept under the carpet because of economic interests .
This is why it is so deplorable that France , Germany , Spain and Italy have allowed economic interests to take precedence over the interests of human rights .
I must add that it is lucky that the smaller states in the European Union are not forced by a qualified majority to keep quiet but we still maintain the right for smaller states to speak out .
This is why Denmark with the support of Sweden and hopefully other smaller states in the EU can carry on this justified criticism against the deficiencies in human rights in China .
Madam President , Commissioner , I really would like to say that Commissioners in general , and Mr Marín in particular , deserve a certain fundamental respect from this House , and when one of them is no longer here we should show greater restraint .
I should like to make some comments on the resolution .
Let me say first of all that the Group of the Party of European Socialists in this House naturally condemns every violation of human rights unequivocally , including those in China , of which there is no shortage .
Secondly , I very much regret that the European Union was unable to adopt a common position on China .
To the previous speaker I should like to say that we also refuse to accept the argument that human rights are an internal matter .
We have the right , and indeed the duty , to concern ourselves with them throughout the world .
Nevertheless , we shall not be supporting this resolution , because its authors have unfortunately adopted a language and tone , especially in relation to the geographical , territorial and political situation , which are not acceptable to us and take no account of the fact that a genuine critical dialogue can be initiated with China .
The point is that if we speak here of Chinese territory and the annexed areas , if a distinction is made between China , Tibet , Inner Mongolia and eastern Turkestan , that sort of language , that sort of tone is no basis on which to seek the necessary dialogue with China , even though we must naturally criticize the infringement of human rights there and campaign wholeheartedly for their observance .
Every resolution should be taken seriously - we should not say , ' It 's just a resolution ' - so let us consider that , sooner or later , and not as a result of negotiations but by some less peaceful means , China might be dissolved into territories such as those mentioned here .
That is something I would not wish upon the world or upon Europe .
Had you really sought a common approach , another type of language would have been found , and we should have been able to support the resolution , but that , unfortunately , is not possible .
We shall therefore abstain from voting .
Madam President , this is a sad day for Parliament , and responsibility rests primarily with the two major groups .
Because they have decided that we should not have an independent , rigorous and concrete EU resolution against China .
At a point when governments in the EU disagree in the area of human rights versus commercial interests , Parliament has chosen to disassociate itself .
One might ask whether this debate on current , urgent issues is actually worth anything .
Are we only to express an opinion when it is not harmful to us , in other words when it will not cost us anything .
Parliament had an opportunity today to support justice , in a conflict between national governments , by sending a clear message on the absolute priority of human rights .
But instead it chose to count pennies and allow commercial interests to prevail .
If this is to be the way ahead , we do not need Parliament .
It indicates that we are only prepared to rearrange commas in the proposed directive , instead of shaping the real political agenda .
At the conference of governments , in which Parliament would like to have more power , we have decided not to use the powers we do have .
This might be to the liking of the governments , but we are letting down our citizens , and it is they that we represent .
People have no use for a parliament which thinks only of money ; they want a political parliament .
Madam President , now it is the turn of Turkmenistan .
Another corner of gigantic China has been discovered and joined to the Taiwan-Hong Kong-Tibet-Macao chain of denunciation against the Chinese Government .
It is a tactic that has its roots in the cold war , which certain groups are still keeping alive .
On the other , we , too , agree that intervention is essential when human rights are being violated .
But that presupposes cedibility on the part of the intervening party , which must itself be respecting human rights in its own arena , in its own part of the world .
Madam President , this resolution lacks credibility and supporting evidence .
When this Parliament debates such a matter in such an unsupported manner it undermines its own credibility .
Ladies and gentlemen , you have taken information from certain parties who have an interest in stirring up trouble of this sort for China and you have put your seal on it , drawn up a resolution and brought it here for debate .
What is the proof ?
Where is your evidence ?
Essentially you are undermining this Parliament 's credibility , and that is one of the reasons - I am thinking of the previous resolution - why even when it has credibility and a well-documented case it is not taken seriously .
Parliament 's resolutions are not taken seriously precisely because its standing is undermined .
That has been so in the case of the missing persons in Cyprus .
So many times we raised the issue , and adduced so many facts proving the case ! No one attaches importance to this Parliament , because with manoeuvres of the sort that brought this resolution on Turkmenistan into being it surrenders all credibility and its opinion ceases to carry weight .
Madam President , the recent riots in the Chinese province of Eastern Turkestan when the Chinese authorities executed a large number of Uighurs confirm once again what a terrible reputation China has when it comes to respecting human rights .
The recent history of Eastern Turkestan is sadly a very typical example of this .
The Uighurs have suffered badly under the Communist regime : many were transported during the 1960s , and tens of thousands were executed during the 1950s , 1960s and early 1970s .
Recent events in Turkestan are also further proof of the Chinese authorities ' contempt for freedom of religion .
More than 100 Koran schools have been shut down , and many Islamic priests have been arrested .
According to a report by the American human rights organization Human Rights Watch / Asia , the Chinese Government regards anyone with religious beliefs as a potential security risk .
It is convinced that what it calls ' hostile foreign elements ' are using religion to destabilize China and overthrow the government .
The Muslims in Eastern Turkestan are not the only victims of this religious policy : Christians attached to churches which are not officially registered are persecuted throughout China .
In view of these serious human rights violations , it is absolutely deplorable that the countries of the European Union cannot manage to table a joint resolution at the United Nations condemning China .
I therefore support the courageous step taken by the Danish Government , and I would point out that the fact that the Chinese Government actually thanked France for its positive attitude should give the French Government some food for thought .
Madam President , clearly the Leninist view of politics has not completely vanished from among the Chinese leadership if they persist in refusing to recognize , within their State , the right to ethnic , religious , cultural and even political differentiation among the various peoples that make it up .
On this occasion we are concerned with the serious abuses of freedom of religion that have taken place in eastern Turkestan during the last year , which have resulted in the closure of more than 100 Koranic schools and the arrest of more than 180 Muslim clerics , teachers and students .
So Leninism and Stalinism have not disappeared from China when such indiscriminate use is still being made of the death penalty , forced resettlement and compulsory birth control .
All these things can distort the ethnic composition of that region , degrade the culture of the Uigur people and suppress the practice of the Islamic religion .
Equally severe treatment , let us remember , is meted out to the Catholic minorities who even today endure intolerable abuses and restrictions on their freedom of worship .
Alleanza Nazionale will therefore give its support to the motion for a resolution .
Situation in Russian prisons :
Madam President , we probably cannot repeat enough now that human rights are no internal affair but an international issue .
The Russian Federation is one of the signatories of the UN Convention against Torture and of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
The Russian Federation became a member of the Council of Europe in 1996 .
And yet in Russian police stations and prisons , people are still being tortured with blows and oxygen deprivation almost to the point of suffocation and are forced to remain for long periods in inhuman and painful positions .
Detainees sleep in shifts , because there are no beds for them .
Forced confessions are used as evidence in trials .
In the negotiations on economic aid , the Commission must address these specific grievances and demand that they be remedied .
It must call for the revocation of the decree whereby people can be imprisoned for 30 days without preferment of charges .
It must also insist that the cases of torture be investigated .
Within the action programme and the TACIS democracy programme developed in conjunction with the Council of Europe , it must devote a considerable share of resources to improving prison conditions and to ensuring that prison wardens are trained in the humane treatment of prisoners .
Madam President , here in this House yesterday , we heard a number of complaints about European prisons too .
That is one point .
The second point , however , is that Russia has acceded to the Council of Europe and has thereby accepted a number of conditions which apply to the domain of criminal justice .
The rules governing the manner in which we compel our offenders to mend their ways ought to be observed there too .
This concentration on the rights of offenders , of course , must not make us forget the victims .
But humane treatment is part of a democratically organized social system , and when we complain about conditions in our own prisons , we naturally cannot turn a blind eye to far worse conditions that prevail in other countries .
Even now , we in the European Union are helping with programmes in other countries .
In Venezuela , I recently saw a prison where we are cosponsoring training programmes .
So in Russia too we could help to initiate aid programmes , but these programmes will have to work .
That is the requirement we must spell out very clearly .
Reintegration into society , of course , is another aspect of the criminal justice system as we see it .
Now we certainly cannot expect the Russians to have all of this in place by tomorrow morning .
Nevertheless , we must tell them most emphatically that the conditions in their prisons , especially for young offenders , will do nothing to improve the situation but can only breed more crime , drug abuse and corruption .
That is what we should tell them , even as they take their place in democratic European society by virtue of their accession to the Council of Europe .
Laos :
Madam President , I am grateful to the colleagues who have found time this afternoon to debate the plight of these three men , Thongsouk Saysangkhi , Latsami Khamphoui and Feng Sakchittaphong .
They have been in jail in a remote region of Laos since 1990 and were sentenced at their trial in 1992 to 14 years further imprisonment .
Their crime was to express opposition to the present repressive government of Laos and call for peaceful change towards a pluralistic system of government .
Their inspiration for acting was the events in the autumn of 1989 in Central and Eastern Europe and perhaps that gives us a particular responsibility for not forgetting them .
They were inspired by those events to call for similar peaceful change to democratic plural democracy away from autocratic one-party rule .
Amnesty International recently obtained a transcript of the 1992 trial which demonstrates very clearly that no sabotage or acts of violence were involved .
Feng Sakchittaphong actually said in court : ' I want the democratic change to occur in a peaceful way without street demonstrations , without confrontation and without overthrow ' .
This statement was sufficiently subversive in Laos to incur a draconian sentence .
Amnesty International has also obtained evidence about the conditions under which these three men are being held , and I quote : ' They are imprisoned in isolation in a prison camp in a remote northern area of the country in conditions which violate international standards .
They are not allowed to talk to each other , although they are held in the same room and all three are reportedly suffering from health problems requiring medical treatment which they have not received .
Their families are rarely given permission to visit them and they are not permitted regular correspondence . '
Amnesty International believes these conditions of detention constitute cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment .
I call upon the European Parliament this afternoon to join with Amnesty International in recognizing these men as prisoners of conscience and agitating for their immediate release .
Madam President , fellow Members , my address will be naturally short .
I have spent the best part of my existence on the side of the defence and I know there are no empty words , wherever they are spoken .
From the depths of their prisons , these men wait for someone to speak in their favour and it is known that if Europe is not always aware of its strength and its influence , the further one goes from its centre , the louder the echo of statements made here .
It is therefore important that the government of Laos should understand that there cannot be negotiations or agreements with the European Union if it treats unjustly and in - it must be said - as miserable a manner in this case , people who only ask for justice .
It is therefore my desire that what is said here is heard in that prison .
Bosnia-Herzegovina :
Madam President , I have just been to Bosnia once again and have noticed a pronounced change there , a change which is certainly encouraging in several respects .
There are signs of hope , and one of these hopeful signs is that Pope John Paul II is expected in Sarajevo next weekend - not for a Catholic ceremony , but as a sign of dialogue between cultures and religions .
I was gratified to note that Professor Topic in Sarajevo , whose task is to prepare the visit , is doing so with his organization Napredak , which means that Croats , Serbs and Muslims are all preparing this occasion together .
At the same time , some quite encouraging new developments are also observable in the Serb-held areas of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
For example , in the Serb-occupied town of Banja Luka Bishop Komarica , who has been here in Parliament , and the Mufti of Banja Luka have begun to cooperate very effectively in petitioning the international community to enforce the rights of their Serbian compatriots .
These are undoubtedly hopeful signs , signs that this community of Bosnia-Herzegovina , united by a common destiny , can survive in spite of the dreadful problems confronting it .
On the other hand there are enormous strains on the unity of the country .
One such strain is the threat by the administration of the so-called Republika Srpska to hinder or prevent its residents who are citizens of BosniaHerzegovina - which we continue to recognize as a State - from undertaking the journey to Sarajevo by levying an exit tax of 70 German marks - payable in marks , which , of course , nobody possesses .
Added to that , naturally enough , is the fear of being registered .
Although that is a permanent state of affairs , it threatens to escalate next weekend , even for those people who are entitled to enter Bosnia-Herzegovina under the laws of that country , because transit rights will be denied them too .
And we want to protest vehemently against that , to prevent this sign of hope from turning into a relapse .
Situation in Cambodia :
Madam President , the insecurity and lack of a serious political framework remain the principal obstacles to the reconstruction of Cambodia , which is having great difficulty in coming out of the ruins of a quarter of a century of war .
Nevertheless we do support the mine clearance operations in Cambodia , the only option likely to release the land and allow farmers to cultivate the paddy fields again .
The grenade attempt in Phnom Pen , against a peaceful demonstration by activists of the Khmer Nation party , which left 19 dead and more than 100 wounded , is part of this new build up of tension and violence before which the security forces show a provocative and reprehensible passivity .
The international community must not tolerate violations of human rights any more in Cambodia , particularly as it is contributing financially to the emergence of an economy which favours a political stability which requires the reinforcement of a still excessively faltering democracy .
Free and equitable elections , involving all political groups able to take a stand against terrorism are the only way to guarantee lasting internal peace .
I therefore wish the European Union to support the holding of these elections .
Madam President , I should like to say very briefly on behalf of my group that we support the joint motion for a resolution stressing the condemnation of the attack on 30 March and noting appropriately the public condemnation of the attack by those responsible for the government plot .
We think that the electoral process must be improved and monitored by the European institutions and we hope that this most serious incident will not be repeated and will not cast a shadow over the scrutiny envisaged for 1998 , so that the people of Cambodia finally have a chance to cast their vote freely without constraint and with respect for human rights .
Madam President , the opposition leader Sam Rainsy has long been trying to promote democracy and fight corruption in Cambodia .
His attempts have been frustrated .
Democracy and the constitutional state are not yet very strong there , and behind the scenes the Prime Minister , Hun Sen , is doing his best to suppress the forces of democracy .
The attack on 30 March was not the first time that opposition party meetings have been brutally broken up .
No serious investigation was carried out into other government activities against the opposition 18 months ago , and many people doubt whether adequate action will be taken this time , even with 16 deaths and 100 people injured .
The steady deterioration in the political situation in Cambodia makes me and my group extremely concerned about the 1998 elections .
The Union needs to act now and make clear representations to the Cambodian Government .
If we could issue a warning so that preventive diplomacy is given a chance to work , then we should do so now - though not in this resolution , of course - with a view to trying to use the medium of the United Nations and the Union to help Cambodia 's fragile democracy .
Madam President , we are appalled by the grenade attack on a peaceful demonstration of Khmer National Party activists in Phnom Penh on 30 March 1997 .
Nineteen people were killed and hundreds injured .
The purpose of the attack was probably to kill Sam Rainsy , leader of the KNP in Cambodia , and other prominent opposition leaders .
One policeman was killed .
The dreadful thing about it all is that the police took no action , that this atrocity took place because the authorities allowed it to happen .
And that is symptomatic of the situation in Cambodia .
This situation cannot be tolerated by the European Union any longer .
We can call for a committee of inquiry here ; the international public must be informed about this .
Violating human rights with impunity , which is standard practice in Cambodia , must not be allowed to continue .
The best weapon is a free election ; free and fair elections will guarantee the democratic structures which will put an end to this state of affairs , and that is the demand we should all be making .
Madam President , fellow Members , a régime is judged by the way it treats its opposition , and it is of no use for this régime to sign a cooperation agreement with us , with the European Union , if it deals with its opposition with grenades and machine guns .
The Cambodian leaders must learn , through our proposals , that the 1998 ballot , its organisation and its conduct will constitute a test to establish whether the European Union is to keep to the agreements reached .
Madam President , welcome though the support for a democratic development in Cambodia by means of free elections may be , it will not succeed in stabilizing democracy there as long as the representatives and sympathizers of the Khmer Rouge are not entirely excluded from the process .
Unfortunately , this left-wing fascist-type movement , which was responsible for the second holocaust of this century , has been integrated into the peace process .
That was a fatal flaw in the Paris negotiations .
We therefore call on the European Parliament to include in all its future demands a stipulation that the Khmer Rouge must be prevented from either direct or indirect involvement in this political process and completely excluded from democratic developments in Cambodia .
Madam President , I will start by answering in chronological order the questions on human rights as put by the Members .
With regard to Cyprus : the Commission is naturally perfectly well aware of the situation of the Maronite enclaves in the north of Cyprus .
I would like to point out that , during the mission by the Council of Europe in February 1996 , the late Lord Finsberg had called attention to the many problems affecting the Greco-Cypriot community in the northern part of the island .
In fact , last December the Secretary General of the United Nations and the Security Council deplored this situation once again .
The Commission shares the European Parliament 's concern about these enclaves and considers that it should be possible to visit them without any prior conditions .
These problems are similar to the ones the Commission is encountering in the activities it is attempting to conduct in the north of the island , activities which are being impeded by the kind of conditions demanded by the de facto authorities in the region .
As for China and Turkestan , the Commission regrets that it was impossible to reach a consensus within the European Union concerning the resolution on China which it had intended to submit for the next session of the United Nations ' Human Rights Commission .
The Commission took advantage of all the opportunities that arose to raise the question of human rights with the Chinese authorities both in the context of the specific dialogue on human rights and of the more general political dialogue .
The European Union believes in a positive approach which would lay the foundations for a constructive relationship .
This was the tenet of its statement in favour of cooperation activities to promote the human dimension in China which could be used as a principle for effective dialogue with this country .
With regard to the events in Turkestan , the Commission thinks that direct talks between the Chinese authorities and the representatives of the Uigur community could undoubtedly contribute to finding a solution to the problems currently facing that region .
As for the situation in Russian prisons , the Commission is aware of the worrying situation in Russian prisons and shares the European Parliament 's concern .
We are receiving and monitoring reports on the sanitary conditions in these , the lack of food and the mental and physical ill-treatment .
Through its aid programmes and the TACIS Democracy programme , and in particular the LIEN programme , the Commission is financing various projects to improve the humanitarian situation in Russia .
Jointly with the Council of Europe the Commission is funding a series of projects destined to provide assistance to Russia so that it can fulfil the undertakings it made when it became a member of the Council of Europe .
In relation to Laos , it is clear that the Commission is informed of the Amnesty International report on the three prisoners of conscience and that it has carefully noted its contents .
The Commission is currently trying to collate further details on the background to these cases .
To this end it has asked the EEC Delegation accredited to the Laos People 's Democratic Republic to investigate the situation , in consultation with the ambassadors of the Member States represented in Vientiane .
As soon as any new information is available the Commission will contact you in order to pass on the relative details of this initiative .
Bosnia-Herzegovina : the Commission agrees that the Pope 's visit to Sarajevo is an important opportunity to unite all the inhabitants of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
It consequently deplores the fact that the authorities of the Republic of Sprska have suggested introducing a charge for crossing the border between this Republic and the rest of Bosnia in order to get to Sarajevo , precisely to see the Pope .
This charge would in addition clearly infringe the freedom of movement of persons covered by the Dayton agreements .
Therefore the Commission firmly supports the efforts under way to persuade the Sprska authorities to reconsider this matter urgently .
As for Cambodia , on behalf of the European Commission I want to reiterate firmly the same feelings you yourselves expressed - and which were also expressed by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers - for the criminal attack on 30 March which killed and injured several members of the opposition who were taking part in an authorized , peaceful demonstration .
Following the signing of the peace agreements in Paris in October 1991 , the Commission committed itself , to a significant extent , to the plans to redevelop and reconstruct the country , involving numerous initiatives to consolidate the process of democracy and improve the living conditions of the population .
However , bearing in mind the imminent signing of this cooperation agreement , the European Commission considers that the Cambodian authorities should take the necessary steps to preserve the prospects of peace and the rule of law .
In this context the Commission is contributing to underpinning the democratic process with a specific programme to establish a transparent electoral register for the 1998 elections .
We are interested in signing the agreement in April because - as you know - there is a set of clauses in the agreement concerning the respect of human rights , freedom and democracy and the development of civil society .
Although it may be difficult to understand that , after all that has happened , the agreement is going to be signed at the end of April , we think that this is a good move for both sides since , once we have signed the agreement , the European Union will have a legal basis and the legitimacy to approach the Cambodian Government .
Thank you , Mr Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the motion for a resolution ( B4-0293 / 97 ) tabled by Mr Newens , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on human rights in the Republic of Yemen .
Madam President , prior to the unification of Yemen in May 1990 , human rights and democratic freedom were accorded little respect in either North or South Yemen .
After unification , there was a considerable improvement until the vicious war of April-July 1994 , in which the former leadership of the South was ousted .
Since that date , there have been many gross violations of individual rights .
The recent report of Amnesty International of 27 March 1997 details ' disappearances ' , illegal arrests , ill-treatment , beatings and torture of those detained and death sentences imposed on the basis of evidence open to challenge .
Other organizations , like the Yemeni human rights organization , Europa , have produced further evidence , including lists of victims , which cannot be disregarded .
In addition , there is a cruel criminal code which provides for flogging , amputation and death for adultery and acts against the Republic and Islam .
An estimated 1 , 250 people who fled abroad after the civil war are afraid to return and have had their property confiscated .
Yemen , however , has agreed to many human rights treaties and has adapted many of their provisions to its own laws .
The reason why they have not been observed , is that the abuses are carried out by armed groups , especially the political security branch of the security forces , which is responsible only to the President .
These abuses must cease and immediate steps must be taken to release those still in detention , commute any outstanding sentences of flogging and amputation , suspend executions and enable refugees to return home without fear of retribution for opposing the government .
It is very important that the European Union should provide aid .
I strongly support the new cooperation agreement but this should be conditional on a substantial improvement in human rights .
All of us want to see the improvement and development of Yemen and to see great strides made in the conditions of the poor and deprived , but human rights and national reconciliation are essential prerequisites to achieving this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the country of Yemen has a very , very difficult history behind it : decades of division , two systems and part of the country under Socialist mismanagement .
Today it is trying its best to find its way among difficult neighbours .
In many respects the 18 million inhabitants of Yemen enjoy greater freedom than the people of other countries in that part of the world .
Yemen is also committed to the peaceful resolution of conflicts in the region , such as the dispute over an island in the Red Sea or the border problems with the neighbouring State of Saudi Arabia .
The recent kidnappings were brought to a swift conclusion without loss of life with effective assistance from the Government .
Now parliamentary elections are scheduled for 27 April , and I am very much in favour of sending election observers from the European Parliament .
It would also be wrong , ladies and gentlemen , if in this difficult situation we were to threaten to withdraw the very modest amount of financial assistance provided by the European Union .
This means , Mr Newens , that your motion can only be considered in conjunction with the amendments on the table , most of which our group can support .
The country is trying hard to move gradually towards democracy in this difficult situation .
It is isolated , because although the Yemeni application for membership of the exclusive club of Gulf States has been on the table for months , and indeed years , the country 's neighbours are still unwilling to let it join .
The country is not covered by our Mediterranean programme , because it is does not directly adjoin the Mediterranean , nor do we have an association agreement with it .
So it would really be wrong of us to leave Yemen in isolation .
This country has done enough to merit support , and with the amendments included we Christian Democrats shall support this motion .
Yes , Mr Friedrich , I am afraid that I am just making things more difficult by proposing one or two amendments .
I think Mr Newens ' resolution is an excellent one , but it unfortunately completely overlooks the human rights of women as a whole , so I have tabled a number of amendments to draw attention to their wretched situation . Their position has gone from bad to worse .
Legislation is now being drawn up to come into force after the elections which will ban women from giving evidence in court , and there is also legislation in the pipeline which will reintroduce the possibility of marriage between minors .
In countries where human rights are violated , it is often the case that women suffer particularly badly and are subject to even more extreme forms of repression , and this is what is happening in Yemen .
So however sensitive the situation may be , I do not understand why the Christian Democrats believe that we should put our relations with Yemen before human rights .
In my view , it ought to be the other way around .
Madame President , the protection of human rights in Yemen and , in particular , the organization of transparent , free elections , are questions of special interest to which the Commission is paying due attention .
The Union and other international partners have pointed out repeatedly in the course of contacts with the Yemeni Government that the elections on 27 April next will be a test for its political system .
At the same time we must admit that the development of political structures in Yemen is being carried out in a particularly difficult domestic situation and in a situation of particularly difficult foreign relations .
The Commission and other donors , which include most Member States , preferred therefore to put forward a series of positive measures to help Yemen reinforce its democratic structures .
The European Commission has thus set aside ECU 700 000 to provide technical aid to the organisation of elections , local control and the promotion of the women 's involvement in the elections , as well as a whole series of technical assistance measures to help with this entire process .

Of course , Mr Newens , Mr Friedrich and Mrs van Dijk , we know that four opposition parties have in effect decided not to contest the elections .
But remember that , due to the lack of democratic practices , there are still 4 000 candidates in this country representing a half-dozen parties , in addition to a large number of independent candidates .
We should not be surprised either that this phenomenon is occurring because it is the first time that this country is taking steps towards democratic normalisation .
Consequently the European Commission and the Member States have agreed on a solution to make this possible because , in fact , and I must say that Mr Friedrich is right about this , we have had to invent a sui generis solution with Yemen .
A sui generis solution because this is a country which does not have relations with its neighbours since the Gulf States will not let it enter their club , while its relations with the African political environment are also very limited .
Consequently we adopted the idea in the past of concluding a bilateral cooperation agreement .
Why ?
For the same reason as I mentioned in relation to Cambodia : there is also a clause on human rights in the cooperation agreement with Yemen , which is to be signed shortly .
Once we have signed this cooperation agreement , the Commission will have the legal and international capacity and legitimacy to implement programmes in this country which are aimed at developing democracy .
Furthermore , as regards the elections , I must point out that I hope that some of you will go there , because the Commission has negotiated with the Yemeni authorities to have international observers present .
We hope , therefore , that 40 observers from the European Union will be present during the election process .
I think that it would be an excellent idea if at least three of the Members who are concerned about this issue would go to Yemen to act as observers during the elections .
That would be an excellent idea , Mr Newens .
Thank you , Mr Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0295 / 97 , tabled by Mr W.G. van Velzen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on humanitarian aid to Bulgaria ; -B4-0314 / 97 , tabled by Mr Papakyriazis and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on humanitarian aid to Bulgaria ; -B4-0317 / 97 , tabled by Mr Goerens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on humanitarian aid to Bulgaria ; -B4-0335 / 97 , tabled by Mr Wolf and Mrs Müller , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on humanitarian aid to Bulgaria ; -B4-0299 / 97 , tabled by Mr Piha and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on emergency aid to Karelia ; -B4-0312 / 97 , tabled by Mrs Ahlqvist and Mr Paasilinna , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on humanitarian aid to Karelia ; -B4-0316 / 97 , tabled by Mr Väyrynen and Mrs Ryynänen , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Karelia and other parts of the north-western Russian Federation ; -B4-0333 / 97 , tabled by Mrs Seppänen and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Russian Karelia ; -B4-0334 / 97 , tabled by Mrs Hautala and Mrs Schörling , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Karelia .
Bulgaria :
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Bulgarian people suffered for years under the mismanagement of the former Bulgarian Communist Party , now the Socialist Party .
Corruption was rife , and the country was mercilessly plundered .
Grinding poverty , hyperinflation and even bread shortages followed , and grain had to be imported as a result of the maladministration , even though Bulgaria was once the breadbasket of Eastern Europe .
Fortunately , President Stoyanov was able to persuade the Bulgarian Socialist Party that this could not continue , and an interim government is now in place .
The interim government has received a positive response from the international community .
The G24 has made USD 290 million available in financial aid for 1997 through the World Bank , the IMF - hopefully tomorrow - is to make USD 618 m available for standby arrangements , and the European Union is lending ECU 250 m in balance of payments assistance and ECU 40 m in social and structural aid .
This is a major expression of trust on the part of the international community in this interim government , and one which is rarely seen on such a scale , but it is also a sign to the Bulgarian people that we feel solidarity with them . We also hope that it is a signal to them to use the elections on 19 April to put an end to the years of mismanagement by the Communist and Socialist parties and to vote for a constructive future for their country , knowing that the next two years are sure to bring reforms , however painful they may be .
I think that the resolution expresses our solidarity with the Bulgarian people on this point .
Madam President , Bulgaria , an ancient country of Europe with a wealth of human and material resources , a country linked in association with the European Union and with prospects of accession , is in a very difficult situation .
It is passing through a severe economic crisis , a crisis which is also social and political , which has developed and come to a head over recent months but which is , of course , a consequence of things that have been happening for many years , since 1989 .
It precipitated early elections on 19 April , so it is obvious that it has not deflected the country from its determination to stick with democracy .
Bulgaria 's geographical and geopolitical position is also difficult and sensitive .
The country has manifested its potential as a stabilizing factor in the region via important initiatives and sacrifices .
With this unanimously endorsed joint resolution the European Parliament is seeking to send a message to the Bulgarian people .
A message that we do care , that we are watching , that we do feel for and support the Bulgarian people in their difficult endeavour , and that we want to restate the need for humanitarian aid to Bulgaria - and not just aid of that type - to be continued and extended as the situation demands .
Madam President , Bulgaria has not yet managed to take off since the end of the dictatorship .
In its defence , the legacy of the past can be invoked , which include the crushing weight of the national debt as well as the embargo against Serbia .
It cannot be denied , on the other hand , that the inability of Bulgaria to engage in true reforms casts a singular shade on the prospects of a country which has , however , set itself some very ambitious targets .
Final observation , I have become firmly convinced that Bulgaria , despite the efforts we have a right to expect from it , will not be able to resolve this by itself .
Bulgaria , with its problems of an exceptional magnitude , raises the question as to whether the cooperation mechanisms with the European Union are up to the challenge .
This country needs to be helped less on a humanitarian level than in its desire to see in-depth reforms through .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe the problem in Bulgaria makes several things clear .
Quite a lot has already been said about these things , and Mr Goerens ' contribution was also very enlightening .
We must ask ourselves whether the type of assistance and guidance offered to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to help them over their transitional crisis is really adequate .
Other aspects of the issue are the question of which political forces in Bulgaria are doing what and the fact that the political class , the nomenklatura , and the Mafia are neither able nor willing to develop their country , a phenomenon we have also encountered elsewhere .
But we must also consider our own share of the blame . What can we do to ensure that we actually honour the promises we have made to the Eastern Europeans and especially to those in the Balkans ?
And we must also ask ourselves very seriously whether our assistance should not go further than merely providing humanitarian aid in emergencies .
Karelia :
Madam President , I should like to deal with the resolution on Karelia and the area around Murmansk .
First of all , may I express my delight at the fact that the European Parliament is finally discussing this region , which is immediately adjacent to the European Union and yet so remote that very few people here are familiar with it .
I am also pleased that many Finnish Members of our House signed the request for an urgent debate , quite irrespective of their party allegiance , as a sign that the situation is critical and that ideology has no part to play here .
The Republic of Karelia and the Murmansk area are part of the northern economic area of the Russian Federation and are therefore somewhat remote , to put it mildly , in terms of the transport network .
During the present century , this area , because of its geographical , linguistic and even cultural closeness to Finland , as well as its strong urge to achieve self-determination , has repeatedly resisted Russian occupation , so it is , understandably enough , not a major recipient of Russian aid today .
Nevertheless , it is absolutely unacceptable that Russia should be putting every conceivable administrative spanner into the works today to prevent humanitarian aid from reaching that region .
It must also be said that control in the region is often exercised by bodies of a non-governmental nature .
The last time I personally took humanitarian aid to that country , I was faced with the rather dubious alternative of placing myself under the protection of the Russian Mafia or of the Afghanistan veterans ' organization .
Today is the tenth of April .
The sun is shining here , even at this time of day , but in Karelia and the area around Murmansk it is snowing , it is cold , below-zero temperatures prevail , and people are dying of starvation and hypothermia .
It is quite simply our duty to urge the Commission to make full use of every conceivable programme , such as TACIS , INTERREG or other cross-border programmes and to do everything possible to remedy this catalogue of human suffering in our immediate vicinity .
Madam President , this resolution on Karelia is extremely important .
Karelia is situated close to the EU and it is important that we develop co-operation with the EU .
There are some good examples . I can mention one from March of this year when the district of Västerbotten in my homeland of Sweden signed a co-operation agreement with Karelia .
The Swedish author Stig Dagerman once wrote : ' In times of no hope there is no worse prison than the future . '
These are words which could well be used to describe the current situation for thousands of people in Karelia .
We have all been able to follow the emergency situation there in the international media .
There is an acute need for humanitarian aid such as food , medicine and other necessities of life which ought to be provided immediately for the people in Karelia , as the people there are living virtually in starvation conditions .
We must urge the Russian authorities to ensure that these aid packages really do reach the right people and do not get stuck somewhere on the way .
Above all , the situation is serious for the children in Karelia .
We already know that 3 000 children have been taken into the care of the authorities because their parents cannot provide for them .
Even if this is an emergency situation we must not stop at emergency help .
We must also come up with long term initiatives to improve the socio-democratic situation and democracy in Karelia .
This alarming situation could lead the Karelian people to say that life was better before and to want to return to the situation of the past .
It would be unfortunate if this happened .
Peace and freedom in Europe requires a further commitment to the future of Karelia which is also part of Europe 's own future as well .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are not talking here about a momentary charitable donation but a part of our work for peace and freedom in Europe .
Let us as from this moment ensure our future commitment to the people of Karelia .
Madam President , Karelia is of course as much a part of Europe as Sicily , Crete , the Canary Isles or other parts of Europe which we regularly discuss here .
Karelia is part of our history .
It has been under Swedish rule , then Russian , then Finnish and is now back under Russian rule again .
Karelia has been affected by the chaos in Russia more than other parts of the country .
Karelia has been affected by the shock therapy which Russia has been successfully duped into applying , not least by Western European economists with their bad advice .
Of course the European Union has a considerable responsibility in this respect .
It is a ' hot spot ' which could result in conflict .
Karelia has a communist government in the autonomous Karelian Republic .
There are groups in Finland who dream about changing the borders and taking back parts of Karelia again .
It is obvious that the socio-economic conditions in Karelia affect the people 's outlook which is a risky situation if someone does not soon intervene and ensure that the region receives help .
It is obvious that the European Union has a very great responsibility here both because , indirectly , we are , in many ways , partially responsible for the situation being as it is and also because Karelia , as I have already said , is of course a part of Europe .
Madame President , the Russians find themselves in a strange situation .
The Communist system has been abolished , but the capitalist system is not yet working .
A disaster is unfolding immediately beyond our external border .
Finnish aid shipments have run into major problems at the border - either the Russian customs officials are conspicious by their absence , or duties are simply collected illegally by locals , something which the Russian authorities should put a stop to immediately .
In 1992 the Union sent Russia food aid .
The produce was distributed to food stores and the revenue from their sale was to be used to fund humanitarian aid .
In most cases , exactly the opposite occurred : people bought the Western foodstuffs with what were probably their last remaining savings , but the money went into the pockets of the Russian mafia .
For that reason , the aid must now be shipped directly to the intended recipients , child-care centres , old people 's homes , etc , with the assistance of the local authorities .
Otherwise , this aid will also fall into the hands of the mafia .
Madam President , there is every good reason to offer the Bulgarian people humanitarian aid .
The mismanagement perpetrated by the previous government has left the people in a state of despair , hunger and misery .
The situation in the hospitals and orphanages is appalling .
It is therefore frustrating to see that NGOs are having difficulty in getting aid into Bulgaria because so many of the bureaucratic measures introduced by earlier regimes are still in place .
I recently heard of a Christian community in Sofia which has been trying to secure recognition since 1990 .
Because they are not recognized , they cannot rent premises or receive humanitarian supplies from sister churches in the Netherlands .
This is particularly distressing for them now that the crisis is so severe .
Moreover , for Christian communities such as this one , not being recognized also means that they are regarded as a sect and even have difficulties with importing Bibles .
There is therefore every good reason to accompany our emergency aid with calls for rapid measures to establish the right to freedom of religion and the right to practise a religion freely .
Madam President , Bulgaria is caught up in a serious financial and social crisis .
High inflation , unemployment and rocketing food prices have put many people into an almost hopeless situation in recent months .
The European Union , as well as other bodies , and especially the private charitable organizations to which Mr Blokland has just referred , have some good projects that are helping to alleviate the worst of the distress .
Children , women , the sick and the elderly are most in need of rapid assistance .
The crisis-management programme of the present Government has been adopted , and I hope that the new Bulgarian Government will continue the programme after the elections .
A clear legislative programme and a restructuring of the economy , accompanied by reforms in the social sphere , are urgently needed .
The Bulgarians need the support and solidarity of all Europeans , since they belong to Europe .
Bulgaria also needs very strong support from us , because the people there have placed high hopes in us .
I hope that after the elections the new Government , together with Parliament and above all with the Bulgarian people , and also with our support , will be able to overcome this crisis .
Madame President , famine is now a fact of life in areas close to Europe .
In Karelia and other parts of Russia bordering on the Union , the situation of children and the elderly in particular has been extremely difficult throughout the winter .
From the beginning of the year onwards , emergency aid has been sent to the region from Finland via the Red Cross and the Finland-Russia Association .
However , the situation has not eased and for that reason we now need the assistance of the Union as a whole .
However , wherever possible local resources and administrative organizations should be involved in the delivery of the aid .
A programme to develop social and health administration in Karelia is currently been financed via the EU 's TACIS programme .
These local resources should also be used to deliver the emergency aid , since this will help to strengthen emerging local social structures and improve their ability to deal with such disasters in the future .
In my view , this is a very important matter in this connection .
Madame President , as regards the problem of humanitarian aid for Bulgaria , I would like to confirm that in the past 6 months the Commission has spent ECU 73.6 million on aid for Bulgaria .
This includes an emergency social assistance programme under PHARE amounting to ECU 20 million , a contribution of 1.1 million from ECHO for emergency medical and food aid , as well as ECU 12.5 under PHARE for energy imports .
The Commission 's objective is still , first and foremost , to lend support to the process of economic reform and , second , to maintain social aid in order to cushion the social cost of the reforms and reinforce popular acceptance of these .
The remainder of the set of aid measures by the European Union were recently presented by my colleague , Mr Van den Broek , in Sofia .
The terms are : first , a new macro-financial loan from the Union for an amount of ECU 250 million .
Moreover , ECU 20 million under the PHARE programme for technical assistance in applying the Government 's reform programme .
And lastly additional social assistance in the context of PHARE for the most needy groups in Bulgaria , amounting to a total of ECU 20 million which will be spent on the existing programme .
Moreover the Commission yesterday took part in a high-level G24 meeting in Bulgaria .
Thanks to various undertakings by member countries to provide aid , it was possible to make good the deficit in financing for Bulgaria for 1997 .
Undertakings to provide humanitarian aid were also made and in November a further meeting of the G24 will take place to review the progress made in reforms in this country and to collect funds for the balance of payments in 1998 .
Lastly , in our relations with this country we must not lose sight of the long-term objective of membership of the Union .
In return Bulgaria , after many years of underdevelopment , will have to assume the challenges of reform , and the clear political will of the provisional Government to implement such reforms is heartening . This determination will , we hope , be ratified after the general elections on 19 April .
As for Karelia , the Commission is aware of the political and economic situation in the north-western regions of Russia , a situation which is indeed serious , not only in Karelia but also , unfortunately , in many regions of the Russian Federation .
The Commission 's humanitarian aid department , ECHO , will carefully examine any practical requests that arise .
However , I must point out that , as mentioned already by several Members , the humanitarian organizations are facing increasingly tough barriers each time they try to get humanitarian aid to the region , as well as problems generally posed by the Russian customs authorities .
This problem of customs controls has already been raised with the Russian authorities .
However , I wish to make one thing clear : problems started to emerge , essentially , from the time that the International Humanitarian Aid and Technical Assistance Office , which used to exist , disappeared in the new government structure .
So far the Russian Government has not adopted a final decision concerning the body responsible for channelling humanitarian aid to those Russian regions which , like Karelia , are experiencing serious problems .
Thank you , Commissioner Marín .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , in connection with the votes on topical and urgent subjects , I would draw your attention to the fact that the front pages of all the newspapers in Mexico are carrying reports that the European Commission 's official representative in Mexico , under pressure from the government there , has withdrawn the subsidy which had been approved for the Human Rights Academy in Mexico until after the elections .
This was why we asked to have a debate on Mexico this week in Parliament , because we knew that it was urgent .
Our request was rejected by the right wing in the House , and I hold you all responsible for the fact that this Human Rights Academy is now not to receive the grant from us that it might have done , because we refused to put pressure on the Commission .
Mrs Aelvoet , you have made your point but as you know the House is sovereign on these matters and it is up to the House to decide what items appear on the list of urgencies .
Votes
Mr President , according to my list we now come to the votes on the Adam and Baldarelli reports .
On my voting indications it is being suggested that there will be roll call votes on all the amendments .
Could you check whether that is still correct ?
If that is still correct , would it be possible for you to invite the groups which have requested all these roll call votes on all the amendments to reconsider , because it seems that we can make the political points by having one roll call vote at the end ?
Now the Balderelli report has been withdrawn the situation is not as bad as you think .
We decided at the vote not to support the committee 's report .
We think that the report deals with essential issues for the future of the fishing industry and appreciate Mr Adam 's work in trying to find a compromise between the various interested parties .
But , despite this , we consider that the committee 's report does not offer a satisfactory balance on the matter of maintaining fish resources and the need to prevent the introduction of bureaucratic regulations , difficult for the target group to deal with , which would not have any real effect towards the objective of maintaining fish resources .
Although we had our reasons from the outset for abstaining on the Adam report on the proposal to introduce technical measures for the conservation of fisheries resources - which we explained in detail during the debate - then we are doubly convinced following the discussion , in view of the Commission 's answers and comments and above we see doubly clearly the real proposals and intentions of the European ' Executive ' in this matter .
In fact the Commission was quite clear in its statement that it would not accept the amendment to the report proposing that there should be a transitional period for the implementation of the new regulation - a realistic amendment which we tabled in the Committee on Fisheries which had had the support of the rapporteur .
This Commission position , quite apart from rejecting the financial compensation bound up with implementation of the regulation , raises serious doubts about the real role of the Commission in maintaining fisheries resources .
We trust that the Council of Ministers for Fisheries on 14 / 15 April will agree to introduce such legal provisions in the final proposal , even though the Commission - as seen here - does not concur .
We trust that that view will be upheld here , in particular by the governments of the Member States most closely affected , which must necessarily include my country - Portugal .
Taken as a whole , the Commission 's proposed amendments to the technical measures are a considerable improvement on the present system .
It has managed to produce a package which is better organized and simpler than the existing measures , and by making fishing gear more selective and protecting certain zones , it will significantly help to reduce the catches of juvenile fish .
I particularly welcome the fact that the Commission is to further reduce the capacity of the fleet in the 12-mile zone , which is where the nursery stocks are usually found .
I do not agree with all the Commission 's proposals , however , since in my view unnecessary restrictions are being imposed on a number of types of fishing .
The restrictions on fishing for hake , for example , will cause serious problems for pelagic horse mackerel trawling .
It is not right that flanking policies designed to protect juvenile fish should jeopardize the future of major fishing sectors , and any measures to rationalize the fishing fleets should form part of the MGPs .
I therefore fully support the rapporteur 's amendments on hake fishing .
The proposed sole limit and the one-net rule also restrict the flexibility of the fishing fleet unnecessarily .
The Commission 's proposal may extend the area where sole can be fished , but not far enough , which is why I have tabled an amendment setting the limit at 56ºN .
This should mean that fishermen operating in the rich grounds between 55º and 56ºN do not miss out on their catches of dab , lemon sole , large sole and so on by having to fish with a minimum mesh size of 110 mm .
I supported most of the amendments contained in the Adam report .
I agree with the rapporteur that the fishermen need to be more closely involved , and that certain measures need to have a better scientific basis .
The amendments on selective fishing gear are very much in line with what the sector can achieve in practical terms .
We need to reflect on the proposal to exempt the pelagic fleet from the ban on netting yarn over 8 mm .
However , I do not support the calls for a scheme to compensate fishermen for any loss of income resulting from the technical measures .
The CFP needs to create the conditions for the fleet to be competitive , and income subsidies will simply serve to keep non-economic vessels afloat .
Kindermann report ( A4-94 / 97 )
We supported the report at the vote but with the following observation on the position adopted : In principle , we welcome an administrative system which would allow the integration of Sweden and Finland into the Common Fisheries Policy ( CFP ) .
But we stress that the Commission 's proposal has been raised prematurely and cannot therefore make use of any better documents which may come from the IBSFC , preparation for which is currently underway , or of any opportunities which may arise from there for multilateral solutions covering the whole of the Baltic , not like the Commission 's proposal which only covers those parts which fall under the sovereignty and jurisdiction of the Member States .
We also think that the Commission 's proposal risks placing an unnecessary administrative burden on both professional fishermen and the authorities involved .
The undersigned think that the committee 's legislative resolution with its amendments takes better consideration of the above points than the Commission 's proposal .
Recognition of higher education diplomas
The next item is the report ( A4-0029 / 97 ) by Mrs Fontaine , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission report to the European Parliament and the Council on the state of application of the general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas ( made in accordance with Article 13 of Directive 89 / 48 / EEC ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0046 - C4-0194 / 96 )
Mr President , I confirm that this concerns a report from the Committee on Legal affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
The report which I have the honour of presenting to this Chamber refers to the first result from the implementation of the recognition of diplomas within the framework of the very innovative approach which the Commission proposed to us in 1989 .
Our Parliament , you will remember , approved this horizontal approach , while bearing in mind , of course , that great vigilance would be necessary regarding the manner in which it would be realised in practice .
We are grateful to the Commission for the very detailed report with which it has presented us at the end of the five years allotted by the directive .
The two objectives sought have been achieved .
The commission is presenting an inventory to us which provides us with very useful information , although I would have liked to have more precise statistics , in particular on the numbers of requests and on the responses - refusals or acceptances - which were given to those requests .
We could thus have yet better appreciated the extent of mobility within the Community .
In the second place , we have today an idea of the improvements required in order that the instrument be operational to the greatest possible extent with regard to citizens .
The important question which arises , indeed , is this : does this directive constitute the practical instrument which the candidates for mobility within the Community wished to have at their disposal , or not ?
Mr President , fellow Members , the outcome is a curate 's egg .
I must say that our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights has greatly appreciated being able to meet the national co-ordinators who , in each of our Member States , are charged with the actual implementation of this directive .
We also thank the Commission for having facilitated these meetings . They have allowed us to complete our analysis and to note with satisfaction a positive evolution of mentalities .
Moreover , in its report , the Commission notes that the compensation mechanism by examination has remained the exception , whilst achieving adaptation training courses has not really caused any difficulties .
Among the positive points , let us mention the synergy between Community programmes , Erasmus , which has now become Socrates , and the directive , and also the fact that this directive appears to have encouraged the convergence of our eduction and training programmes .
All this is excellent .
Nevertheless , our Committee on Legal Affairs had unfortunately to note that a certain number of important obstacles remained .
And it is not by chance that more than one hundred petitions have been submitted on this subject since the implementation of the directive .
It is also the reason why I am very much in favour of the amendments presented by Mr Cot and Mrs Schmidbauer on behalf of the Socialist Group , which refer to these petitions .
The obstacles in question are the result of several weaknesses .
First of all , the incomplete and insufficient transfer of the directive into the legislation of certain Member States .
Next , these obstacles are the result of the absence of a precise definition as to the level of higher education .
It is a point which we have raised , particularly during the hearing of national co-ordinators and which must certainly be clarified .
But , in a more general way , these obstacles result from the fact that the way of thinking in the sphere of academic recognition still prevails .
We equally stress the information problem .
It is a formidable problem , not just in this connection , as well we know .
But it appears in this case that if the migrants are now aware of their right to recognition of diplomas , the are very largely ignorant of the mechanisms of the system as well as the mechanisms of appeal .
It is now an absolute necessity , fellow Members , for - let me say it clearly - appropriate information as close as possible to citizens .
It is also necessary for the role of co-ordinators , who have done excellent work , to be strengthened .
This is one of the requests we are expressing .
Finally , our Commission on Legal Affairs would like to warn of a difficulty which may arise in the likely event , which we wish to be the case , that mobility within the Community develops in a significant manner .
Indeed , no legislation has been envisaged until now to take account of the numerus clausus which Member States have instituted for certain professions and which limit access to those professions of a number of candidates fixed in advance .
We wish , Mr Commissioner , the Commission to undertake a study on this matter .
Fellow Members , Mr President , based on these findings and these observations , we think that amendments will be necessary .
But we also think that the Commission is wise in proposing a deadline of 1999 .
At that time , our field of observation will be wider , our results will be more exhaustive .
From now until then , the greatest possible vigilance is required .
Our Committee of Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights wishes , on its part , to initiate changes , in cooperation with the Commission , which will be required for this important aspect of the real Europe to become fact for the greatest number of our fellow citizens .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur - and in this case this is not empty rhetoric - on his good work .
While it is customary to congratulate the rapporteur , it is less frequent to point to the virtues of Commission documents .
But this is a useful document .
The rapporteur has rightly highlighted several shortcomings , but it is still true , nevertheless , that the Commission is fulfilling its promise : to provide a quite precise view of the situation .
The first conclusion to be drawn - which Mrs Fontaine mentioned - is that it is still early . Not enough time has passed to permit us to draw conclusions that would result in a change in the law .
It is wise to wait until 1999 before revising Directive 48 / 89 .
What are the essential conclusions that emerge from this report by Mrs Fontaine - which is backed by the PPE - together with the two amendments tabled by the Socialist Group ?
The fact that at time when freedom of movement has not been properly developed as a fourth freedom - as set down in the Treaties - which is leading to discouragement and scepticism , considerable progress has indeed been made in this area , which affords a note of hope that deserves a mention .
This Directive is based on a balance between two articles : article 3 which reflects mutual trust between States : if someone has decided to exercise a profession in a Member State , the mutual trust between the States , a principle of the Treaties , must enable him to continue his profession in another Member State ; and article 4 which must be interpreted as a restrictive clause laying down compensatory measures in those cases where there is no equivalence .
Once again the two main currents which have always been intertwined since the start of the process of European construction : on the one hand , the fears and visions of a fortress , a limited , narrow vision , and on the other , the vision of the future , of a Europe with a diversity of culture - and this diversity must be maintained because it is a source of wealth , it is our heritage - but , at the same time , it is a Europe where freedom of movement is a real right , not simply a formal right set down in the Treaties .
Finally I should like , Mr President , to point out that there is an article - article 2 - which states that all of this is aimed at achieving political integration .
However , this cannot be established automatically vis-à-vis nationals of non-EU states as claimed in the report .
Mr President , on behalf of the UPE Group I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , for her efforts .
The proposal she has set before us will certainly enjoy the support of our group .
I note in passing that Directive 89 / 48 / EEC marked an important turning point in Community policy on the free movement of citizens holding a higher education qualification .
It was with that directive , in fact , that the Commission decided to introduce a radical change into the legislative policy previously pursued regarding the free movement of individuals intending to work in another Member State . Instead of a mass of detailed vertical directives for each profession there would be generalized , horizontally applicable legislation laying down rules for the recognition of qualifications in all sectors not previously covered by a specific directive .
The system was then supplemented by a second directive for professional and vocational qualifications and a directive updating the directives that previously applied only to individual sectors .
Freedom of movement is based on Articles 52 and 59 of the EEC Treaty , which have the status of direct applicability and validity , meaning that they give citizens ' rights that can be directly protected by the national courts .
Turning specifically to the salient points in the motion for a resolution , I should like to single out , in summary , the need to promote recognition of diplomas obtained in third countries and recognized by a Member State , the need to inform the citizens of the rights granted to them , to clarify the confusion between recognition for academic purposes and recognition of professional training qualifications , the guarantee of appropriate investigation of complaints of abuses made by members of the public to the Commission and the European Parliament , and the need to enhance the role of national co-ordinators in order to accelerate the process of convergence between educational and training programmes and to improve the clarity of recognition procedures .
In all these areas much certainly remains to be done from the practical standpoint .
The bureaucracies of the various Member States will undoubtedly have to make great efforts in order to move forward from the theoretical to the practical application of the Community directives , a path often choked by a mass of red tape .
Even so , I believe we are moving in the right direction , and I have no doubt that the work done by our rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , will help us on our way .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , is of course to be congratulated on her report , but she knows as well as I and the Commission do - and I should like to hear what the Commission has to say about this - that it is in fact far too optimistic , and that the Member States , not least her own , take every opportunity to protect their markets , even when it comes to the recognition of diplomas .

I think we therefore need to accept that in the long term , we can no longer leave education policy solely in the hands of the Member States , and that we need to introduce rules at Community level .
Some progress has of course been made , thanks to the Court of Justice - or in this case the Court of First Instance , which ruled in Case 1690 , the Panagiotopoulou case , that Directive 89 / 48 was directly applicable .
I think this was an extremely important ruling .
Mrs Fontaine has clearly denounced the opposition of national professional bodies to the directive on lawyers , and has tried to overcome it - there is at least a little more openness towards the idea now - but I should like to draw attention to another bad example in the very first area in which we made a start on the recognition of diplomas , the medical professions , where France is still indulging in market protection over the ' protégiste dentaire ' .
There is a European directive on this , but the way it is interpreted in France means that for practising their profession there - quite correctly under the terms of the directive - people are still being thrown into prison .
This needs to be put right , and Mrs Fontaine 's report should help to do this .
Mr President , fellow members , the report from our fellow member , Mrs Fontaine , is quite excellent and we will vote for it without reservations .
It is true that the Commission 's report represents , as our rapporteur has indicated , certain progress in the implementation of a general system for the recognition of diplomas of higher education within the European Union .
Also as a member of the Saint-Benoît brotherhood , I earnestly wish to see the transnational community of universities which already existed in XIIth and XIIIth century Europe re-established in future , thanks in particular to this new legislation , community which was inspired by belonging to a single civilisation , based not only on both the Latin language and Roman law , but also on the Graeco-Christian values which are still ours today .
I do not wish to enter into details of the legislation which are dealt with in Mrs Fontaine 's report , but I would like to bear witness to the importance these exchanges can have for higher education in a border region such as mine , that is to say Alsace , by which I was elected and which is situated geographically and culturally at the heart of Rhenish Europe .
Inter-university cooperation already exists on an important scale , particularly between the universities of Baden-Württemberg and Alsace , without forgetting , moreover , Basle , in Switzerland , but this cooperation cannot but be reinforced by the development of a general system of reciprocal recognition of diplomas which is being implemented , but which is still inadequate .
All this appears positive to us and we express our sincere wish that the recommendations advocated by Mrs Fontaine 's report be applied as speedily as possible in the years to come .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Fontaine on a report which is up to the standard that we always expect of her .
Can I say that we on the left in this Chamber , when we talk of the single market , have always contended that there has to be a social dimension to it and when labour is sold in the single market it is inevitable there will be a social dimension and the mutual recognition of qualifications is part of that .
I spoke earlier this week in the debate on driving licences and argued then , as I do now , that part of free movement within the European Union is to recognize that there are diverse legal systems within that Union but that it is nevertheless possible to have a recognition of qualifications and laws .
Indeed , Mr President , you will be aware like me that within the United Kingdom , England and Scotland maintain distinct and separate legal systems and yet nonetheless are able to recognize certain principles within the United Kingdom , and I would argue that the same thesis should also apply to the mutual recognition of qualifications .
Again the Scottish and English examples apply there .
Mr President , you I suspect have different qualifications from mine , but they are mutually recognized within the United Kingdom .
Indeed many argue , and I am sure you would , that Scottish qualifications are , of course , superior to those of England .
Nonetheless , when it comes to higher education , we also accept and understand the need for mutuality .
Can I say in conclusion that I am a lawyer by occupation .
The recognition of my qualification , which shows me with hair and a black beard and is shown by way of a card translated into nine languages , in fact dates from a directive from 1987 before this Parliament was a real Parliament and it shows that we have been working at this problem for a very long time and I hope that , for the benefit of all those young people in the gallery , we will speed up our work so that they can take advantage of the single market with a social dimension .
Mr President , would you please draw the attention of Mr White to the fact that it is now 1997 and this Parliament has existed for a very , very long time .
He probably mixed up the numbers which , for lawyers , are always difficult .
I think he meant 1977 , before this Parliament was directly elected .
But as he said such nice things about the Scots I was not going to correct him .
Mr President , I should like to make one or two brief points on Mrs Fontaine 's report and also on this attempt to standardize the recognition of diplomas , which is a constant concern to me .
I think that in spite of everything the market must prevail and that a diploma might provide cover for a dunce .
However I think it would be difficult for a diploma to have any intrinsic value and that it should never be a substitute for the work experience which the holder has gained .
I have already taught in America by virtue of my doctorate in classical languages from the Faculdade de Letras , Lisbon , and the American authorities never raised the question of equivalence of qualifications .
They accepted that the work I had done was good enough to enable me to do the job of university professor .
Europe - which never had any concerns about education nor any tendency to make things converge , I do not say as regards teaching , but the quality of teaching in which some countries even regard other countries as having a lower teaching standard -must now face , quite naturally , the problem of recognition of diplomas .
We are all aware that in any given country there are universities , polytechnic colleges or equivalent colleges which award diplomas which are not as good as those in other establishments in the same country .
I nevertheless think that the less meddling there is by the Commission and the bureaucrats in the automatic evaluation of diplomas the better it will be for the freedom of movement of citizens .
But I think it should be fundamental that Europe should be concerned to see some approximation in teaching quality at all levels and not show concern merely in monetary convergence .
That would at least be a more interesting ideal , yielding greater richness .
Mr President , the convergence between academic , university education and professional or vocational training , which has now become necessary , represents one of the methods identified some time ago of trying to counter the employment crisis that is now dominating the entire Community , and not only the Community .
Unfortunately , it is difficult for academic and professional education to play their full part , especially because of the obstacles that occur in the systems of recognizing diplomas , and in particular higher education diplomas .
The degree to which the directive we are discussing today has been applied tells us of 11 , 000 citizens interested in the success or otherwise of the system , which encounters its major obstacles with the recognition of academic qualifications .
We believe , furthermore , that this figure refers only to those who have had the courage to complain of a problem they have encountered , and that , sadly , the real situation is much more serious .
Has Europe , then , lost that spirit which , over the centuries , established its great universities as the temples of world knowledge if , today , it is unable to recognize the universal nature of the knowledge imparted in the Community 's seats of learning ?
Mrs Fontaine , then , is quite right to complain of the delays that are taking place with the application of the directive .
We would remind the House , Mr President , that professional qualifications such as those held by surveyors , dental surgeons and many others have not yet gained recognition in all States of the Union and the professions concerned enjoy no particular protection .
We too endorse the call for a closer dialogue between the national authorities and the Commission 's services with a specific view to setting up an appropriate system for providing information , a system that must be as transparent as possible .
We also ask you , Mr President , to bring the necessary pressure to bear on the Belgian , Greek and German governments which are currently proving the most stubborn in barring access to the professions for citizens coming from other Member States . That will send our citizens that European signal which nowadays is too often obscured .
Mr President , much as the standardization of higher-education diplomas is to be welcomed , that does not actually guarantee what the successful completion of a diploma course is supposed to reflect .
In practice it often means very little that graduates of different universities have the same right of access to the various professions in the entire European Union ; the only guarantor of equal professional opportunities throughout the EU is comparability of training levels .
The oft-repeated argument that every university and every country should have the right to develop its own curricula is only justified if graduates emerge from their courses of study with comparable qualitative levels of training .
It is therefore especially important to uphold the subsidiarity principle by enabling Member States to decide whether the practice of a profession should or should not be regulated .
It therefore ought to be possible for individual countries , irrespective of mutual recognition of diplomas , to enact their own laws or regulations governing proof of professional aptitude .
The fact is that with no coordination of the various countries ' curricula at all , the European Union would soon have a similar situation to that which prevails in countries like the United States , where a diploma from one university guarantees a far higher level of aptitude than the same diploma from another .
In this modern competitive society , where success and promotion depend on the free market , graduates of the so-called élite universities will generally swim to the top .
And if entry to these élite universities then becomes correspondingly more expensive , that will create unfair conditions , with university entrance becoming dependent on the financial clout of students ' families or other sponsors .
Free access to the employment market throughout the EU - and that is surely meant to be the whole purpose of standardized diplomas - is therefore not guaranteed by mere recognition of diplomas .
That would be a phoney type of equality and would possess no credibility in the real world .
Mr President , general and vocational education is an instrument of employment policy , adapting professional qualifications to the needs of the internal market and playing an important part in the fight against unemployment .
The education systems of all our Member States are currently underprepared and too uncoordinated to respond to this challenge .
The general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas serves a crucial purpose here .
That purpose is to realize free movement of persons , in other words the right to enjoy citizenship of the Union , to live and work in other Member States , in conjunction with the eradication of unemployment .
In the Committee on Petitions , a considerable number of petitions submitted in recent years have shown us time and again that freedom of movement in this particular domain of recognition and equivalence of diplomas is not working properly .
Petitions give Parliament an overall picture of the problems faced by European and national administrations , of remote and bureaucratic measures , of infringements of principles of Community law and in general of defects relating to European unification and popular participation in the process of European integration .
These experienced flaws in European legislation should be used as a basis for the further development and improvement of Community law .
That is why I welcome Mrs Fontaine 's excellent report , and I should like to draw on our experience in the Committee on Petitions to add something from my own point of view as a member of that committee .
The main demand made in this context is that the Directive should also cover professional experience gained after graduation , because that is the only way to ensure that freedom of movement will be exercised in a satisfactory manner to promote education and employment policies in which our citizens are closely involved .
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the Committee on Legal Affairs and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , for the quality of her report and also for the interest she has always personally shown in the recognition of diplomas , something which is of fundamental importance for the citizens of Europe who wish to exercise their right to freedom of movement .
We are satisfied that the Committee on Legal Affairs considers it advisable to accept in principle the main conclusions in the Commission report - for instance that the ' General System ' Directive 89 / 94 is meeting the expectations created when it was decided to adopt a new horizontal approach to the question of the recognition of diplomas .
We have found out that in principle you are in agreement with the European Commission as regards the main problems the application of the Directive has given rise to during the first two years of implementation .
Mrs Fontaine said that perhaps more sophisticated statistics were needed in order to make an assessment .
According to the statistics , Mrs Fontaine , scarcely 11 000 citizens have so far obtained recognition of their diplomas in the entire European Union .
Why only 11 000 ?
Perhaps because only two years have gone by .
And second , because many of the problems you have mentioned are obvious and have to be resolved .
What are these problems ?
First of all , the system of work and relationship of trust .
The relationship and cooperation with the national coordinators is absolutely essential , and a feeling of trust must be established by means of the meetings with the national coordinators .
It is useful to note that , at the joint meeting between these coordinators and the Committee on Legal Affairs , the important role which the national coordinators , who have to apply the directive , must play when it comes to encouraging mutual trust was highlighted ; this mutual trust is absolutely essential for the success of the general system .
Only on the basis of trust can the system envisaged in the directive be effectively introduced .
On the other hand , there are other problems such as the definition of the concept of higher education and the balance between article 3 - recognition of diplomas per se - and article 4 which , in certain circumstances , enables the Member States to introduce additional requirements .
I cannot conceal from you the fact that there is a considerable difference of opinion , as you well know , between the European Commission and several Member States as regards the interpretation of these directives .
This has inevitably led us into a rather unfortunate situation : the initiation of an infringement procedure pursuant to Treaty Article 169 against several Member States , which will certainly result in a ruling by the Court of Justice .
Given the importance of the relationship of trust , it is preferable that the system progress by means of relations of trust between the Member States rather than the Commission having to systematically solve problems of interpretation of the directive by means of infringement procedures and resort to the Court of Justice .
I am convinced that the Commission 's point of view will prevail , but we all know that proceedings pursuant to article 169 at the Court of Justice in Luxembourg will mean a lot of lost time , regardless of what can be won in the end .
You have called for more information and greater transparency at every level .
The ' Citizens of Europe ' initiative was launched recently , one of the main objectives of this being in fact the recognition of diplomas .
Let us hope that understanding of the system will increase as and when the directive is applied , and I think that in general today we are in a relatively better situation than at the beginning .
Two specific points were raised by the Committee on Legal Affairs : the diplomas awarded by non-EU countries and the effect of mobility at Community level on national rules on numerus clausus - a very delicate issue since there are Member States which practice the numerus clausus , while others do not , and there are even Member State which at this very minute are reviewing this option .
What I can say , Mrs Fontaine , is that at the moment the Commission is examining the best solution to solve both the problem of validation of diplomas awarded by non-EU countries and the problem of countries which apply a numerus clausus .
As for the proposed amendments which Mrs Fontaine supports I would like to say that the Commission will make the necessary changes as soon as possible .
Lastly , I would like to thank you and all the other Members who spoke and who highlighted the importance of this issue .
The directive has certainly not achieved cruising speed yet , but you know perfectly well that all the harmonization directives involve a problem of tenacity .
Harmonization should preferably be introduced on the basis of political negotiation and rules of trust rather than by dint of cases at the Court of Justice . That is the view of the Commission .
No , Mr President , this is not a point of order .
I should like to put a supplementary question to the Commission .
I asked the Commissioner a specific question , and although I quite understand that his Flemish has not improved since he has been living in Bruges , he has not yet answered it in so many words .
He said that we need to work on the basis of the ' Cassis de Dijon ' principle of mutual trust .
But I asked whether he did not think that , because of the repeated instances of market protection , our next step should not be to introduce a Community education policy , and he has not yet answered this .
Perhaps he prefers not to , but I should nevertheless like to hear what he has to say .
Mr President , the directive is correct and has to leave it to Member States to ensure the recognition of diplomas .
Perhaps your grandchildren or mine will have the luck to live in a more united Europe with a linguistic system in which language is not a disadvantage , with a system of academic credits which means that it does not matter where a person has studied because there will be automatic recognition , based on a decision at Community level , of all the professions .
You will certainly be proven right , Mr Wijsenbeek , but a Commissioner cannot allow himself to be simply a poet of Europe .
And in my view your vision is too poetic , at least at the moment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 6.40 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been circulated .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , my name is not on yesterday 's attendance list .
That must undoubtedly be because of an oversight on my part , but I can assure you that I was present at yesterday 's sitting and can prove it if you would like me to , as my name is on several voting lists .
I hope therefore that this omission , no doubt due to my forgetfulness , can be put right .
I can confirm that I saw you on several occasions .
That will be corrected .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I refer to page 30 of the Minutes , which makes reference to the fact that I made an outrageous personal attack on a Member of this House yesterday .
I wonder whether you could now give Sir James Goldsmith the floor so that he can reply in person to the attack I made on him .
Thank you for that helpful comment .
Mr President , I refer to page 31 of yesterday 's Minutes - the Fontaine report .
I should appreciate it if you would tell Mr White that today is 11 April 1997 and that 1977 was 20 years ago , when he still had a black beard and hair on his head .
I think 90 % of the House will not understand what you are talking about but as I was in the Chair yesterday , I do .
Mr President , firstly , I wish to congratulate you on being in the Chair two days in a row , which must be a record .
I refer to page 5 of the Minutes and I congratulate the sessional services for adding my name - almost the first point in the Minutes and I will try to make it the first point next time - and to remark on the fact that I managed to make the vote in favour of the Palacio Vallelersundi report , thereby making it 19 British Labour Members , including yourself , who supported this splendid report on artist resale rights .
Thank you , Mr Kerr .
Votes
The freedom of movement of persons is one of the four fundamental freedoms which every citizen of the European Union should have .
This freedom does not actually exist .
One aspect of freedom of movement of persons is the mutual recognition of qualifications and acceptance of national higher educational certificates by the Member States and consequently by private firms , universities and professional organizations .
In December 1988 a general system was adopted for the mutual recognition of certificates of higher education approving professional training for a minimum of three years ' study in higher education .
That acceptance makes it possible to retain a diversity of educational courses .
The Commission has always encouraged the States to gain an understanding of the education systems of their neighbours : national academic recognition information centres ( NARICs ) in particular have been set up .
It has also reprimanded Greece and Belgium for failure to meet their obligations .
In view of the 1999 complete study of the 1992 directive on a second system for the recognition of professional training , the Commission is wanting to propose some amendments and , for example , to include a provision that account must be taken of experience gained subsequent to obtaining the diploma .
It would in addition be a good thing if the Commission could carry out an in-depth study on individuals actually encountering problems as regards recognition .
The European Parliament congratulates the Commission on its very thorough report which covers the essential problems concerning the state of application of the system for the recognition of diplomas .
Equality of opportunity for people with disabilities
The next item is the report ( A4-0044 / 97 ) by Mrs Schmidbauer , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission 's communication on equality of opportunity for people with disabilities ( COM ( 96 ) 0406 - C4-0582 / 96 ) .
Mr President , I had intended to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report but must now do this later when she has come in .
When discussing the issue of equal opportunities for people with disabilities , I think that we should begin by discussing the definition of handicapped which most people now seem to hold , namely the term handicap in relation to the surrounding environment .
This means that a handicap is not a static thing but something which can be reduced and perhaps even eliminated through action within the sector of housing for example .
By making housing accessible we reduce or eliminate the handicap .
By improving transport we reduce or even eliminate the handicap .
This is one starting point .
Another starting point is that when we formulate policies for people with disabilities and when we try to create equal opportunities every aspect of society is involved .
Those aspects , which are well described in this report using the term mainstreaming , including housing policy , transport policy , labour market policy and education policy .
A policy for the handicapped is not , as it was traditionally considered , an issue for the social sector but involves every aspect of society .
I will not go into any further detail on this as time is pressing but I would like to touch upon certain areas which are particularly important now in terms of creating equal opportunities .
The labour market situation which now prevails in Europe , with its high unemployment , is very serious .
We have unemployment figures of more than 10 percent .
I myself was involved in a study in Sweden several years ago .
At the time in Sweden we had practically full employment , e.g. only 2 percent unemployment , among the population as a whole .
But for those with the most severe disabilities unemployment was all of 70 percent .
This means that when the labour market situation is even worse these people are affected even more .
This makes our efforts in creating jobs for the disabled and the need for suitable models to be found even more urgent .
I would like to see us review which models are best and exchange ideas with each other as there are different systems in the different countries .
Secondly , I would like to touch on education .
Young people and employees with disabilities cannot currently take advantage freedom of movement because of lack of accessibility .
This is the nucleus of European co-operation , freedom of movement , the opportunity for people to cross national borders in order to study and work etc .
This is an important issue which must be resolved in the near future so that all of our people can take advantage of this freedom of movement .
Finally , I would like to say that the programmes for the handicapped that we have had have been good .
They have primarily been concerned with the exchange of knowledge .
Unfortunately these have been blocked by the Council .
It is particularly important that new programmes are established which are based upon the exchange of knowledge especially in those areas which I have touched upon so far .
As I said , I would like to thank the rapporteur for a good report .
Mr President , there are 37 million disabled people in the European Union .
Their scope for participating in the benefits of the European Union , in other words freedom of movement and access to all goods and services , is very limited .
As the organizations of disabled people have put it , they are the invisible citizens of the EU .
And violations of the human rights of people with disabilities are taking place repeatedly throughout the Union .
The Banotti report , which we adopted here in December , provided clear evidence of this .
It is therefore essential for a non-discrimination clause to be included as part of the revision of the Treaty .
Until the beginning of this year , we had the HELIOS II programme , which provided disabled people with opportunities for exchanges of information and experience .
This programme gave rise to the Disability Forum , which is doing valuable work at European level with and for those concerned .
So far , no new programme has been presented .
Already , on the grounds of subsidiarity , both the poverty programme and the programme for elderly people have not been put into effect .
The German Government does not accept Article 235 as the legal basis for social programmes .
Because that is so , the Commission has held back and not yet produced a successor programme to HELIOS II .
It wishes to wait for the final evaluation of the HELIOS II programme before taking action .
We believe that it is urgently necessary for a successor programme to be developed and implemented , a programme based on the principle of equality of opportunity , human rights and the UN Standard Rules .
In the meantime , the Commission has instead issued a communication by way of an interim solution , which we are discussing here today .
We welcome this communication on equality of opportunity , especially the new approach emerging from it , which reveals a human rights based concept of disability and moves away from the principle of paternalism .
This is a radical departure from the old thinking , which has viewed disabled people as objects of charity and pity .
It shifts away from the health model , in which the aim is to make amends , and towards the social model , based on human rights .
The policy on disabled people is now starting to be geared towards integration and equality of opportunity , in other words mainstreaming .
However , even an approach as good as the one in this communication does not necessarily lead to direct action .
Only with the help of a programme can there be a transfer of policy , information and experiences between Member States .
The HELIOS programme was the only one which directly financed the work of NGOs with the disabled and acted as a link for disabled people across the European Union .
The programme was helpful for disability groups where the incidence of disability is very low , such as deafblindness .
These groups depend on genuine European exchange to enable them to meet their needs .
It was the only programme which reached all groups of disabled people .
On this point , the interim evaluation said that it was important not to understate the problem HELIOS II was confronting , namely building solidarity and common strategies across such a diverse sector of Europe 's population .
While I entirely support the Commission 's stated objective of involving disabled people substantially in the management and implementation of the HORIZON programme , HORIZON alone cannot fulfil the role of a broadbased disability programme based on equal opportunities , since it is confined to employment and training only , and must be cofinanced .
As regards employment , strongly as my colleague has just described it and serious as the non-employment of disabled people is , employment is only one part of the daily challenges which disabled people have to cope with .
As one disabled person put it : ' It is all very well having jobs available , but many disabled people cannot get on the bus to go to work , or do not have someone to help them get ready for work ' . Until such time as disabled people have full integration into all policy areas , including adequate personal assistance and support services and accessible public transport , assurances that job opportunities are available will not , without adjustments to other measures , automatically ensure integration .
Also , a high percentage of disabled people are of retirement age .
Measures targeted on employment will therefore only reach a limited number of disabled people .
However , I also believe that the responsibility for disability policy should continue to rest principally with the Member States .
The European Union 's role is to add value , and to assist the Member States through exchanges of information on best practice .
The European Union should also ensure that disabled people are included wherever the competence to legislate or make policy or programmes is already in its own hands .
This is the approach of mainstreaming , aimed at bringing about equality of opportunity for disabled people .
I would appeal to the Commission to go down this road , in other words to bring forward a successor programme to HELIOS as soon as possible .
And my appeal to the Member States is to incorporate a legal basis for this programme in the Treaty , together with a clause on non-discrimination .
Mr President , let me first of all express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur .
She is one of the idealists who devote a great deal of additional time to this area .
It is quite right : there are 37 million disabled people living in the EU .
They certainly have to struggle with many prejudices and difficulties in our society .
Anyone who speaks with them or about them should always appreciate that they could easily become one of their number overnight .
The Member States are mainly responsible for implementing disability policy .
Nevertheless , I take the view that sensible coordination and inclusion in all EU programmes of the integration of disabled people is desirable .
I wish to emphasize this point , even though I have a very high regard for the principle of subsidiarity .
A new action programme designed on these lines for the benefit of disabled people and their associations , provided they have a 50 % representation on the management board , is therefore necessary to ensure that the structures which have been created do not collapse .
We need to promote equality of opportunity and integration , and to further extend the structures for cooperation .
Regardless of the legal problems , the Commission should carry out pilot actions and preliminary work for disabled people , with the involvement of NGOs .
Securing non-discrimination and the right of access to all Community programmes is sensible and important .
However , rights which exist in theory on paper are not enough .
Otherwise , the same thing will happen to disabled people as to small and medium-sized enterprises : their rights may well be written into many programmes , but they are frequently not translated into practice .
We must make every effort to see that this happens , so that the right results are achieved .
And we must ensure that there is genuine access to all the modern information and communication techniques .
Unfortunately , I do not have enough speaking time to elaborate on this .
To my mind , it is essential that the problems of disabled people should be examined by a high-level group of experts which must be set up in the near future .
In this context , dialogue is important both with the Member States - which , as I said , are primarily responsible - and with the European disability forums , so that progress can be made for disabled people at European level and beyond .
This objective is also supported by my group , and I should like to thank my colleague Bartho Pronk , who was responsible for our preliminary work on this report , but is unable to be present with us here today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that this is a very important report that we should not be dealing with on a Friday morning , but that often seems to be the way with these kinds of issues .
I should like to begin with the last point made by the rapporteur , who called for an article on non-discrimination to be included in the Treaty .
Parliament has produced some excellent recommendations for a balanced nondiscrimination article in the Treaty , but I am most concerned that our proposals will not be adopted as they stand at the IGC , on the pretext that it is too costly to extend the Treaty to cover the disabled .
I find this outrageous .
If we have anti-discrimination provisions which apply across the Union , there can be no question of distortion of competition , and so I would urge the Commission to do everything it can to get this through , because it really is the most important thing that we could do for the disabled .
The right to access is extremely important for the disabled - access to work , access to education , access to transport - and it is for the most part the responsibility of the Member States to ensure this .
The Union can only set an example through its various programmes , and I think we have managed to do this fairly well up to now .
I would draw your attention to another important aspect here , which was also mentioned by the rapporteur : the possibilities offered by the information society for our policy on the disabled .
The disabled can benefit enormously from the new communication technologies , though they may also present an extra obstacle in that they can be difficult to access .
But I see it as an ideal application for these new technologies , which could also give the disabled greater scope for becoming more involved in many social processes .
But we need to work together to make it possible , and that is why I think that the use of information technologies should form part of the Commission 's rolling action programme .
Mr President , I believe the problem of disabled people is in fact a more fundamental one than has been described today .
Mrs Schmidbauer is quite right : we need a proper legal basis for social programmes , we need a clause on non-discrimination , we need what Mr Schiedermeier emphasized once again - coordination of national policies - and a high-level group of experts would also be extremely helpful .
A broader issue is also involved here , however , not just so-called prejudices and difficulties , but a questioning of our society as a meritocracy , as an immense Darwinian mechanism of social selection in which more and more people are constantly being filtered out , and in which this relentless process of selection is also still being ideologically charged .
To put an end once and for all to the temptation to construct ideologies from this , whereby the high achievers are sectioned off from the less worthy elements of life , we should in fact take our society forward - at least outside the business world - on the basis that everyone contributes according to his abilities and is cared for according to his needs .
I think we owe that to disabled people !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the excellent report by Mrs Schmidbauer and the work on this subject in general are also extremely important because it is quite simply a fact that when it comes to equality of opportunity for disabled people , large areas of Europe are lagging far behind other parts of the world , especially the United States , Canada and Australia .
I should like to take up just a few points .
This subject is covered most unsatisfactorily by Article 235 .
It really is therefore necessary for a new programme to take a rights-based approach , fully involving disabled people and their parents .
I too see no contradiction between a disability policy which is geared to integration and equality of opportunity and a specific disability programme .
On the contrary , I believe that the disability programme can help to achieve the goal of equality of opportunity .
However , something which does not emerge properly either from the Commission 's communication or the committee 's report is the fact that disabled people are in particular also fully entitled to have their share of pleasure , happiness and enjoyment .
In future , therefore , we shall need to address the question of fully involving disabled people in the areas of culture , sport , tourism and politics .
For example , the wonderful ' Special Olympics ' movement , which comes from the USA and was founded by the Kennedy family , is one that you need to have experienced in order to understand just what it means for these disabled adults and children , how it gives them the opportunity to experience sporting competition , to be happy and to exist as full individuals in our society .
Another topic is the scope for deaf people to become involved in politics .
Here in Parliament , we have interpretation into all our languages .
But who thinks of the fact that deaf people should also have a right to be able to take part in political events ?
For example , the political movement which I represent here has for some years now also provided interpretation for deaf people at a number of events .
This is another area that we should tackle .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her report and , together with the rapporteur , welcome the Commission 's communication particularly the fact that the concept of mainstreaming has been adopted .
I welcome it all the more because it has been brought to my attention that , at the UN 's annual general meeting , they set up a special joint committee to focus on women , children and the disabled .
All three groups are particularly vulnerable and distinct .
The norm is able-bodied males .
The rest of us are exceptions to this norm .
Mainstreaming puts an end to this .
As a practical guide , mainstreaming means that special requirements are incorporated into the general , in other words that we make the extraordinary part of the ordinary .
This is the antithesis of segregation and removal of the strange or different to special reservations .
Mainstreaming reduces the need for special solutions , and in this way we are able to prevent the isolation and separation of the disabled .
To put it another way : the disabled must travel along the broad avenues , and not be diverted off into side streets and blind alleys .
I would like to bring out three main points .
First of all the responsibility of the majority .
Ten percent of EU citizens are disabled .
They represent a minority , and a minority without power .
This ten percent is completely dependent on what the 90 % majority decide .
We must all be conscious of this responsibility .
That is why mainstreaming is important .
So that we no longer have this 90 / 10 situation .
Secondly I would like to stress the special problems connected with early-onset disability , that affecting children and young people , and the consequences of these disabilities for entry to the employment market , and to stress that the EU 's education programme must also be for the disabled .
Thirdly I would like to stress that if freedom of movement in Europe is to be a reality for the disabled , we need a wholly different commitment from the one we have today .
Mr President , there are 37 million disabled people living in the EU .
That is five times the entire population of Austria and around 10 % of the population of the European Union as a whole .
This is a substantial number of people , 37 million of them , who have to be integrated , and who are therefore already seen as a fringe group .
Let me put a question : how many AIDS sufferers are there in the EU ?
Certainly not 37 million , but the population nevertheless has a greater awareness of the problems of AIDS sufferers than those of disabled people .
Do you know why this should be ?
I wonder if we have not failed to use advertising campaigns and sympathetic representatives from public life to generate the same amount of interest for disabled people as we have for other fringe groups in society .
Is it not also because people are all too easily tempted to suppress these so-called problems and close their eyes to them ?
Ultimately , does this not result in a certain lack of interest on the part of donors and the general public , when it comes to opening their wallets ?
However , we can also see from the example of AIDS the success and the widespread impact which can be achieved in the population by a good campaign .
Only when an awareness of the everyday problems of these disabled people has been created in the public at large do support programmes really make sense .
Simply calling for a non-discrimination clause as regards disabled people - even though I am in favour of it - only has a point and is only worth the paper it is written on if the population sees disabled people not as a fringe group , but as part of itself .
Mr President , I very much welcome the Commission 's communication and the report which Barbara Schmidbauer has produced on behalf of Parliament in response to that communication .
At various times over the years Members are asked to take up a subject , produce perhaps a single report or opinion on that subject and then move on to new subject areas .
That is not the case with Barbara Schmidbauer .
She has devoted a lifetime of work to the issues of disabled people , working with disabled people , and I would like to thank her sincerely for her work on behalf of this Parliament .
( Applause ) I believe that one valid test of the well-being of any society is the respect that society gives to the fundamental rights of all its citizens .
If we look around this European Union of ours we will see that we are not respecting the rights of disabled people .
The greater part of the job needs to be done at Member State level but clearly the effort varies considerably from Member State to Member State .
At European Union level , as Barbara has said , we do not even at the moment have a legal base to allow a continuation of the work that we have undertaken hitherto .
It really is a shame in my view that the Commission has decided that the first programme it will abandon in the face of the difficulties over Article 235 is the programme in favour of disabled people .
If ministers wish to block a programme in favour of disabled people we should pass them that programme and allow them to expose the fact that they are to blame for that blocking .
As things stand the Commission is allowing itself to be accused of being involved in that blocking mechanism .
Our sincerest hope , of course , has to be that the Intergovernmental Conference will come up with a new programmatic legal base that will allow work to recommence in this area .
Johanna Boogerd-Quaak has referred to the importance of information and communication technologies as a way of improving the lives of people with disabilities .
That is also very important .
If these technologies can dispel the notions of geographic peripherality , it is even more important that they are used to dispel the notion of isolation , of marginalization , of people with disabilities .
But for that to work we need considerable investment in hardware , in adaptations to existing hardware and new software and training to allow disabled people to take advantage of these technologies .
I will finish with what I mentioned a short while ago , namely that we must hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will come up with a new programmatic legal base .
We must also hope that we will see a new nondiscrimination clause in the Treaty .
We have a right to expect , not just hope for these things , and if our leaders do not come up with them they should not be surprised if we as Members of this House refuse to be part of the sales force going out trying to sell a set of Treaty changes that do not respect the rights and concerns of the people that we represent .
Mr President , there are approximately 37 million disabled people in the European Union , about 10 % of the total EU population .
Yet these 37 million people feel excluded and irrelevant to the European Union .
Disabled people are invisible in the Treaties ; a provision in the Treaty is vital if the rights associated with European citizenship , such as freedom of movement and freedom to provide and receive services are to become a reality for disabled people according to a document entitled ' Invisible citizens ' .
There is a huge disability lobby in the European Union .
Disabled people are becoming angry at the lack of attention that they get .
Even the fact that we have the debate on a Friday when we know there is poor attendance shows the lack of concern that we feel for disabled people .
Parliament should have ensured it received maximum coverage in the middle of the week .
I would like to thank both the Commission for their very good document and also Mrs Schmidbauer for her very sensitive and thoughtful report .
I entirely concur with all the conclusions in it , but I particularly call for an article on disability rights in the Treaty .
The Commission must put its money where its mouth is and actually fund some sensible programmes for disabled people .
There is supposed to be free movement of workers in the European Union under Article 48 , yet disabled people have very little chance of being able to exercise this full right unless something is done to enhance their status and their capacity to work in the European Union .
I therefore urge and plead with the Commission : please do something positive as a result of this debate and this vote today .
Mr President , the Commission would like to congratulate Mrs Schmidbauer on and thank for her excellent report on equality of opportunity for people with disabilities .
It is particularly pleasing to note that the Community 's three political bodies , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , share the same views on the philosophy underpinning human rights and equal opportunities as expressed in your report and your resolution .
The Commission communication was based on the White Paper on European Social Policy .
The Commission announced its intention of drawing up a suitable proposal taking into account the recommendations of the United Nations concerning the disabled .
This is an important factor in ensuring that EU policy is consistent with international developments .
The objective , as stated a few times in this Chamber today , is to move on from paternalism towards a discussion of the rights of the disabled .
In that sense , the Commission communication is the cornerstone of a new strategy .
Coming back to the report by Mrs Schmidbauer , the Commission shares her view on the positive outcome of the HELIOS programme , which cleared the way for cooperation at Community level with disabled persons .
It has made a contribution to analysing the problems , ensuring proper rewards for the results achieved and disseminating information on the most worthwhile experience gained .
The experience gained in the course of the programme has illustrated the continuing need for a political strategy with regard to the disabled at Community level as well .
The Commission is considering the possibility of submitting a formal legislative proposal to Parliament and the Council , hence the vital need to analyse as a matter of priority the results of HELIOS II , along with the results of pilot projects under way this year and preparatory measures .
As you know , the 1997 budget makes such measures possible .
Two weeks ago , the Commission published a communication giving precise instructions as to how the appropriations are to be used .
It is not always easy for disabled people to participate in all areas of Community policy and much work has still to be done in order to arrive at a satisfactory situation .
The full involvement of disabled people is one of the key features of the new strategy drawn up by the Commission , which has cooperated closely with the European Forum of Disabled People , and all appropriate steps will be taken to ensure that support for that Forum continues .
I should like to thank the author of the report , the committee and all the Members who have contributed to this vitally important discussion on policy concerning the disabled .
The debate is closed .
We shall proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
The citizen dimension of the European Union makes it essential for everyone in the Union to have the same civil and social rights and the same freedoms .
The European Union , which has 37 million disabled persons , must evolve still further to reach a state of equality for all .
Most people who are disabled want to live a life of independence and to have a job .
Mrs Schmidbauer 's report on the Commission communication on the equality of opportunity for people with disabilities has certain gaps as regards the setting up of a real European policy for the disabled .
Even though the Commission communication does to its credit , break from the paternalistic approach adopted for far too long , it cannot overcome the problem posed by Article 235 of the Treaty .
In fact the Commission communication does not indicate whether there will be other programmes once HELIOS II is developed - the current programme for the disabled .
A legal basis must therefore be decided at the intergovernmental conference in order to enable the Council to vote by qualified majority , no longer unanimously , within the social sphere .
Moreover , the ' inclusion principle ' intended to bring the equality of opportunity dimension into all structural programmes , must not make it impossible to pursue specific programmes .
The programmes must , on the one hand , place the accent on involving the disabled in the making of decisions which concern them and , on the other , developing new information technologies which make the lives of disabled people easier .
Integration in developing countries
The next item is the report ( A4-0086 / 97 ) by Mr Needle , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission - European Community support for regional economic integration efforts among developing countries ( COM ( 95 ) 0219 - C4-0260 / 95 ) .
Mr President , the Committee on External Economic Relations welcomes the excellent report by Mr Needle .
My colleague Mr Dimitrakopoulos , for whom I am deputizing here today , has also drawn up an excellent opinion which you will find in the same document . In this , he explains in great detail that regional integration does not conflict with the integration of world trade , but quite the opposite .
I think one has to make that point , because the successful regional cooperation which we have after all developed as a model here in Europe is constantly being questioned by globalization fanatics , who see it as conflicting with a worldwide system .
In this context , I would point out that the movement for European unity between the wars - the Pan-European movement - had two opponents : on the one hand the nationalists , and on the other the extreme supporters of the League of Nations , who claimed at the time that regional alliances were superfluous and that a world order should immediately be created .
We are having these same debates again today .
Interestingly , some people in Europe - where we support the regional alliance - are demanding that regional alliances of this kind should not be encouraged elsewhere in the world .
We in the European Union should not give our backing to this misjudgement .
Regional cooperation can put right many things which were done on behalf of Europe or by Europeans .
In Africa , artificial states have been created , and regional cooperation is a way of reconciling the ethnic problems which arise because these artificial lines were drawn .
Refugee flows can be controlled on a regional basis , as was done in an exemplary way in Thailand at the time of the war in Cambodia , or in Pakistan during the war in Afghanistan , when millions of people were assembled near their homeland - with our support , but on the spot - and from there could be more easily reintegrated into the structures of their native country .
So regional cooperation helps to bring about peace , and we therefore have to support it .
We must not do this by producing any kind of Utopian alliances or artificial creations , we must support it - and this is made very clear in the report - on the basis of natural trade flows , traditional links , and also common interests .
Because the fact is that a common policy does not just involve a common past - as is always conjured up nostalgically - but also a common future .
And we can shape that common future in the developing regions by encouraging the regional forces which are cooperating there : not by giving any kind of lectures , but through helping them to help themselves .
Mr President , regional integration is one of the fundamental causes of change in the world order today .
This report singles out economic integration in particular , although it is clear that for every integration process aimed at well-balanced , sustainable development with a human face , integration must be based above all else on clear political will and decisions .
The scope and effectiveness of many regional economic integration initiatives are limited because of a lack of such solid political backing , and because the relevant political and economic players are not directly involved .
At the same time , the establishment of a regional economic integration area must be underpinned by reliable economic structures and a real willingness to create a common market .
When it comes to integration among developing countries , the role of international donors - and in particular , as far as we are concerned , the European Union - is of fundamental importance in helping to shape a system that matches up to international standards , providing for access to resources and transfer of know-how , without which many projects are bound to fail .
The backdrop here is of course the globalization of the economy and trends towards the liberalization of international trade .
However , as we are aware , market forces alone cannot solve the problems of the poorest and most remote countries ; on the contrary , they often tend to widen the gulf between the richest and poorest areas of the world .
It is possible and more beneficial to integrate the world economy by establishing areas for the development of South-South economic , trading and political relations .
Support for establishing and encouraging institutional and human potential in the developing countries is likewise of fundamental importance .
We know very well , however , that domestic and international efforts in these countries must be directed above all towards combating poverty and satisfying the primary needs of the populations .
That is why development cooperation and regional integration must go hand in hand .
Of course , there are no across-the-board solutions , and the rapporteur , Mr Needle , was right to point that out .
Moreover , I should like to compliment him on his excellent work .
Even though , as I was saying , there are no across-the-board solutions , it is only through regional integration that the developing countries can hope to play a specific , important and autonomous role in international economic and political relations , and that is why it represents a top priority for our cooperation policies .
Mr President , it is very encouraging to see that there is increasing cooperation between groups of countries in various areas of the world .
On the American continent we have the Andean Pact and Mercosur , in Africa there are excellent examples in West Africa and the south of the continent , while in Asia the ASEAN group is growing in strength and the Pacific Forum is becoming more prominent .
We could claim , in fact , that the European Community , now the European Union , has been an excellent export , and that our successful cooperation in Western Europe has been an example to the rest of the world .
The formation of these regional cooperation associations is also a sign that the countries concerned are becoming less dependent on Europe and the United States , say , and that the regional independence of these developing areas is increasing .
That is a very good thing , and has been one of the major objectives of our development cooperation efforts in the West .
The question now is how to prepare ourselves for this regional cooperation in developing areas , and how we can promote it .
The Commission document puts forward a number of good ideas here , and Mr Needle makes a number of excellent suggestions in his report .
I should like to pick out a few points which my group finds particularly important .
First , now that there is increasing cooperation between developing countries it is even more important that the donor countries should also work together more .
This means that there must be closer alignment between the 15 Member States on development cooperation , both in Brussels and in the embassies in the developing countries themselves .
Fixed structures need to be established for this as soon as possible by the Commission , which has already launched a number of pilot projects on the subject .

Secondly , as Mr Posselt also pointed out , this is not just about traditional development aid , it is also about the trade relations between the Union and its 15 Member States on the one hand and the developing countries and their cooperation associations on the other , and this is another field in which there needs to be closer alignment at regional level .
The recent agreements with ASEAN were a good example of a joint approach .
However , I would also draw attention to the problems which the SADC area is experiencing .
In talks on a new trade agreement , South Africa asked for greater consideration to be given to the SADC area , in other words to its neighbouring states , and we have to respect this .
There is growing trade integration between South Africa and its neighbours , and we cannot just ignore it .
Thirdly , not all issues are suitable for a regional approach .
Things like infrastructure , energy supply , water management and trade relations are typical examples of issues that go beyond borders , whereas aid for schools , hospitals and so on is a local matter .
So the Commission needs to be careful in selecting which issues need a joint approach and which are best left to be dealt with at local level .
One final point .
It is , of course , important that development programmes in developing countries are established not just at national level , but also regionally .
This is what happens now in the SADC area and in the Pacific Forum , and it is an approach that we must support .
I have identified some of my group 's priority concerns , but I think that the approach recommended by the Commission and Mr Needle is an excellent one , and we are therefore happy to support the resolution .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his report and stress three points based on the fact that , in terms of development aid , Denmark is among the main contributors , but at the same time has decided , as a matter of principle , that 50 % should go to multilateral assistance .
Firstly , the absolute need for greater coordination , not only between the EU and Member States , but also between the EU and multilateral organizations .
Secondly - and I am pleased that the rapporteur also addressed this issue - the need to pay far greater attention to sustainable environmental development , in actions and not only in words .
And thirdly , that those of us involved in regional development strive for a high level of self-sufficiency .
Because this will be the best way to achieve sustainable development in terms of the economy , employment and the environment .
We must do this , even if it goes beyond our own commercial interests .
Mr President , as regards regional economic integration , the Commission 's objectives are to ensure that there are sustainable development prospects on the one hand and that developing countries are better integrated into the world economy on the other .
We unreservedly support the first objective , save only to point out the need for these societies to move towards democracy , despite the marked preference of the international bodies for strong regimes , which guarantee social stability .
The situation in Zaire reminds us that this social stability is never durable .
Moreover , the interweaving of regional economies already noted in certain areas , helps to strengthen trade between countries in the south and then to fight poverty and consolidate peace and finally to help new aspects of solidarity to develop .
Not all regional areas are of course in a position to embark upon a process of integration , but it is in all their interests to enhance their relations as regards cooperation for various reasons .
First , historical reasons .
We know that the present borders are essentially the result of post-colonial agreements and that they do not necessarily correspond to a traditional scheme of occupation of the territories .
Secondly , for ecological reasons , because watersheds and other geographical features are no substitute for borders .
Finally , for economic reasons , by virtue of the complementary nature of their systems and also , of course , in order to make economies of scale .
The European Union in general and the Commission in particular would be well advised to pay special attention to the role of the outermost regions and specifically the overseas departments thereof the better to structure its economic and development policies and of course the better to implement the funds such as the ERDF and the EDF .
As regards the second objective - better integration of developing countries in the world economy - I am much more sceptical .
Not only because I am not a fanatical supporter of the ultra-liberalism seen in international trade relations , but also because I believe that there will be significant unwelcome consequences , in particular because there is the risk of stultifying speculation to the detriment of sustainable development and also because there is the risk that integration will become an end in itself , in its own right , so that it turns into a mechanism for financial aspiration .
I do not think those are aims which we can include in our development policies .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Needle , has produced a very interesting report on regional economic integration in response to a Commission communication on the subject .
Regional integration is designed to eliminate obstacles to the movement of goods , services , capital and people between developing countries , and it appears very similar to the objectives that we have in the European Community .
But regional integration between developing countries cannot be modelled on European integration .
Developing countries are at a completely different stage in their economic development from the EU Member States , and so a different approach is needed .
An interesting experiment with the West African currency , the CFA , which was intended to stabilize currencies , actually backfired when it became clear that the value of the CFA had collapsed .
Regional integration among the very poorest countries still seems a very risky undertaking to me .
Such countries would perhaps do better to limit themselves to cooperating on issues of common interest .
If a developing country reaches the stage where it looks likely to have a firm position on the world market , and if there are other similar countries in the same region , then further integration would be justified .
But if this is pushed through too early it could harm all concerned .
I wished to make this point , because it is something that I think has not been given sufficient attention .
Mr President , because of the fact that , besides our own rich countries , there are unfortunately many countries which have to rely on the help of others , our western industrialized societies have a social duty to provide aid .
In the past , attempts have often been made to supply this aid purely in the form of financial support .
However , I should like to propose here that in future , development aid should be implemented to a far greater extent than before in the form of specific projects and economic links with the donor countries , so as to ensure a useful kind of support .
This could be done through a substantially upgraded transfer of know-how , for example , whereby the countries and regions in need can be given help to help themselves , a concept to which attention has already rightly been drawn by Mr Posselt .
Our debts and responsibilities towards the poor countries of the world are not absolved simply by providing injections of money .
The question should not be how much we have given , but who has actually benefited from it , and what it has achieved .
All too often , this form of development aid seems to be a kind of moral purchasing of freedom from responsibility , rather than what really helps the people of these countries , namely aid which is targeted , project-related and , above all , effective .
Timely and useful development aid serves both the donor and the recipient countries , not least in terms of avoiding wider political conflicts .
Because the fact is that poverty , need and lack of resources are the most significant causes of war .
Seen in this light , effective development aid is a key factor in preventive peace maintenance , and can therefore also be interpreted as help for the donor countries themselves .
Mr President , in my opinion , the report focuses more closely than the Commission communication on the practical problems which economic integration may encounter , above all in the poorer developing countries .
In that connection , sub-Saharan Africa constitutes a separate , particularly problematically area .
The number of organizations is large , and relations between them are poorly coordinated .
Expectations regarding the ability of these organizations to foster economic integration and development are often too high , particularly as regards the amount of time this may take .
As the report correctly points out , the countries involved here are fighting endemic poverty , so that the programmes designed to combat that poverty will continue to play a vital role in the overall scheme of support .
In theory , the European Union has a good chance of fostering sound economic integration , provided it remembers that integration as practised by the European industrialized countries cannot serve as a model for the integration of the developing countries .
The report quite rightly emphasizes the fact that it is not enough to highlight only the economic dimension .
Due account must also be taken , on a sustainable basis , of environmental aspects , a viewpoint I fully share with the rapporteur .
I should also like to emphasize the need to take political factors into account .
Even after the armed struggle for power has ended , economic tensions are accompanied by political tensions , including the rivalry for political leadership .
This is a point which must be taken into account if sensible , effective support is to be given to the integration process .
In the context of support for the economic integration of the developing countries , the European Union 's main task cannot be to open up broader markets for its own Member States , thereby hampering the development of the economy and production in the developing countries .
Measures designed to encourage economic integration must not place too much faith in the power of market forces : the latter may improve macroeconomic statistics , but at the cost of even greater suffering for the poorest sections of society .
In my opinion , support for the economic integration of the developing countries must continue to be guided by these ideas .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mr Needle for his excellent report , which has given us a great deal in terms of the economic information it provides .
However , I should like to look at the issue more from the political point of view .
Mr Linser has rightly said that this project , as Mr Needle presents it , is for the most part in Europe 's interest .
We have an interest in maintaining peace , and peace is certainly not assured .
The fact is that if one looks at the developing countries , one has to say that there are time bombs ticking away everywhere .
We in Europe are just not sufficiently aware of the fact that there are currently 16 wars going on in Africa .
There are conflicts large and small .
But people only talk about those wars which are reported in the press , and not those on which there are no reports .
Even worse , what is taking shape in the Pacific , the war between Papua New Guinea on the one hand and Bougainville on the other , is one of the cruellest of wars , but who talks about it ?
Who is aware of it , even though it is of crucial economic importance ?
This is a challenge for us .
Moreover , we keep on hearing that there is not enough money for development aid .
I think the money is there , but it is being badly distributed and badly used .
People will go on saying that we must first help the poorest of all , and then the others .
I think the reverse would be more appropriate .
First the countries on the verge of development must be helped over the threshold , since the broader the shoulders which carry the development aid , the better that aid will be for all .
Finally , we must continue to organize this development aid in a rational way .
That means first applying development aid at the level of the people , since while major projects are good in terms of bringing areas together , it is the smaller projects which actually bring development .
Moreover , development aid above all means developing people , and in this respect it is still doing very badly .
Without human infrastructure , we shall not make any progress .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent job and thanking him for taking into account some of the key elements of the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations .
In particular , I would like to refer to the obvious but important fact that support for regional economic integration amongst developing countries needs to be based on the realities facing developing countries in the individual regions in question .
This requires the European Union to have a highly differentiated approach to regional economic integration and the Commission to adopt supportive measures which are appropriate to the specific circumstances facing these regional groupings .
Against this background , regional economic integration per se should be seen as only one component of a process of building up a regional community of interest on which closer regional cooperation and , subsequently , regional integration can be developed .
This means that equal attention should be paid to the provision of support to other forms of regional cooperation which serve to foster and develop a community of interest , such as cooperation in transport , communications , energy etc .
I would like to stress here that this will require the Commission services to pay far greater attention to the management of programmes of support for functional cooperation in those regions of the developing world where major obstacles exist to the effective initiation of regional economic integration .
Turning from the report to the actual Commission communication , I find it somewhat surprising that in the communication on support to regional economic integration , the Commission argues that a strong case can be made for moving away from unilateral preferences to greater reciprocity between industrialized and developing countries .
Colleagues will be aware of the concern recently expressed by the southern African region over a proposed European Union-South Africa free trade area .
The Commission has recently acknowledged that moves towards a southern Africa FTA will have an effect on the customs revenues collected by developing countries - in many instances , the finances of these countries are in a precarious condition .
Finally , moving towards reciprocal trade preferences could , in certain countries , significantly undermine industrialization processes , which have only relatively recently got under way .
That is why it is crucial that the specific consequences for developing countries of the regions entering into an FTA should be fully assessed before any serious consideration is given to the introduction of greater reciprocity .
The effectiveness of our policy goals will be largely determined by our understanding of these crucial issues .
Mr President , as rapporteur for the ACP Joint Assembly on regional cooperation within the Lomé countries , I give a very warm welcome to this excellent and timely report by Mr Needle .
I want to concentrate on Africa .
I too warmly welcome the Commission 's communication as we move into this global economy situation .
It is a good basis for discussion , hopefully on a partnership basis with ACP nations .
The strength of many African states can only be developed on the basis of good economic regional cooperation leading possibly to political integration at a later stage .
Africa has to accept it has to help itself ; salvation is in trade not aid .
But we in the EU must assist in building that new economic strength through regional structures .
In a global context the continent of Africa , through the strength of its regions , should logically next be in line for investment from the developed nations , but without political stability and good governance that just will not happen .
Regional cooperation , as has already been seen , can help with conflict prevention and I believe it is only the African nations themselves who can bring about peace and stability by influencing their neighbours .
If the Commission is moving towards post-Lomé regional aid as the new way forward , the fundamental question must be what is the make-up of those regions and how can we focus .
Africa is littered with regions and subregions , with many nations being intertwined with a number of regions .
This to my mind cannot continue and I hope the Commission , in cooperation with Lomé countries , is seriously looking at a feasible structure that is historically , socially and institutionally a grouping that gives a sound basis to work from .
If we do that I believe that all the detail in this report can follow .
Mr President , in congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent report , could I say that this is very important indeed , particularly for the European Parliament , because of the history of the European Union and I would like to build on the point that both Mr Habsburg and Mr Corrie have mentioned in relation to violence , conflict and war .
If we look at Southern Africa we see that the driving force for the launching of SADC was a determination by the front-line states to cooperate , to show solidarity in a determination to get rid of the brutality and the violence of the apartheid regime .
I am sure this was helped by the positive response we saw from various parts of the world , and especially led by the European Parliament , that decided , against the wishes of many Member State governments to support the United Nations ' isolation of South Africa and to set up a special fund using our budget provisions here .
Support from this region for southern Africa is something that could be looked at for Nigeria , the Western Sahara , and Papua / New Guinea .
We always need to remember our special responsibilities and opportunities .
It is not so long ago that the late President Mitterrand reminded us that nationalism means war .
We know that the driving force , that successful economic cooperation in western Europe was a determination by a small number of nation states that the history of violence , the history of mass cemeteries and concentration camps would not continue and we could do something about this .
This is why I am very pleased that Mr Needle has mentioned conflict prevention , he has mentioned the political objectives and I would welcome as he does a follow-up by the Commission to put this whole question of regional integration in a much broader political basis in the future .
Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation for the quality of Parliament 's report which , to a large extent , endorses the analysis and recommendations of the Commission 's communication while also articulating a number of crucial issues .
Parliament 's report reflects the recent evolution of thinking on the subject .
The discussion is particularly welcome at a time when , for a variety of reasons , the chances of success of regional integration efforts among developing countries are greater than in the past .
On the other hand since the communication was forwarded to Parliament in June 1995 regionalism has been increasingly gaining credibility as a useful development device .
The WTO and a number of development agencies now recognize that regionalism can be a useful stepping-stone towards integration into the world economy provided the regions thus continue to maintain an open stance with respect to the rest of the world .
There is thus an increased possibility for effective donor coordination - as called for by Parliament - that should enhance the results of our support .
At the same time in some developing regions the situation as regards the preconditions for successful regional integration has also progressed .
Economic adjustment policies are beginning to reap rewards in many areas .
In many parts of the world the rule of law , good governance and the political situation in general have improved even though there are still too many trouble spots .
It is also an appropriate moment to revisit our recommendations in the light of recent experiences , in particular in the context of our ongoing operational work .
Having said that , I should like to comment briefly on two points raised by Parliament 's report .
One is the equitable distribution of the benefits of integration .
As Parliament 's report rightly points out the Commission 's recommendations are compatible with the objective of providing the poorest countries ' populations with a stronger position to fight the endemic poverty which still plagues them .
The financial and technical support provided is meant to contribute to ensuring that economic integration is beneficial to all the countries concerned .
The channelling of support to needy parts of society is facilitated by the link to the structural adjustment support which focuses on the social sectors .
In practice special attention will have to depend on ensuring that this assistance does in fact filter down to all sections of society .
The other point I should like to comment on is the link between environmental considerations and regional economic integration .
The communication focuses on regional economic integration which is considered not as an end in itself but rather as part of a strategy to achieve sustainable development .
Environmental consideration should form a key part of the overall strategy .
At present these considerations are fully taken into account in the context of the functional forms of regional cooperation , for example in the struggle against desertification and the preservation of tropical forests .
In conclusion , I should like to recall that , in my view , while regional economic integration is a necessary step for small developing economies to participate effectively in the globalized economy , it is not an easy process .
It is therefore crucial to put forward reasonable objectives in order to avoid costly failures .
The Commission is ready to continue its lead role on the subject in collaboration with the Member States and other interested development agencies , taking into account the concerns and recommendation of the European Parliament .
The debate is closed .
We shall proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Crisis in the rice sector
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0020 / 97-0-0034 / 97 ) by Mrs Fraga Estevez , Mr Colino Salamanca , Mr Fantuzzi , Mr Filippi , Mr Happart , Mr Ebner , Mr Jové Peres , Mr Lambraki , Mr Campos , Mr Arias Cañete , Mrs Redondo Jiménez , Mr Rosado Fernandes and Mr Vallvé , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Commission , on the crisis in the rice sector .
We are holding today 's debate on rice because there is a most serious situation in that sector which has only worsened in recent months and which is affecting both producer countries and countries where rice is processed .
The sad reality is that 70 % of the amount produced is still unsold and will therefore have to go into intervention , which is very exceptional in this sector .
Why have we got into such a situation ?
In the first place the abysmal talks relating to this sector within the GATT Uruguay Round had disastrous consequences which it is difficult to put right .
Secondly the entry into force of Council Decision 91 / 482 on the association of overseas countries and territories brought the influx of imports up to insupportable levels .
The result was that during the last marketing year over 200 000 tonnes of prepared basic rice came into Community territory and the amounts for the first 3 months of the new marketing year show a disconcerting steady increase .
As if the situation was not already disastrous enough , Mr President , the European Commission proceeded in January this year , against the opinion of producers and processors to grant a 25 % reduction in customs duties on a quota of 32 000 tonnes of rice originating in Egypt - that in addition to the 25 % reduction already granted to that country .
All these combined problems gave rise , at the instigation of the Italian and Spanish governments , to the introduction of a Commission safeguard clause last February as regards the importation of rice originating in the overseas countries and territories which will apply until 30 April .
Finally we must draw attention in this context to the attitude of the United States of America which are constantly and unacceptably blackmailing the Commission in order to obtain even greater advantages for their rice .
Any such concession , Mr President , would immediately threaten the system of trade between the Community and third countries wiping out Community preference and actually exposing Community production to world competition .
I should therefore , Mr Commissioner , like to put one or two proposals to you for alleviating the situation in the Community rice sector .
First a definitive maximum quantity must be set on which further customs concessions may be granted and that quantity must be compatible with the needs of the current Community situation as regards production .
In the second place , we cannot give in to the blackmail of the United States ; that is something which can never be justified and which moreover goes beyond the scope of the Uruguay Round .
And I have to say in this respect , Mr Commissioner , that I have heard that at the last meeting of the Commission 's Cereals Management Committee a draft regulation was approved intended to set up a system for the refunding of import duty in the rice sector provided the Americans withdrew the action brought on 13 February before the World Trade Organization against the Community system for the importation of rice and cereals .
I urge you , Mr Commissioner , on behalf of this House to resist the implementation of this project which again runs counter to the interests of this Community sector .
We also ask that , abiding by the ceilings which GATT places on subsidized exports , the 75 000 tonnes not used last year should be added to the figure for this year , which might make the market significantly more flexible .
Food aid might provide a further outlet for a certain amount of rice , which would get rid of some surpluses .
Finally , the common organization of the market in rice might need to be reviewed to bring the three-year plan forward a year , that is to move directly to maximum aid and minimum price intervention .
These , Mr Commissioner , are some of the ideas we wished to put forward and we hope that the Commission will put them into practice if it really wants to solve the problems of a sector which is sorely afflicted by a crisis through no fault of its own , but owing to mistakes on the part of others - mistakes which we hope can be put right .
Mr President , the oral question raised by the honourable Members is indeed a topical one and has already been the subject of a number of discussions over the last few months .
The rice sector , after years of good progress , despite a drought affecting recent seasons , is again in a delicate situation on account of the abundant quantities available , some of which could enter into intervention .
The problem is due , on the one hand , to a very large harvest following the end of the drought in Spain and to very good climatic conditions in the other producer Member States and , on the other , to the increase in imports , based on preferential arrangements and the cut in protection at the frontier , resulting from the Uruguay Round agreements .
The Commission has , therefore , endeavoured to operate a cautious export policy in the early months of the marketing year in order to encourage sales within the Community .
By the end of March , more than half of the rice harvested in Italy - the Community 's largest rice producer - had been marketed but in the other Member States concerned , particularly Greece , the rate of sales is lower .
Although imports had increased by 21 % , on 18 March exports were 88 % up on the corresponding level last year and 28 % more rice had been supplied as food aid .
The reform of the rice sector introduced by Regulation No 3072 / 95 will not take effect until the 1997-1998 marketing year , when the intervention price will be cut by 5 % .
The reduction will reach 15 % in the 1999-2000 marketing year and that will make Community rice better able to compete with imported rice .
At the request of Italy and Spain , the Commission has applied a safeguard clause on imports of OCT rice .
These imports have risen considerably over the last five years .
The safeguard clause , valid for four months and limiting the duty-free imports to a total of 44 , 728 tonnes over that period , has contributed to reversing the downward trend in rice market prices .
However , market prices are still at levels below the intervention price and , therefore , the Commission decided last Wednesday that it intends to renew the safeguard clause .
At present , with the intervention period starting on 1 April , exports of Japonica rice are continuing and the Management Committee on 27 February issued two invitations to tender for Indica-type rice , one for husk rice for delivery to Réunion and the other for exports of parboiled rice .
These measures will help to improve the marketing of Community rice in the second half of the marketing year , thereby reducing the quantities that may potentially be offered for intervention .
Mr President , the Community has never shown much concern for the rice sector , which has always got by on its own , expanding without much support and standing on its own two feet .
It has seemed for some time , however , that deliberate moves are under way to chop off those feet , thereby stopping the sector in its tracks .
First there is the question of the OCT imports at zero duty , which are increasing out of all proportion and disrupting the internal market , then the new import quotas resulting from enlargement of the EU , then the agreements with the USA on the cumulative recovery system , and finally more quotas because of the new association agreements : all this makes for an explosive mix , which is already fuelling the rush to place Community production into intervention . This , to my mind , will create a massive vicious circle : a product imported with only superficial checks , the possibility of fraud , and higher costs to bale out internal production , for which it will be more difficult than before to find a market .
If that is the new CAP , Commissioner , then I am far from content .
The market is disappearing , and prices are depressed by decisions which have nothing whatsoever to do with the market .
What is more , the USA is enjoying a game of cat and mouse : it withdraws its appeal to the WTO on cereals and rice , and just as the Commission is about to adopt the regulation on the cumulative recovery system to give it almost complete satisfaction , it again makes the same appeal only a few days later .
Given what is happening in the rice sector , perhaps the Intergovernmental Conference currently under way could reword as follows Article 39 of the Treaty , which relates to the objectives of the CAP : the Community undertakes to comply with every diktat of the US foreign trade department .
There is in fact no doubt that the USA 's appeals to the WTO carry a thousand times more weight than the complaints and protests from our rice-growers .
Yesterday , as you said , the Commission decided to renew the safeguard clause beyond 30 April . I take note of that , but when will this whole business be settled once and for all by means of a sensible amendment of the Council decision on the association of the OCTs with the European Union ?
How can it be , Commissioner , that a single Member State can for so long block the efforts of the other fourteen to put right a system that is obviously not working , as the Court of First Instance has confirmed , and which does not even benefit the OCTs concerned ?
The presence of the Council presidency might perhaps have been more useful now than ever .
I note with some bitterness that the Council did not choose to attend today and reply to our oral question .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that Community solidarity is a serious matter ; otherwise we shall be obliged to agree with the director of Agence Europe , who stated in a recent editorial that free trade in agriculture is often a fig-leaf for selective generosity , in other words it is only practised when considered convenient .
Mr President , the common organization of the market in rice was reformed just over a year ago , striking a balance - which was seen as satisfactory by producers - between the need to protect European production and that to liberalize the sector .
But that balance , painstakingly reached in December 1995 , has been shattered by a succession of errors made in the drawing-up of trade agreements .
The Uruguay Round has already been mentioned , with a 25 % reduction in customs duties for Egypt , 300 000 tonnes from the OCTs , increased preferences for US imports and so on , added to which there are the 63 000 duty-free tonnes resulting from the accession of Austria , Finland and Sweden .
With precedents like these , one wonders what will become of European agriculture when we reach the second Uruguay Round and the EU is enlarged to include the CCEEs .
On several occasions , I have attacked the schizophrenia implicit in building up the EU 's agricultural policy while destroying its foreign trade policy .
I read in Agence Europe on 1 April that the Council of Agriculture Ministers appears to have detected this schizophrenia and is drawing up measures to improve the coordination of the Union 's trade and policy actions .
On rice , the Agriculture Ministers can show their consistency and their faith in the studies carried out by responding to the demands contained in the motion for a resolution that will be voted on at the end of this debate .
The resolution calls on the Commission to analyse the functioning of the COM .
To my mind , one valid purpose of this request is to identify the weaknesses in the Commission 's previous assessment of the quality of European rice .
It was said then that there was a future for Indica rice , but nothing was done to promote research into the production of quality grains in Europe , thereby perpetuating our dependence on the USA .
At the same time , Egypt - aided by the United States - has been developing yields and qualities to European standards and even beyond in the case of Japonica rice , offering it on the European market at a high quality standard and a competitive price .
In this way , countries like Italy are doubly penalized : because of the acknowledged limits to Indica , and the more recent freeze on research into Japonica .
The European Union must emerge from its political subordination to the United States in the field of international trade and protect its producers , whose interests all too often take second place behind those of the EU 's large public and private-sector importers .
Mr President , four speakers have taken the floor so far : one from Spain and three from Italy .
That alone , Commissioner , is a clear indication of where the main fears now lie as regards the incredible , untenable state of affairs in the rice sector .
Other speakers will of course come in later , but these two countries more than any others will have to pay the price for this shocking state of affairs if it is not remedied .
The quota concessions for rice which have been granted to third countries are , perhaps irrevocably , bringing ricegrowing to its knees , particularly in Italy , which as we all know is the largest producer and which has areas where for historical and traditional reasons this crop cannot be replaced by others .
The chronic shortcomings of the GATT have recently been compounded by the far from transparent rules on compensation for the three new EU Member States : according to EUROSTAT statistics , 63 000 tonnes of duty-free white rice and 20 000 tonnes at a duty of ECU 88 per tonne are the equivalent of some 31 % and 58 % of the surface areas planted in Europe , bearing in mind that the bulk is Indica rice .
All this is therefore conspiring , as has been pointed out , to throw Community production into crisis , submerged as it is by mountains of rice imported from the OCTs : 215 000 tonnes last year , 200 000 tonnes so far and , according to those in a position to make forecasts , 396 000 tonnes by the end of this year .
I too believe that the time has come to speak out clearly and firmly to the United States .
We no longer live in an age when such disputes were settled by declarations of war , so let us try to reach for treaties rather than arms , but quite frankly in other times that is what we would have resorted to .
The United States is accustomed , as it is now demonstrating , to dealing with its foreign relations in a high-handed way ; now the time has come to make the USA and its partners - such as the Dutch OCTs - understand that Europe will not put up with such outrageous conduct for much longer .
In this way , we shall also avoid considerable economic hardship .
This year we will in fact obtain less revenue from duty , and the cost of export refunds will increase , as will that of funding intervention buying .
We shall be spending ECU 28 million this year , Mr President ; last year we did not even spend one .
Mr President , the resolution before us contains a number of points which I support .
The rules introduced in 1991 for imports of processed rice should not mean that a particular group of farmers are the only ones who benefit , and I therefore feel that the Commission was entirely right to use the safeguard clause .
There are also a number of points in the resolution that I feel are a little too sweeping .
The House adopts many resolutions to help promote employment in poor countries and so forth , and this was one of the reasons why the 1991 rules were introduced .
I have not yet seen any report on the exact impact on employment in these overseas countries and territories , and I should like more information about this before I reach a final conclusion .
The resolution also talks about the need to give more rice as food aid , which would be very easy to do .
However , it has long been proved that if we dump our surpluses - in this case , rice - on the developing countries , it is their farmers who lose out .
I do not think it is right to offer them development aid while at the same time offloading as much as we can of our surpluses there .
So I have mixed feelings about this resolution : it contains some good points , but there are others with which I cannot agree .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the approval of the common organization of the market in rice and the return of normal weather conditions , this marketing year is the first which might be regarded , in terms of the value of the rice produced , as anything like normal .
Normality ends there , though , because for the past eight months roughly 70 % of Community rice production for the 1996 / 97 marketing year has remained unsold .
There are various reasons for this ; we must be clear about how we are to approach them .
With Community production back to normal , increasing importation of rice has saturated and put pressure on the market and lowered prices to an insupportable level for European producers , who are either compelled to sell their produce at less than cost prices , thus ruining themselves , or falling into financial ruin because they are not selling and are opting - or being forced - to place the crop in storage .
In Portugal , my country , the drop in price to the producer may reach levels of the order of 40 $ 00 , that is ECU 0.2 , per kilo .
The rice imported comes from different countries of origin .
One proportion of such rice is even envisaged in the provisions of existing regulations , respecting quotas and paying import duty .
The other proportion , which is directly responsible for worsening market conditions , comes above all from the overseas territories of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands . But that rice is not produced there ; those places merely act as transit points giving free access to the Community market earmarked for those territories .
The rice entering the European Union via this route is therefore an import of very dubious legality , it distorts the market and competition , causes the price to drop , and defrauds the Community budget of customs duties not collected .
The Commission decision to extend the restrictive measures on the importation of this rice , which have been in force for four months , beyond 30 April are therefore positive .
But how long will that extension last ?
Will the same amounts be imported as for the previous four-month period ?
How will the situation develop ?
What are the details of this decision ?
And what is the Netherlands Presidency going to do about this matter which is so close to home ?
Will it accept the Commission decision ?
Will it finally remove the obstacles to the possibility of drawing up an controlled importation scheme from those overseas territories ?
Or will it continue to play the role of an interested party , continuing to allow competition to be distorted and somewhat vague interests to be protected , leading in fact to the ruin of Community producers ?
Ladies and gentlemen , either rice imports must in fact be controlled and measures must be taken to this end with a view to future rice marketing years or this sector will probably not have any future in the European Union .
One further question closely bound up with this problem concerns the approximately 12 % drop in the monthly growth figures for rice , a proposal which appears in the new package of agricultural prices .
Such growth figures are essential for an agricultural marketing year to indicate the requirements for possible storage and placing on the market as a function of demand .
The Commission justifies this proposed reduction by pointing to the fall in the bank rates .
However , the bank rates has quite a different effect for the various agricultural products that they warrant different reductions and we wonder whether even the most significant of them is exactly likely to affect rice , or whether this unwelcome proposal be bound up with American pressure to remove the common organization of the market in rice already being used as a bargaining point for the dropping of the complaint lodged by the United States in the common organization of the market ?
And , speaking of bargaining points accepted by the Commission for the withdrawal of that complaint , some people say - and it has been in the news - that these include the recent decision to authorize the importation of 30 000 tonnes of barley with customs duties reduced by 50 % intended for the exclusive production of beer fermented in beech barrels .
I might tell you that , contrary to what the Commission said in reply to one member of my Group , there is only one factory in Europe producing such beer ; it is in England and is American owned .
Mr President , faced with such a picture , these examples and these doubts which have not been dispelled , we might rightly wonder whether the Commission is staunchly defending the interests of Europeans or , on the contrary , whether European Union decisions are in fact significantly influenced by outside interests ...
Mr Novo , let me remind you that it is not the Presidency which decides upon speaking time but the Members themselves .
When the time which you have allotted is up then I inform you , respectfully but clearly , with a couple of little taps with my gavel on the bench .
But I think you have gone on far longer than discretion would permit .
May I use this as an example to ask Mrs Aelvoet to speak on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament and to ask him to try to keep to the minute and a half allocated to him .
Mr President , the drought a few years ago led to greatly reduced rice harvests in a number of countries in Europe , which were offset by increasing imports from abroad .
Most of these came , and still come , from the United States .
What we are seeing now is that the European Union , fearing another tough fight with the United States in the World Trade Organization , is instead trying to force other countries from the developing areas to export less to the common market in Europe , while still allowing the United States freedom to continue its exports .
All this is to try to avoid conflict in the World Trade Organization .
We have not endorsed the joint motion for a resolution , not because we could not agree with anything it says , but because it contains certain fundamental flaws .
We entirely agree with the calls for a rigorous examination of the operation and efficiency of the World Trade Organization , though we know what the outcome is likely to be .
What we fundamentally object to are subsidized exports in themselves , since these lead to ecological and social dumping .
Mr President , the multiplicity of reasons which have given rise to the present confused situation -which are acknowledged in fact to be the Uruguay Round , the attitude of the United States within the World Trade Organization and certain preferential agreements - clearly show that there has been too little care but too much complacency in various sets of talks .
I personally would like to dwell a moment upon rice being sent via and processed in the overseas countries and territories by reminding Members that the Netherlands and its overseas territories and countries signed the Treaty of Rome and have therefore been part of the Community and the Union since 1957 .
Secondly , I would point out that the Union has taken certain measures to encourage the production of rice elsewhere and I want to reiterate what Mr Fantuzzi said when he mentioned just now the competition from rice coming from the overseas departments to point out that it was actually a European Union decision which launched rice production , particularly in Guyana .
In other words there is the problem of coherency between the Community economic policies on the one hand and the development policies on the other ; it is as well to remember that it is not a question , should there be a temporary setback in Europe , of setting up protective mechanisms elsewhere , then when the crisis is over , of considering that production might be destroyed with impunity .
Destructuring always entails costs - whether it be within the European Union or within the territories and countries with which the European Union is associated .
Finally I should like to suggest that using rice as food aid is a dangerous and pernicious approach since the effects of destructuring on the economies of the developing countries , of a food aid which is not suited to their eating habits on the one hand and which furthermore does not permanently take the place of local products .
Finally , Mr President , problems have their hierarchy and we must set things out in relative terms .
Let us not confuse any lack of unanimity between the European Union and the United States with the difficulties brought about by other less powerful partners .
Where I come from we have a saying to the effect that when two tortoises fight they know where they hurt each other .
There are countries which do not have the shell of the tortoise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rice production in the European Union has over recent years been subject to intense competition .
Unfortunately , the Commission and the Council have not resisted these pressures , having made numerous concessions within the scope of the GATT under pressure from the United States .
These pressures have led to an over-reduction of the Community preference .
It also needs to be pointed out on the other hand that the excessive freedom of access granted since 1991 to rice produced in the overseas countries and the overseas territories , which has caused imports to the European Union from these countries to multiply five-fold since then , rising from 58 000 tonnes in 1991 to 300 000 tonnes in 1996 .
Consequently the market in the European Union has been profoundly affected , with a marked fall in prices to the producer and in incomes in addition to the problems that over half of European production from the past marketing year is still waiting to be marketed .
This Parliament urges the Commission and the Council to take account of this difficult situation which is facing European Union rice producers and take the measures needed .
These should be focused on two major questions : on the one hand the review of the conditions for access for rice originating in overseas countries and territories and third countries and the fixing of import ceilings ; secondly , review of the conditions and concessions made to the United States and some non-member countries .
Finally , I want to underscore the fact that the sector needs some adjustments to the reform of the common organization of the market , which should in specific terms , provide growers with compensation for loss of income caused by any price falls due to commercial concessions made to non-member countries or territories , otherwise a distinction will have to be drawn between rice and other cereals or other arable crops .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , if courage could be imported through the overseas territories , even at high rates of import duty , none of this would be happening .
It is simply not possible to import courage , or to buy it at the supermarket and what the Commission and the Council really need is a spot of courage to face the American colossus , which with its array of weaponry - and this is shamefully never admitted - manages to frighten Ministers and Commissioners .
There is no explanation why Big Brother World Trade Organization should continue to orchestrate as it does all aspects of piracy .
We all know that kings of yore ennobled corsairs ; Pirates have become corsairs - handling rice , laundering it , ' processing ' it into European rice , not paying duties - as is also the case with concentrated wine must - invading us and almost placing us in a sickening , humiliating position , almost wanting a drought , almost wanting to have aid , almost wanting aid because we are growers ; it is a situation which the Commission and the Ministers should be ashamed of .
Neither can shame be bought and there is not much shame in societies which are completely losing their ethical values and which attempt , because of the wretched hunger for gold , to fight one another !
I think it is unacceptable that there should be no solidarity between the European countries to fight off unfair , albeit legal , competition , because not everything which is legal is moral , Mr Commissioner !
It is as well to remember that not everything which is legal is moral because the law often protects morally reprehensible activities , as unfortunately in our present situation .
This is a question of economics , not of specialists or technical experts .
This is a question of good people or bad people deciding the fate of an ever more decadent Europe !
Mr President , the Commission does not seem to lack courage as a collective body and individually , and the same can be said of the Council .
However , in actual fact , the situation is not quite as clear cut as that .
These people have courage as individuals , but collectively they are serving other interests .
That explains why they accede to American pressure . They have to consider other sectors and other , multinational , interests which have established themselves in the Community .
So let there be no self-delusion . Let us look at the situation as it really is .
It was not by chance that the Commission discarded the vaunted principle of Community preference for a whole range of agricultural products : tobacco , cotton , fruit and vegetables , olive oil . Now it is the turn of rice .
300 , 000 tonnes were imported in 1996 from the Antilles by a Community country , the Netherlands .
And it is not grown in the Antilles , except for just a small quantity . It is grown elsewhere and passed through there .
What is the Commission doing about it ?
What about Community preference ?
Why has this market crisis been generated ? Why the price crisis ?
What measures is the Commission taking ?
What the Commissioner has said could almost put us at ease if the matter were not so serious . Why , Commissioner , did you arrange for the intervention period to start in April , six months after the harvest , and why can you not take it close to the harvest date ?
Why are you restricting imports only for the first quarter of 1997 ?
What is going to be happen in the other three quarters of 1997 ?
What are the producers supposed to do ?
So put aside the pretexts and the hypocrisy . If you have any desire to act like a proper Commission of the Community , like a proper Council , impose measures in favour of the Community 's own producers , in favour of those are struggling to earn a living , and stop throwing them out of work .
Mr President , Mr Ephremidis is wrong , and I shall explain why .
I also do not agree with some parts of this resolution .
There is without any doubt a crisis in the rice sector .
There was a drought , so the European Union decided to allow the OCTs , the Netherlands Antilles , the British overseas territories and the French overseas territories to increase their exports , which restored the balance through the 1990s .
Now , however , the drought is over and tension is beginning to rise again in Spain and Italy , so what has the Commission done ?
At the very time when this was happening , it agreed to accept substantial imports from the United States in order to solve a problem with GATT .
It allowed imports from Egypt , Thailand and other non-member countries .
Now things have gone seriously wrong , what does the Commission do ?
It looks for the easiest way out .
Not getting down to talks with the United States or ASEAN , as that would only cause more problems .
So instead it hits the OCTs , the Netherlands Antilles and the British overseas territories , and that is supposed to put an end to the problem .
It is simply not fair .
I quite understand that something has to be done .
The agreements must be improved , but the Netherlands Antilles has 500 people employed in processing rice .
This is the equivalent , Mrs Fraga and Mr Cunha , of 30 000 workers in Spain , if you calculate it as a percentage of the population , or of 50 000 in France or Italy with their populations of 55 million .
The population of the Netherlands Antilles is only 230 000 .
Just think about it .
It is ten times worse than the crisis at Vilvoorde , which the Dutch Government is simply refusing to accept .
We cannot do this to the Netherlands Antilles .
We need to find a solution , but whatever misery we cause must not fall only on the OCTs .
I think my French colleagues are right : we need to find a reasonable solution .
It is not fair to blame the Netherlands , Mr Ephremidis , or the Netherlands Antilles .
The Commission itself has made mistakes , and it must ensure that they are put right in a fair and balanced way .
Mr President , I should like to begin by declaring a personal interest in the matter we are discussing , since I am a rice producer .
But , although I am speaking you will understand that it is not on my own behalf , since I produce japonica rice and we are discussing much more specifically indica here .
And I do not think any congratulations are in order as regards the management of Community funds .
First the payments are made then decisions are taken which created a problem affecting the Community aids which you saw as a solution .
We are talking about a product for which there is a shortfall in the European Union and so it is logical that there should be imports .
But how can the lack of control be justified when it has led , as Mr Cunha said , to a five-fold increase in imports over four years ?
What is serious also is that it ignores the Community preference clause and that , as has been mentioned , we are bowing to United States blackmail .
Mr Commissioner , I live in the Bajo Ebro district which is home to the delta of the River Ebro and where the inhabitants , directly or indirectly , all depend for their living on rice .
Lands colonized and cultivated for the past 150 years , lands which will once again be condemned to desertification and depopulation , unless you remedy the situation .
It is paradoxical that those representatives from the Community country which best understands what sacrifice it takes to colonize and bring into cultivation virgin lands , should today be the most reluctant to find a solution for the future .
To conclude , Mr Commissioner , I shall quote you one parameter of the seriousness of the problem - and I do not think the weather has any bearing - the per hectare value of a rice field has fallen by half over the past ten years .
When we look at the growth of EU rice imports , we may note that this has happened from the OCT at zero duty .
In 1992 the level of imports was 40 , 000 tonnes and it went up by 1996 to 252 , 000 tonnes .
Clearly this shows where the major problem is and that is the reason for the Commission 's decision to apply a safeguard clause , which decision was taken at the request of Spain and Italy .
That is the main comment I have to make in this context .
For the rest , I will inform my colleague Mr Fischler who is responsible for this sector , on the discussion today .
Mr President , I would like to add the following after paragraph 1 : ' Considers it absolutely essential for the Union to take appropriate measures on the basis of a public and detailed investigation ' . Why ?
Because it is obvious from today 's debate that the situation is still unclear , particularly as regards the OCTs .
I have given you the text and I would urge colleagues to vote for it : ' on the basis of a public and detailed investigation ' .
Mr President , I would point out that there is a undertaking on those lines in paragraph 7 , where it says that we ask the Commission to carry out an analysis of the functioning and efficiency of the COM .
I believe that studies can be useful as long as they look at the overall rice situation .
The particular problem of the OCTs is , in my view , a non-problem , in that the Court of First Instance ruled very clearly , at the end of 1995 - in rejecting an action brought before the Court of Justice by the Netherlands on the grounds of public interest for the OCTs - that such grounds do not exist ; moreover , this is what enabled the Commission to adopt the safeguard clause which is now being renewed .
So I do not believe that there is any particular problem concerning the OCTs ; in any event , paragraph 7 calls explicitly for an overall analysis of the operation of the COM in rice .
I would also point out - the Commissioner did not say this - that the proposed safeguard clause was adopted by mutual agreement between Commissioner Fischler and Commissioner Pinheiro : it is therefore a joint proposal from DG VI and the directorate-general responsible for development cooperation , DG VIII .
Ladies and gentlemen , we shall not start a debate on the question .
Mr Maij-Weggen has made a proposal , stating her reasons ; now Mr Fantuzzi has spoken .
I suggest that we ascertain whether there is any objection in the House to our putting this amendment to the vote .
Are any twelve Members against ?
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I cannot support the resolution concerning the crisis in the rice sector .
The rice sector was opened up to competition on the European market some time ago , which was a good thing as this has benefited food consumers considerably .
But the improved market conditions for the rice sector have created difficulties for several European rice producers .
The difficulties which have arisen are of course regrettable but I think that difficulties for some rice producers cannot be resolved by the reintroduction of import restrictions or other trade barriers or by particular subsidies for the rice sector which would really distort the conditions for competition on the European market .
We have voted against the Union 's policy for the rice sector .
We are against protection on the rice market which will lead to higher consumer prices and will make exports from rice producers in other countries more difficult .
We also oppose the use of increased food subsidies and export subsidies as a method of resolving the Union 's agricultural problems .
Food subsidies should benefit domestic production and local markets .
The rice sector in the EU has problems .
But it is important not to draw the wrong conclusions .
The long term solution is not import quotas or export subsidies but a continuation of policies which lead to increased free trade .
The negotiations which took place as part of the so called Uruguay Round made a significant step in this direction .
It is important that the EU takes the lead in this work and takes the necessary initiatives to bring about global free trade as soon as possible .
Mr Hallam has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , as a regular Member of the ' Friday morning club ' of which you are the President , I would crave your indulgence .
In the Minutes , there is a ' list of shame ' of those people who voted against the Ghilardotti report .
Unfortunately there is a printing error and the names of the British Conservatives who voted this way are not obvious .
I should like to ask that that be reprinted so that we can see these people who voted against giving women enhanced rights in sex discrimination cases .
Mr Hallam , that is not a point of order ; it concerns the Minutes .
Mr President , I am sorry , this is on a similar matter , but it is one I have to mention .
While I did vote to approve the Minutes at the beginning of today 's sitting , and these are absolutely correct , I have only now been able to compare the various language versions of the resolution on Bosnia-Herzegovina and to see that they are different in all the languages , and also wrong .
That is the only thing they have in common .
I should like to point out that the Minutes correctly state what was adopted , namely that paragraphs 1 , 2 and 3 of the original text were deleted and replaced by new texts , whereas paragraph 4 of the original text remained unchanged .
This is a very important point , and I would ask the Sittings Service to correct the matter .
Thank you , Mr Posselt , for your helpful comment .
I shall make sure that the Parliament 's officers put the wording right .

I should like to reassure Mr Hallam ; over two hours ago I pointed out to members of the staff that the names of my colleagues who , fortunately for me , voted against the Ghilardotti report , are illegible .
We are agreed and I am sure that my conservative friends will certainly want to make it known that they voted against that report .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are all aware that in this House we all want the greatest transparency and , therefore , when errors occur , they will b e put right .
Mr President , when I checked my pigeon-hole about an hour ago , I still had not received written answers to my questions for Question Time .
Normally at this stage in the week I have .
Could you ensure that everyone who is entitled to a written answer gets it please ?
Thank you , Mrs Oddy for that information .
I take responsibility for that .
I shall find out why and make sure that answers arrive on time .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , I have to tell you that Parliament has come to the end of the agenda and that the minutes of this part-session will be submitted for Parliament 's approval at the beginning of the next part-session .
Adjournment of the session
Ladies and gentlemen , may I thank this Parliament 's officers , not merely as a matter of form , but sincerely ; without their help it would not be possible for us to do our work .
I should like to thank you all too and also to express my appreciation of Mother Nature for granting us this marvellous week of springtime which has rendered this lovely city even more beautiful .
( The sitting was adjourned at 11.30 a.m. )
Resumption of session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 11 April 1997 .
May I remind the house that today is ' World Book Day ' , declared last year by UNESCO , and therefore I wish you happy reading .
Decision on urgency
I give the floor to Mrs Malone on a point of order .
Mr President , I would like to bring to your attention the fact that an Irish Christian Brother was murdered in Kenya in January and this week an Irish priest , very luckily , just escaped with his life .
I would ask you to ask President Santer and the Dutch presidency to suspend all EU aid to Kenya until the human rights situation has improved .
Thank you very much , Mrs Malone .
Mr Santer is here and we shall convey your request to the Council for it to take more effective measures to tackle the problem you have brought to our attention .
I give the floor to Mr von Habsburg on a point of order .
Mr President , this is not a point of order , but refers to the agenda . That is what we are discussing and I would like to ask a question about it .
Mr Habsburg , may I remind you that , as is the custom , our agenda was adopted in Strasbourg .
In that case I shall not put my question .
Thank you very much for your cooperation .
Mr President , on urgency for aid to shipbuilding : this is certainly still a most controversial subject , in the European Community too .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has discussed this urgency .
There were different views on the subject in committee too .
But the committee decided by a majority to consider the matter as son as possible , not during this sitting but at the earliest possible next one .
And we have taken all the necessary measures to ensure that it can be dealt with as soon and as competently as possible .
We have appointed a rapporteur , Mr Glante .
We will do all we can to ensure that a reasoned opinion can soon be reached on this subject .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to speak to urgency .
Let me first explain the situation .
In its proposal of 19 March 1997 the Commission accepted the notification submitted by the German Federal Government and submitted it to the Council of the European Union on 24 March 1997 for further consideration .
At the same time , the Commission proposal was also forwarded to the European Parliament for its opinion .
This proposal has a rather dramatic history .
It must be looked at against the background of a structural adjustment that occurred very quickly and was very intensive and which , in my own country , meant that within a space of a year and a half more than 40 000 workers were made redundant in shipyards alone .
This enormous change was accompanied by the dismantling of capacity required by the European Union ; against this background aid was authorised in 1992 .
Much of the aid made available in 1992 was used for the wrong purposes .
It was not invested in the shipyards of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern but misused by the main company Bremer Vulkan , which has since gone bankrupt .
The responsible prosecuting attorney who is investigating the situation said a few weeks ago before the Federal committee of inquiry that the money has gone for ever ! So the funds originally provided are no longer available .
On the other hand , it is clear that in a region that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , there are three reasons why we should oppose this urgency .
The first was stated by the last speaker , namely that there was misappropriation of funds the last time that state aids were granted to Germany .
Therefore we need to have proper parliamentary scrutiny of this proposal ; we should not simply be rubber-stamping a decision of the Council .
Secondly , the shipbuilding aids being offered are going to have a distorting effect on the rest of the shipbuilding industry in the European Union .
What about Finland , the United Kingdom , Denmark or the other shipbuilding areas ?
We need to take careful account of that .
Thirdly , if we take seriously our work in this Parliament as an overseeing body on state aids and competition policy , we should at least give ourselves two or three weeks to look at this matter and produce a proper report .
If the Christian Democrats vote in favour of urgency , they can never again complain about state aids or competition policy in this European Parliament .
I put the request for urgent procedure to the vote .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure ) This item will be included in tomorrow 's agenda .
Mr President , you commented that only 265 people took part in the vote , when there are quite a lot more of us than that here in the chamber .
Now that we meet in Brussels , when most of us are used to getting our voting cards in Strasbourg at the door of the chamber , here in Brussels it takes us about half-an-hour to find our voting cards .
I urge you to make access to the chamber easier .
Thank you very much , Mr Wijsenbeek .
I have been informed that you will have to go a bit further to get them because of the preparations for the new buildings .
I am sure that everyone will take the necessary precautions to obtain their voting cards in time .
Membership of temporary committee ( vote )
The next item is the proposal for a decision on the setting up of a temporary committee of inquiry instructed to monitor the action taken on the recommendations made concerning BSE .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of my group , on two of the amendments which are being presented on this text .
The first is Amendment 1 of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , which I would like to withdraw .
As for Amendment 2 , presented by the Group for a Europe of Nations , in accordance with Article 124 , point 5 , I would like , on the contrary , to take it over .
If you will allow me , I will quickly explain to you why , and I do so in the presence of President Santer , who knows well that this temporary committee will monitor closely the very important work which awaits the Commission and the Parliament .
The proposal of the presidents ' conference includes twenty members , excluding two of this Parliament 's groups , while the Committee of Inquiry envisages the presence of all groups .
Following agreements with the various groups , only the Group of the European Radical Alliance would , in reality , remain outside this committee .
With much humility , I would ask my colleagues to accept , in a spirit of compromise and conciliation , that this number be brought from twenty up to twenty-two and that the various groups may all be allowed to be represented , as anticipated by the Committee of Inquiry .
( Applause from the ARE Group )
Mr President , I do not think we need to discuss these amendments or vote on them .
The Socialist Group has eight members , eight alternates .
Our Group has seven members and seven alternates .
We said we were willing , and we stand by that promise , to give up one member and one alternate .
I think if others in the House , and the Socialist Group in particular , are also willing , we can settle this matter satisfactorily .
Mr President , you took a decision at the Conference of Presidents .
This decision does not tally with the views of the Socialist Group .
It wanted something else and one or other option could be chosen .
One has now be chosen , and the plenary will most probably accept it by a majority .
If that is the case , then let me ask you , Mrs Green , you are not taking the same line as in the case of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE .
There we had 18 Members , and in the end you too accepted not having a place to enable the smaller groups could participate .
Quite apart from the fact that you have lost in this case , would you please tell me what the difference is between this committee and the Committee of Inquiry into BSE ?
Why are you being difficult now and not giving the ARE group the place that is in fact due to it in this matter ?
I give the floor to Mrs Green to answer personal remarks .
I put the proposal for a decision to the vote .
( The Parliament adopted the decision )
Equal opportunities for men and women
The next item is the Commission communication on equal opportunities between men and women .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate relates to the problems of women , but I hope that the men will also want to pay attention .
I am very happy to continue the practice which we instituted last year , by having an exchange of views today on Community policy in favour of equal opportunities for men and women .
And this follows 8 March , International Women 's Day .
A day like 8 March indeed makes it possible to take stock of the work accomplished , but also to discuss the road which is yet to be travelled .
And this seems to me an excellent opportunity to look at the progress of the Commission and of Parliament .
It is also , perhaps , the moment to be a little creative .
More than two years ' experience of the Community show me that we can only move forward by establishing relationships of trust , without attempting to deceive our interlocutors .
And this year 's diary will be full , I think in particular of the Intergovernmental Conference and the new Treaty to be adopted in Amsterdam , as well as the start of negotiations towards expansion .
We must , therefore , be more innovative to convince European citizens and make them our allies .
This is not an easy task , because do not forget that only 49 % of European women think that Europe is a good thing , against 57 % of men .
Equality of opportunity is therefore a serious and important subject which occupies a growing place in our thoughts and policies .
This gives me great satisfaction , even if I am conscious of the fact that there is still a great deal to do .
I will start first of all , Mr President , by taking stock with you of the activities of the Commission during this last year .
We have been very active with respect to equal opportunities .
I will spare you the exhaustive list of all of the work completed , or still under way .
There have been too many initiatives for that .
So I will highlight a few concrete points and the most high-profile events of the year .
For exhaustive information , may I however refer you to the first annual report on equal opportunities which the Commission has just published .
This reviews the progress made by Member States and by the Union as a whole and thereby fufils a triple objective : to make Community policy in this domain visible , to encourage debate on the strategies to be followed , and finally , to provide an instrument of reference for all active parties concerned .
The policy followed by the Commission during the past year falls under the fourth programme of action for equal opportunities , which covers the period from 1996 to the year 2000 .
This programme , which was adopted during the year of the fourth world women 's conference , constitutes a major contribution to the implementation of the platform agreed in Beijing and relates to areas as diverse as employment and professional life , decision-making and information .
The driving concept of the fourth programme of action is mainstreaming .
Mainstreaming means the integration of the dimension of equality into all Community policies and initiatives , whether they are directed outward or towards the staff of the Commission .
The very notion of mainstreaming remains rather obscure for many .
The Commission took up the challenge committing itself both to defining its approach to the subject and to setting up an operational structure for implementation by means of a communication adopted in February 1996 .
This communication stresses that equality of opportunity does not only call for the implementation of positive measures , centred around women , but also for explicit mobilisation in view of the equality of all general actions and policies .
It is a matter of introducing the perspective of gender into the conception , implementation and followup of these policies and these actions .
In this context , I attach particular importance to mainstreaming in the structural funds , which constitute a major financial tool , since over six years , they amount to 145 thousand billion Ecus .
The Commission also wanted to pursue the implementation of the fourth programme on the ground .
Currently , we are supporting more than 60 projects spread throughout all the Member States , which involve a huge range of active parties , such as national , regional , and local authorities , NGOs and social partners .
These activities are financed by a sum to the tune of about four thousand million Ecus .
This figure is certainly modest , but we are talking here about cofinancing and partnership activities , the effect of which is often extremely positive .
Mr President , I would now like to talk about another essential component of the fourth programme , which is the legislative work which awaits us .
Two proposals for legislation are currently on the table in the Council of Ministers .
Firstly , the proposal for a directive on the burden of proof , on which you gave your opinion on 9 April , in a direction broadly favourable to the Commission 's proposal .
We now hope that a common position may be adopted under the Dutch presidency .
Secondly , the proposal for modification of the directive on equal treatment presented by the Commission , following the Kalanke ruling , which was the subject of many debates during the last ' social matters ' Council of 17 April last .
Moreover , a certain number of new proposals , as provided for by the fourth programme , are currently being put together , in particular concerning respect for the dignity of women and men at work , and the domain of reponsibility and services relating to children and other dependants .
Finally , a Eurobarometer inquiry , carried out at the Commission 's request , was dedicated to the perception of equality in public opinion .
Amongst other things , it emerged from it that if , for the majority of Europeans , the fight against unemployment remains one of the priorities of the Union , it seems that the improvement of the situation of women passes through the better distribution of chores , housework , children , in the sphere of private life , and to a respect for masculine and feminine identity .
Anyway , I would like to stress the fact that the policy of equal opportunities is not limited to social policies alone .
Thus , I will cite the success of the European conference on the traffic in women , organised on the initiative of Mrs Gradin .
Just a few , words , now , Mr President , on the policy pursued within the Commission .
I am delighted with the results which our administration has already achieved .
Indeed , the statistics show that the representation of the two sexes has balanced out again in the various categories of staff in the Commission .
In particular , the objectives of appointment and recruitment of female staff for Category A have broadly-speaking been achieved in 1996 .
I will give several figures , which seem to me very encouraging .
Half of the young civil servants recruited from the new Member States are women .
The exact rate is 49 % .
At the management level , grade A2 , the Commission saw its female staff double in 1996 , since it numbers to date fifteen female managers , as a result of the seven appointments / promotions which took place during the year .
For my part , Mr President , I will not resist the satisfaction of telling you that half my own cabinet is composed of women .
But I think that we must also look to the future .
As I said earlier , the participation of women in the pursuit of the construction of Europe will prove to be crucial for the success of certain deadlines .
I think this is true for economic and monetary union which must take place in a concrete way with our citizens .
And I have always thought that women have an extremely important role to play in the integration of the Euro into people 's everyday lives .
Indeed , without wanting to lapse into stereotypes , I am relying heavily upon women to make this theory a reality in 2002 .
The second major deadline is , of course , the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Commission means as much as the Parliament to insist that the new Treaty take on board better the principle of equal opportunities compared with current provisions , which are limited to equal pay .
The conference tackles this hot issue in three ways .
Firstly , by means of the general principles of the Treaty , in particular fundamental social rights .
Then with a specific nondiscrimination clause .
And finally by specific provisions regarding equal opportunities .
At the moment , three objectives are being targeted : making equal opportunities a specific task of the Union by including it in Article 2 of the Treaty ; equal pay for work of equal value by formulating thus in a more appropriate way the current Article 119 ; competence for the Union to take measures relating to equal opportunities beyond remuneration ; and a provision authorising positive discrimination by Member States , intending thus to respond to the Court ruling in the Kalanke case .
The fact that equal opportunities are being taken into consideration should also enrich our approach to the major economic and social issues of Europe .
And employment first of all .
You know the value I attach to European action in this domain .
We must not be content just to knock together short term solutions , which often end in increased insecurity for those who are most fragile .
Women are confronted directly with the increase in number of part time jobs and short term contracts .
They have been pioneers in these new forms of work which are spreading to greater and greater numbers of workers and which will increase as new technologies develop .
We must use their experiences therefore to bring up to date and consolidate our European model of society .
So , I attach great importance to the negotiation which is under way between the social partners about part time work as well as the Green Paper on the organisation of work which was adopted last week by the Commission .
I would still like to say that a great debate on social protection took place this quarter ; I will perhaps have the chance to come back to it later .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I come now to my conclusion .
At the time of my investiture speech before the European Parliament , I undertook personally to make the pursuit of equal opportunities a key thread of Community policy and I think I can affirm that at the half-way stage of its term of office , this Commission has clearly demonstrated , by the multiplicity of the initiatives adopted , that it is keeping its word .
There , Mr President , a brief survey .
It emerges from this that , from all the evidence , regarding the promotion of equal opportunities , the Commission is not resting on its laurels , but is working tirelessly to consolidate and deepen the important gains achieved in the past .
Mr President , I have two questions for the Commission .
Firstly : When does the Commission intend to proceed with the changes in the terms of service approved by Parliament several months ago , in other words , the terms of service for EU employees ?
Secondly : In what way is the Commission paying heed to equality between the sexes with regard to the programme for the information society ?
It is obvious that current programmes , toys and games attract boys while girls back away from sitting in front of computers .
In what way is the Commission taking this into account ?
Mr President , as regards the first question put by the honorable Member , I would like to say , as I did earlier , that the Commission has made proposals and has set itself targets to achieve regarding the recruitment of civil servants in its own departments .
As far as 1996 is concerned , and I quoted the figures , we achieved these objectives .
We have also set ourselves targets for this year , at various levels , up to the highest grades .
We have reached , and even passed the targets set for 1996 , but we still have work to do because , for the moment , obviously we are talking above all about the recruitment of civil servants relating to the new Member States , where equality has been achieved : 49 % for women , 51 % for men .
In the future , this activity must be pursued in the same direction .
As regards the second question , relating to equal opportunities for men and women , particularly in the use of modern technology if I have understood correctly , in the context of information policy , I can tell you that the fourth programme of activity which we have set in motion to promote equal opportunities contains a certain number of proposals aimed specifically at achieving the objective which you are proposing yourself .
Next year , when I report again on the action of the Community during the past year , it will no doubt be possible to see how we have been able to achieve this objective in 1997 .
Mr President , I have a very specific budgetary question .
The structural funds are our most important instruments .
How can you ensure that women , who tend to be hit harder by unemployment than others , obtain more access to these structural funds ?
How can you ensure that the principle of equal opportunities is applied quite consistently in the operational programmes ?
After all , until now only some 5 % has been spent on women-oriented projects .
I think that is far too little .
The fourth Action Programme is not enough , the few million ecus being allocated here are not enough to achieve the great aim of full employment .
The money that we allocated last year in many budget lines is certainly a great help .
So how can you now ensure that mainstreaming is implemented and does not just end up as a drop in the ocean ?
Mr President , I share entirely the opinion of the honourable Member , which is that , in the fight against unemployment , priority must be given to women , who are the first to be affected because they are worst hit by part-time and short term work .
In fact , one of the elements to set us on this road lies in the use of the structural funds .
The structural funds , as I said earlier , mobilise a considerable amount of money - 145 billion Ecus over six years - but not enough use is made of them , and within the context of the European social fund one of the priority objectives must be specifically the mobilisation of the funds for the engagement of women .
You asked a second question , which concerns mainstreaming .
The Commission has indeed finished drawing up a strategy for the integration of the dimension of gender into all its policies .
I think it is essential not to stay centred on one set policy only .
As is the case for inter-departmental cooperation , reference lines should be introduced for evaluation of the impact of policies on equality between men and women , as well as a follow-up system and suitable training for staff .
This is what we must work towards .
I quite agree , there is still a great deal to be done , and I am relying on Parliament , when the budgetary proposals are made , to give still greater impetus in the areas the honourable Member has targeted .
Mr President , once the Intergovernmental Conference is completed , and I still hope it will be in Amsterdam though I do not rule out the possibility that it may be in Wasserbillig , the accession negotiations with a number of Eastern European countries will start soon afterwards .
I am wondering whether President Santer or the Commission has already begun to analyse the legal and social position of women in these would-be Member States .
In my view they need to in order to ensure that once these countries join , the acquis communautaire , which we already have in this area and which needs to be taken further than the provisions of existing laws in Central and Eastern Europe , must be introduced in those countries without delay , because I feel that is essential for women .
In all honesty I think too , and I should appreciate an answer on this , that it is necessary and I hope there is the will for that in the European Commission , that special aid should be given to that end to women 's organizations in the Central and Eastern European countries which are prepared to help to get these thing achieved .
Mr President , like the honourable Member , I hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will conclude with a Treaty of Amsterdam .
You are familiar with the strategy of expansion , as defined by the European Council of Madrid and then by that of Dublin .
Straight afterwards , the Commission will present its proposed opinions concerning the various candidate nations .
Within the framework of these opinions , we must take account of certain criteria which have been set by the European Council of Copenhagen in 1993 .
One of these criteria , and it is not one of the most negligible , is that of knowing how successful the countries have been in adapting their national legislation to fit in with the achievements of the Community .
We have established some rules on this .
We have also , with the Phare programme , suggested a certain number of programmes to these countries , but I agree entirely with you that it is an important criterion , not only with regard to women , but in a general way .
The achievements of the Community must be preserved and the legislation of the new nations , the new democracies which are knocking on our door , must be able to take on these Community achievements .
This is an essential point and the Council of Ministers , with consideration for the opinions of the Commission , will certainly attach a particular importance to this .
Mr President , one might be grateful to President Santer for his very informative announcement and perhaps feel that a certain amount of progress has been made , but I wonder whether he can actually understand that this progress is very limited when we look at the actual scale of the problem .
I was privileged to represent Parliament at the Indian conference . We got a picture of the problem , which concerns 50 % or more of the population - and it is the same in Europe if we leave aside the countries of northern Europe where the situation is actually quite good - whose representation is extremely limited .
For instance , only 6.4 % of MPs in France are women , in Greece only 6.3 % are women and in the United Kingdom only 9.5 % are women .
Can the Commission actually understand that such rates of progress are doing nothing to resolve the problem and that much more needs to be done ?
And is it aware that the legal aspect has now changed following the judgment of the French Council of State that affirmative action does not constitute discrimination ?
Mr President , I agree with the Member in saying that much progress has been made , but I would add that this progress has not been sufficient in view of the size of our task .
That is why we must work in many different directions .
We already are at the present time , moreover .
I think it is very important that , within the context of the Intergovernmental Conference , which should finish with a revision of the Maastricht Treaty , a number of the proposals of the Irish presidency , which have been retained by the Dutch presidency , and which aim to write equality between men and women into the Treaty , which is one of the missions of the Community , are indeed written into it .
In all its activity , the Commission will aim to eliminate inequality , to promote equality between men and women , to apply , and I think this is very important , a general clause of non-discrimination , in particular on the basis of sex , and to extend the scope of application of Article 119 of the Treaty .
Another point , which I mentioned earlier in response to a question , relates to the policy of mainstreaming , which consists in integrating women 's policy into all our policies , and not making of it a policy on its own .
I think , with regard to this , that it is an exercise which will go on for a long time yet , and that it will be accompanied by changes , especially of mentality , in our various Member States , and in the organisation of work .
Finally , you raised a problem which concerns decision-making .
With regard to this , certain actions of the Commission aim to encourage and support Member States which are launching specific action to admit women into higher positions , in which decisions are made .
We are in the process of cofinancing a series of actions , with respect to this , within the framework of the fourth Community programme .
We will draw up an annual assessment of the progress evident in Europe , by means of the annual report known as ' equal opportunities ' .
Mr President , first of all I should like to say what a pleasure it is for me to see the President of the Commission here in this Assembly answering our questions on such important matters . I should like to put this question directly to him .
He began by saying that , of all European citizens , women are those who are the least convinced of the importance of Europe . On that point , I should like to say that this stems from the Treaty itself : women 's rights are just not sufficiently dealt with in the text of that Treaty .
I should like to put two very simple questions to him .
My first question is whether the Commission is going to fight with us to ensure that revision of the Maastricht Treaty covers all of the points realting to women 's rights which the European Parliament has supported .
And my second question is whether the Commission is going to help us to inform women of these aspects ?
Let us not forget that the Maastricht Treaty is going to be ratified in most countries by referendum ; it is women who will go out to vote in large numbers and unless we have women on our side the new Treaty may well be signed not ratified .
Mr President , this question follows the one which was asked earlier by one of your colleagues , to which I replied by indicating the objectives we are setting in the Treaty .
You are right in saying that the current Treaty , the Treaty of Maastricht , does not lend enough attention to objectives aiming at equality of opportunity for men and women .
I recalled the objectives of the Commission , which tie up with the proposals which Parliament itself presented at the time of the revision of this Treaty .
I will not repeat it , but I consider it essential that , in the Treaty itself , certain objectives aim more specifically at affirming that equality for men and women will constitute one of the Community 's missions .
Secondly , one result of the Eurobarometer shows that more men than women trust the European Union .
Work of conviction , of persuasion , but above all of information and communication , must be carried out .
I think it would be wise for all our information programmes - and I mentioned earlier the programme for the Euro , for economic and monetary union - to target women more specifically .
Indeed , whether one likes it or not , they are not merely one half of the population , they are also closer to its citizens , they know the education system much better , they may look after their children , etc .
When one speaks of economic and monetary union , and in the context of the way the Euro is handled , women must be integrated as housekeepers , as consumers , because I think it is on this condition alone that we can make a success of the Euro .
( Interruption by Mrs Randzio-Plath : ' But I work ' ) Of course , women at work , too .
That is my conception of the policy of mainstreaming , to which a certain importance must be attached by integrating women into all our policies and not only into specific policies .
Mr President , thank you for your commitment to the cause of women .
Your final remarks are very encouraging for me in favour as I am of the cause of all women .
From this point of view , may I make a request of you , which is at the same time a question : could no completely new path of hope exist for the vitality , economic as well as social and cultural , of our various countries in Europe , in recourse to research , as was demanded at the conferences in Copenhagen and Peking , to evaluate the unwaged work of women at home .
I think that this could be a breakthrough for a redynamisation of the whole of life in our countries in Europe .
I am relying on you to see that the welcome given by the Commissioner at the federation of housewives , in Peking , is followed up .
Mr President , I can respond favourably to this request , because we are currently doing research along these lines and it has been indicated to me that the results will be available at the end of this year .
From another angle , I would still like to say that there should not be too great a polarisation made between women at work and women in the home .
I believe that women who work also have household chores to do , and they perhaps have to do two times or three times the work .
So I will not , personally , I am saying this completely from a personal point of view , have a distinction made between women who work and women who stay at home .
I think it should be necessary to find ways which make it possible to determine the way in which every woman contributes to active and to professional life , whoever she is .
I would like to thank President Santer for his declaration , and salute the many initiatives he has spoken about .
But I would like to ask him whether the Commission means to follow up in a more concrete way the resolutions made and positions adopted by the European Parliament , particularly these : we requested modification of the 1979 directive regarding equal treatment of men and women in the legal systems of social security to provide this equality in relation to age limits and survivors ' pensions .
We proposed a Community instrument for the introduction of splitting of pension rights in the event of divorce in all Member States .
The President knows the problem very well .
Finally we proposed that the ' decaffeinated ' directive of 1986 on the application of the principle of equal treatment for men and women exercising independent activities , including their spouse , be strengthened , and in February our Parliament demanded a real legal status for these invisible workers , the spouses of independent persons , and independent social security for them .
Mr President , are you going to do something in this domain ?
Mr President , as you know , a proposal along the lines of the concerns of the honourable Member was made by the Commission in 1987 , and furthermore it remains on the table of the Council .
The Commission has undertaken to find the best way of restarting discussions on the subject .
The question of splitting , which has just been raised by Mrs Lulling , and pension rights in the event of divorce falls , of course , under the much wider theme of the individualisation of the right to social security of men and women .
That takes me back a little to my former activities .
I know the subject well , as the author of a proposal for reform of social security along these lines , in my own country .
This is a very delicate subject for many Member States , but the Commission is trying to make discussions progress as far as possible .
That is how the subject of individualisation came to be tackled in the communication on the future of social welfare , which was recently adopted by the Commission .
I must refer back to a draft report by Mrs Catasta , here , dated 10 June 1993 , which contains a proposal for a resolution , which was actually tabled by Mrs Lulling at the time , which had the same objective .
I think therefore that we must aim in that direction and I hope that the communication on the future of social welfare is a good starting point from which to deepen these rather difficult discussions .
As far as the 1986 directive is concerned , regarding equal treatment of women , for independent women , the Commission has committed itself in its fourth programme on equal opportunities to examining the possibilities for strengthening this directive which , as the honourable member points out , does not currently include any particularly effective measures .
Once again we are talking about subjects , social security and tax , which are more than just difficult .
The Commission 's preparatory work is moving forward .
Two round tables have been held with those most involved , in which , if my information is correct , members of this Parliament have also participated .
Now it is a question of examining the feasibility of the ideas put forward .
The Commission has long recognized that women are undervalued and under-utilized in the SME sector .
How can the Commission help women both as workers and as entrepreneurs in small firms ?
I ask this because there is a disproportionate disadvantage to women in the unemployment figures and the small business sector is , of course , most fertile in terms of producing jobs .
As you know , the Commission , and I personally , are very committed to the strengthening of small and medium-sized enterprises , because we think that thanks to them new jobs can be created .
It is not large companies which are creating jobs , it is the eighteen million SMEs we have in the European Union , which are capable of doing so .
In this regard , the Commission 's objective is to determine the concrete policy and the appropriate measures to improve the situation of independent workers , and their spouses .
The Commission has already organised a round table in which all the interested parties have participated .
We are currently busy collecting together all the information for the purpose of finishing up with a firm proposal for an instrument to be used .
Furthermore , within the framework of the European Social Fund , an initiative exists , the NOW initiative , which also has this objective .
It is further in this direction that we must go in order to respond to your own concerns .
Mr President , Austria has a model system of leave for working women .
They can stay at home , as can the man for the last six months if he so chooses , and , most important , with a guarantee of employment , which makes it easier for women to return to working life .
There is no uniform system of this kind in the EU , which means there is still a major deficit here .
Is there any chance of the EU adopting the Austrian system and allowing women unpaid leave , which would make it easier for them to arrange for child-care and to return to working life ?
As you know , social policy falls within the competence of Member States themselves .
The Commission as such , or the Community as such , therefore has no particular competence regarding social policy , neither does it have regarding economic policy .
That does not prevent us , nor dispense us from seeing how we can use the instruments within our reach to make our contribution to the achievement of the objectives you have described .
One of these instruments is precisely , within the framework of social protocol , social dialogue .
Last year , the social partners , within the framework of social dialogue , came to an agreement on a formula , which does not go as far as the Austrian formula , I agree , but which proposes a conciliation between professional life and family life , by means of parental leave , etc .
We have taken up this formula within the framework of a directive , but if we have taken a social directive , it belongs to Member States to transpose it and apply it .
I think that , from proposals modelled on systems such as that of Austria , or other systems existing in other Member States , reflection can be started at Community level , to see how it is possible to grant a particular social status to women who work .
Mr President , I was already beginning to suspect somewhat that this whole field might fall outside your ambit , but fortunately this proves not to be the case .
The Commission communication devotes special attention to the question of taking account of equal opportunities in connection with the Structural Funds .
In order for the principle of mainstreaming to be acted upon , information is needed about the present state of equality between the sexes , and impact analyses also need to be developed .
The existing monitoring and assessment indicators do not reveal certain problems which are important from women 's point of view .
The Commission says that consideration should be given to indicators of , and ways of measuring , the extent to which the principle of equality is taken into account in programmes .
Might I ask you , Mr Santer , whether such indicators are being developed by the Commission which could be borne in mind when evaluating the Structural Funds , in order for women to reap the benefit ?
Mr President , indeed there is still much to be done , as the Member said , and as I said myself , all the more so since we do not have the necessary instruments yet to create a true Community policy at this level .
That is why I said earlier that it is necessary , within the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference , to introduce a number of principles , objectives , which can be used to develop a more coherent policy in this domain .
With regard to this , and not to repeat myself , I will say , as far as the structural funds are concerned , that a number of developments , a number of programmes are being funded thanks to the structural funds .
This is still not enough , but I think that certain indicators , or as one says today , the benchmarking system , may also constitute an essential instrument for seeing how , little by little , equal opportunities for men and women are approaching .
It is an indicator , as you say , which has not yet been taken up , but it is an idea which deserves thought and deeper study .
Thank you very much , Mr Santer .
Economic policy and excessive deficits
The next item is the Commission communication on the broad economic policy guidelines and excessive deficits .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as your Chamber wishes , I insisted on coming and reporting to you , as soon as this session opened , on the deliberations and decisions of the Commission this morning on the predictions and the general orientation of economic policy for 1997 .
They are an essential instrument for a better coordination of economic policy for the medium term in Europe .
The Commission can confirm , this year , that the recommended macroeconomic strategy is bearing fruit , as economic growth is confirmed .
On the basis of this encouraging observation , the general orientation is aimed , as your Chamber recommended in its Annual Economic Report , at giving new impetus to the economic strategy of the European Union .
First of all , the forecasts confirm the coherence of the economic strategy recommended by the general orientation of economic policy .
Growth has returned thanks to the stabilisation of public finances , the reduction in the level of interest rates and the control of costs .
It is necessary to consolidate this renewal and ensure that it creates jobs over the long term .
Spring predictions indicate a small revision of growth upwards , compared with those of last Autumn .
Growth should rise to 2.4 % in 1997 .
We had predicted 2.3 % in the Autumn .
In 1998 , economic activity could increase by 2.8 % .
This renewed growth will permit the creation of two million jobs over 1997 and 1998 .
The level of unemployment should start to drop , sadly not far enough , from 10.7 % in 1997 to 10.3 % in 1998 .
There will be no substantial reduction in unemployment without strong and lasting growth in the medium term .
To achieve this , the Commission recommends three means .
Firstly to pursue the stabilisation of public finances .
This is beginning to bear fruit .
The vast majority of Member States have set themselves the target of public deficits of 3 % in 1997 .
I recall to mind the fact that the average deficit of the Union has fallen from 6.2 % of GDP in 1993 to 4.3 % in 1996 .
The Commission predicts a figure of 2.9 % for the whole of the European Union for 1997 , with thirteen countries on or below the reference level of 3 % .
Within the context of the pursuit of this stabilisation , the Commission is stressing , this year especially , the need to reduce public spending rather than increasing revenue from tax , which is bad for growth .
It is also stressing the need to preserve spending on investment , which is essential to give the Union the potential for lasting mediumterm growth , that is , for the future .
Secondly , the stability of prices must be maintained , as inflation hits the less privileged sectors of society hardest .
Thirdly , the policy on wages , implemented by the social partners , has proved its responsibility and realism .
It must continue to integrate both the objectives of stability of prices , and profitability of investment .
In the vast majority of Member States , these recommendations have already been followed by results in 1996 .
We must persevere in this way if we want to create more jobs in the future .
On the basis of these encouraging results , the Commission recommends , as your Chamber advocates , two priorities for conducting economic policy in 1997 : employment , of course , structural reforms of the employment market , and public and private , physical , intangible and human investment , which are still insufficient .
Concerning employment , three priority actions are advocated by the Commission .
Firstly , to increase the capacity of economies to adapt to changes caused by globalisation and to increase the potential for growth , it is necessary to promote innovation , research and development , and to improve systems of education and professional training .
Furthermore , it is necessary to pursue investment in trans-European networks .
This emerges clearly from our recommendation to the Council .
It also situates the importance of the fifth framework programme of development and research .
Secondly , better operation of the market in goods and services is necessary .
Complete exploitation of the benefits of the internal market alone will make a strong contribution to increasing growth .
Let me remind you that persistent segmentation of the markets , for example because of insufficiencies in harmonisation of taxes and because of excessive regulation , must be abolished .
To this end , the Commission is currently preparing a plan of action on the internal market .
Thirdly , reform of the employment market is necessary to increase the job content of growth .
The contribution of the social partners is , in this respect , exemplary and necessary .
Thanks to the social dialogue , the flexibility of the employment market may be increased by means of pragmatic measures respectful of the attachment of our citizens to high social standards .
It is also necessary to work at a reasonable adaptation of salary structures , in line with differences in productivity at regional levels .
On the subject of investment , today 's report is rather disappointing .
Certainly , studies of the current economic climate instance an increasing confidence on the part of manufacturers and the profitability of investments is at its highest since the 1960s in the European Union .
The Commission observes that paid workers have contributed to the stabilisation of the macroeconomic scene by moderation of pay .
It now considers it essential that employers seize the opportunity that the excellence of economic conditions is offering and , for most , of their financial situation , in order to renew investment to create jobs .
This renewal of investment must involve private investment - 85 % of the total , I recall - as a priority , and in all its forms : physical investment , investment in intangibles , investment in people .
But the Commission also recommends that public expenditure on investment be maintained . It is essential to give the Union potential for lasting growth in the medium term .
It is an investment for the future of the collectivity as a whole .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to inform you that the Commission has just proposed to the Council that it abrogate its decision on the existence of excessive public deficits in the Netherlands and in Finland .
If the Council adopts the recommendations of the Commission , the number of countries which are no longer in a situation of excessive deficit will be brought to five .
These results confirm both the efforts at stabilisation which the Member States of the Union are making and the coherence of our European economic policy .
A majority of Member States will be able to move over to the Euro on 1 January 1999 . I really do believe that .
Confident in finding , Mr President , the full support of the European Parliament for the implementation of these recommendations by the Member States , the Commission , as it has endeavoured to do for the past two and a half years , will continue to associate your Chamber as closely as possible with its work , as it does unceasingly , for the introduction of the Euro within the framework of the conditions and timetable anticipated by the Treaty .
Mr President , I would like to ask Commissioner de Silguy , at this fateful moment of choosing the countries which will participate in the third phase of the approaching EMU , that is Spring 1998 , and independently of the conclusions of the Dublin summit , whose shaping was largely the raison d 'être of the ' ecofin ' Council of Nordwyck and which we are taking for our own , how the question will be asked , for certain States in the Union , about the public deficit in 1997 , in that some will not fulfil the conditions of the qualification criteria .
I would like to know whether the Commission can share with us its future recommendations and its attitude on this matter .
In other words , if the deficit is 3.1 or 3.2 % , in countries which have demonstrated that they have followed the correct path , does the Commission actually think that it could accept this slight overshoot ?
Mr Giansily , the decision will be taken next year by the Heads of State and of government , at the end of April , or the beginning of May 1998 .
The decision will be based upon a recommendation by the Commission , which will be the central element , as the Commission will play a central role in this process .
This recommendation will be adopted at the end of March 1998 , in order to take account of the real figures for 1997 .
Today , we are presenting predictions drawn up by the departments .
We are not carrying out an entrance examination ahead of time .
Therefore our predictions must not be made to say what they are not actually saying .
Predictions are a photograph at a given moment and not an anticipation of the entrance examination .
Next year , when we have our recommendations made , the Commission must take account of all the conditions set by the Treaty for entry to the single currency .
There are five of these conditions , the famous five criteria , which are not simply reference values .
Added to them there are a number of other conditions , like for example the independence of the central banks .
I must add that the examination must , and this is very important , consider the lasting nature of the convergence .
In other words , it will be a question of making sure that if , in 1997 , the conditions of budgetary stabilisation are correct , this stabilisation will continue throughout the coming years .
Indeed , may I remind you that when the single currency is in place , the figure of 3 % will no longer be an objective , but it will become a limit .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner what criteria were used to establish the Commission 's forecasts for the Italian , French and German deficits , which the International Monetary Fund and certain German institutes put at the same level of 3.2 % .
Has the International Monetary Fund been excessively severe towards Germany and France or has the Commission been excessively severe towards Italy ?
Secondly , Mr Commissioner , I would like to ask you why , when the Commission 's recommendation mentions the firm commitment of the German government and the Spanish authorities to achieve the 3 % objective , no such reference is made , either for 1997 or 1998 , to the Italian government 's repeatedly expressed commitment to keep below 3 % in both 1997 and 1998 , with decisions which have been pretty difficult to take in Italy .
Mr President , I will reply to Mr Imbeni that all States are dealt with in exactly the same way , on the basis of the same pattern of reasoning , in defining the conditions .
There is no discrimination .
These predictions are based upon macro-economic aggregates which take into account , in particular , assessments of growth .
As I do not know the predictions of the International Monetary Fund , which are not public , which have not been published , I cannot comment upon them .
I can say , however , that it frequently happens that the different international institutions make different predictions .
That is quite normal .
What I do observe , from having done this myself , is that looking back with hindsight on the past , to assess the predictions by the Commission , I can see that we have been at least as good , if not often better , than the other international institutions , and in particular than a number of private set-ups .
As far as the rules which are applicable are concerned , we are taking account of all the budgetary decisions which have been made by the governments , and we are assessing them .
What the departments have done - once again , we are not talking about a decision by the Commission , but an assessment by the Commission 's departments - is to make a precise evaluation of the effectiveness of the measures .
As regards Italy , since you are giving me the opportunity to talk about it , I would like to pay tribute to the nation , which , if our predictions are correct , is going to reduce its public deficit from 6.7 % to 3.2 % , that is by 3.5 % , if you listen to us , or by 3.7 % if you listen to the Italian government , it doesn 't really matter .
What I do note is the fact that this reduction in the public deficit is the largest ever recorded in Europe for fifteen years .
Consequently I think that the message which emerges clearly from all of these predictions today is a message of encouragement , a message of recognition for the work and effort achieved .
And nobody is to come and tell me , as I replied to Mr Giansily earlier , that these predictions are an entrance examination ahead of time for the single currency .
Not at all !
They are a photograph taken on the basis of data .
The data may be disputed , or observations may be made on them .
The departments are obliged to apply the same data to everybody and to make coherent economic hypotheses .
But these hypotheses are not necessarily the same for every country .
Regarding your comment on the problem concerning recommendations , honourable Member , I have here a text , to which we have made changes this morning in committee , to take account of exactly that , the particular sensitivity of the problem .
In other words , it was not , and is not , a matter of changing the figures which have been drawn up by the Commission 's departments , because the figures must be credible , that is , they must not be subject to any political pressure .
Be that as it may , in the presentation , and you will see , in the latest version which you perhaps do not yet have , account is taken perfectly of this difference in appreciation between what the government thinks and what the Commission thinks .
If the Commission is mistaken , that is to say , if its assessment is not correct , and if the Italian government thinks that its measures will be fully effective , well then the figures will be rather different .
But what counts is the encouragement of the overall message much more than a few dozen points .
Commissioner , when referring to the broad economic policy guidelines , you referred to a new wage structure , and I would like to know whether you meant flexibility downwards for wage patterns , along the United States model , referred to on so many occasions in the Annual Report .
And does he think that this should be applied in all countries ?
I think that it is necessary to see that wages depend on collective negotiation . That is the responsibility of the social partners .
It is not a matter therefore of interfering in this process .
All that the recommendations mean is that the level of productivity by qualification , by region , must be an element to be taken into consideration when setting levels of pay .
In any case , it is not a matter of advocating a general drop in pay .
Don 't misunderstand the meaning of our analyses .
Commissioner , the stability and growth pact provides for fines of up to the impressive amount of 0.5 % of GDP .
Does the Commission fully agree with such a drastic measure ?
Do you not think that dissuasive or preventive measures would have sufficed ?
Does it not concern you that the pact is being converted into an instrument basically determined by the political negotiation of sanctions ?
The need to pursue efforts at reducing public deficits in the medium term is an imperative of the Treaty which has been recognised as such by the Member States .
All the same , slipping over the 3 % is laid down explicitly as requiring sanctions . That is the Treaty .
The pact for stability and growth gives content to the Treaty 's expectations , it specifies what the Treaty provides for .
I would add that , for my part , I hope that these penalties do not have to be applied .
It is in this that they are a deterrent .
It is because Member States know that they run the risk of incurring large penalties that they will not put themselves in a position in which they will have to pay them .
To put it another way , these penalties are the deterrent valve which complements the preventive valve .
Enough is never said about the preventive valve of the stability pact , which is coherent , complete , structured , and which makes it possible to ensure that all economic and budgetary policies operate in a harmonious way and in the same direction for all the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , you say that you intend to send notes to ten countries because their budget deficits are excessive .
Yet at the same time you say that it is necessary to invest in the future and in human resources , but what exactly do you mean by that ?
What are the practical implications ?
Do you not think that these ten countries could find themselves in considerable difficulties ?
On the one hand you are bringing pressure to bear on them to step up austerity measures in public expenditure , but on the other hand you seem to be coming round to the point of view that it is necessary to invest in the future .
Is it not the case that many of the expenditure cuts which you are urging upon these ten countries will , on the contrary , weaken social security and reduce the human resources which you wish to support ?
Could you explain what you mean when you say that it is necessary to investment in the future in this situation ?
Firstly I would like to make the point that public deficits have never created jobs .
If deficits created jobs , we would know about it , we would see it , and in view of the level of public deficits in Europe , we would be in a position of overemployment .
Historically , I observe that the reduction in public deficits , the restoration of confidence , growth and the creation of jobs generally go hand in hand in Europe , and not only in Europe .
The United States will have a public deficit of 1 % this year , understood in the Maastrichtian sense of the criterion , and to my knowledge they are given as an example when it comes to the creation of jobs .
So consequently , there is no contradiction between the need to develop investment - I am speaking of private investment , since 85 % of investment is private - and the pursuit of the policy of budgetary stability which has borne fruit in Europe .
We are harvesting today the first fruits of this in terms of interest rates and growth .
We must continue along these lines .
What I have said is that , in the context of assessment , at the level of businesses , but also at the level of the States , it is appropriate to see how far we should now concentrate our efforts , taking account of room for manoeuvre where it exists , on seizing the opportunities and renewing investment which will be a factor for growth and the creation of jobs in the future .
Mr President , I would like to return to a topic that was raised once directly and once implicitly by two other colleagues .
In answer to Mr Giansily , the Commissioner clearly remarked that at this point he was not willing to decide the actual passage to the single currency because that is for next year .
Answering Mr Imbeni , he correctly acknowledged and saluted the adjustment efforts made in Italy .
However , if one reads the report , I would put it to the Commissioner that the plainest message that comes from the report in respect of Italy - and this is the major sensitive political question for next year - is that it gives a clear economic policy message that the one-off adjustments in the budget are masking the need for further economic policy change .
Without that , the clear underlying economic message in today 's report is that Italy would fail to meet a condition sine qua non .
Is that not the basic economic reality underlying your sums today , Commissioner ?
I think that the principal message , when you compare the figures , between 1997 and 1998 , is that you realise that the figures for 1997 are in general obtained because Member States have taken isolated measures for stabilisation or one-off measures , in English .
The very clear message which emerges from these forecasts , from these recommendations , is that , where additional measures must be taken for 1998 within the framework of the lasting nature of convergence , it is necessary that these measures are structural and not just one-off .
I think that this is how the tables , the figures , should be interpreted , and once again the exercise which we will have plenty of opportunity to comment on next year , Mr Cox , should not be anticipated .
Mr President , in your recommendations to the Member States I see no signs of the Commission playing an offensive and active role , for we have to remember that there have been proposals before the Commission and the European Parliament since 1993 that seek to ensure that jobs really can be created via infrastructure investment and innovation campaigns and that we really can aim at employment-boosting growth .
Do you not believe that you ought to impose stronger obligations on the Member States here , in relation also to the kind of savings policies pursued in the Member States and to the structure of the consolidation policies in the Member States ?
Do you not think that in this context the Member States have to make stronger commitments so that we really can achieve cross-frontier successes here ?
What is the point of guidelines if the European Commission and the European Parliament are the only ones to repeat them ?
Do you not think that there is one recommendation missing from your list and that monetary policy could still play a more constructive part in a suitable policy mix , given the real interest rates , which are still not low enough ?
Moreover , it is not the case , Commissioner , that the response to structural change has to lie in ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) ... a social dialogue , which you must require of the Member Sates , so that if an economic policy proves successful workers subject to wage restraints can share in this success via a policy of income and asset formation ?
Mrs Randzio-Plath asks three questions .
A more active role for the Commission : it seems to me , Madam , that the Commission is not sparing any effort either in the context of definition of the macro-economic framework , or in the other backup measures .
I am thinking about the large networks and the framework programmes of research and development .
Nevertheless the Commission cannot change the decision-making procedures within the Council , and in particular , it cannot replace the rule of unanimity with that of the qualified majority .
Perhaps , and I hope this will be the case , Amsterdam will bring us a solution on this matter .
Having said that , I think that we must not centralise everything at Brussels level , and that we are in a liberal economy , in which subsidiarity must play a role .
It is as necessary to define a stable framework within which to conduct economic policy as a community , as it is that at the level of structural measures , social measures , and a number of measures , I am thinking particularly of the employment market , this definition comes under the specificity of the individual nations , of social dialogue and of contact between the various partners .
The programmes of budgetary adjustment , as I have said and as I repeat , must be credible and socially balanced .
There should be no attempt to oppose budgetary stability to jobs , or budgetary stability to social welfare .
I think that if budgetary stability is pursued , it is really also , and sometimes above all , to safeguard the future of our systems of social protection .
Last comment on the policy mix .
I think that , for a number of months now , it has been patently obvious that the effort which has been made in terms of economic policy has permitted a relaxation of monetary conditions in Europe and that interest rates in Europe have not been so low for a number of years .
The savings which result from this , in terms of billions , for European economies , are considerable .
Policy mix is a good thing , but the relaxation of monetary conditions is only and will only be possible if budgetary consolidation is sufficient .
This appears to me to be an essential element for the future .
Mr President , we have millions of unemployed people .
That is a problem and I think the most important thing is to give these people work again .
Can we in fact assume that the lack of convergence criteria and lack of a single currency are largely responsible for the unemployment we see today ?
Is that a major cause of it ?
Secondly , is it reasonable and possible to reduce the timescale from 1999 to 2002 ?
More jobs , yes , that is desirable , that is what we are trying to do .
But we will not have more jobs without more growth and we will not have more growth without balanced and stabilised public finances .
And if we create the Euro , it will be to give Europe an economic framework in which we will have more growth and more jobs .
Why ?
Because to make the Euro , it is necessary to have stabilised public finances .
To make the Euro and to live within the Euro it is necessary to maintain stable public finances .
I remind you all the same that half of household savings are used today to finance public deficits and that this money would be better used to finance private investment or consumption .
So more growth is necessary , and the Euro will give us more growth in Europe .
And this will permit us to make more investments , there will be more consumption and more jobs will be created .
Second comment : more jobs , today this also involves structural measures , relating to the employment market , relating to training , which I spoke about earlier , research , also relating to education , apprenticeship , and excessive welfare costs which weigh on the lowest paid , particularly in the labour-intensive industries .
All of these reforms are under way , and sometimes it is hard to apply them , as it is with others still , in particular reform of the labour market , which must be conducted hand in hand with the social partners .
This takes time , it must be speeded up and it is only with these efforts that we will indeed arrive in Europe at having unemployment rates as low as those which exist in the United States .
Mr President , for several months , we have been watching in the European Union a real race to meet the targets set by the Maastricht criteria , that is , to fulfil the conditions , considered draconian by some economists , for passage to the single currency according to the dates set .
Events of political life bear witness to it every day , such as the recent alarm sounded by Germany , or the reasons put forward by the French government for the dissolution of the National Assembly , and we have witnessed permanent debate on the timetable for Monetary Union .
Without wishing to question the argument for the single currency , we can nevertheless note , in order to deplore it , the very prejudicial effect on European economies and the use of stringent plans implemented by the Member States , to the point that it seems that the priority given to the reduction of public deficits in accordance with the criterion of Maastricht , to mention only one , prohibits any economic renewal , holds back growth and annihilates any effort towards the creation of jobs .
What really positive , immediate measures can the Commission advocate to tackle the catastrophic social situation in the European Union while maintaining unchanged , that is with no flexibility , the priorities inherent in making the single currency a reality ?
In the relentless pursuit of stablisation policies , does the Commission not glimpse the danger of throwing the baby out with the bathwater ?
These are ready-made formulae .
I believe I have already answered this question by saying that it is certainly not , today , by kick-starting the economy , by carving out even greater public deficits , by increasing the number of jobs in public services , by increasing useless expenditure , by increasing the number of civil service posts , by increasing everything which is not productive , that the problem of unemployment will be sorted out , because if we followed your analysis , Sir , it would mean that tomorrow it would be our children who would have to foot the bill for the errors committed by such policies .
Commissioner , since Thursday , as you know , in Italy there has been talk only about Commissioner de Silguy 's figures and in particular this 3.2 % which would put Italy in a corner , while many other international institutions list the same figures for other countries , one of which you know very well and which is facing an election campaign after which nobody knows what sort of policy will be pursued .
So , the first question I would put to you is this : why this possible difference in approach ?
My second question , on Italy in particular , is : what , therefore , is the background reason which makes you doubt the Italian programme ?
Would it be problems with the structures behind the government 's efforts which are not satisfactory to you ?
Mr President , a little earlier you called me to order because I had perhaps been rather long answering Mr Imbeni on the same question , so I shall be brief .
There is no difference in approach between Italy and the other Member States in the work carried out by the departments of the Commission as far as the predictions are concerned .
Secondly , I am prepared to support the comparison , with the results in my hand , on the predictions made by the Commission and by the other international institutions .
Generally , experience tends to prove us right .
There is no difference in approach .
Once again there are differences in analysis at the same time on the impact , in 1997 , of the finance laws which were adopted at the end of 1996 .
There is also a difference in terms of growth .
Furthermore , there is a difference in terms of total quantitative efficacy over the year of the measures which are being taken by Italy today .
But , once again , the levels of difference between the Commission and Italy are extremely small .
I will only take one example so as not to prolong the debate .
Regarding inheritance tax , the Italian government thinks that , in 1997 , as the legislation has changed , revenue will be 50 % higher than it was last year .
I think this is perhaps a little excessive .
I could take one or two other examples like that .
But the important thing , I seems to me , is not to question the Commission 's credibility , nor to try to put pressure on the Commission , because you would affect the institution , it is rather to consider once again that the Italian effort is an effort without precedent in 1997 , in the stabilisation of public finances .
I think it is that above all else that I remember , myself , from the Commission 's predictions .
Mr Katiforis , there are some dangerous slopes which it is better not to chance .
In particular , regarding inflation , I do not think that just because we have controlled it in an appropriate manner for a number of years , its ghost has disappeared definitively from the European Union .
I think we should remain very vigilant .
Secondly , inflation is still at 2 % .
Our target of 2 % is not at all incompatible with , or in contradiction to , our figures regarding employment and what we should do with respect to the fight against unemployment .
I think when all is said and done that we must continue to keep on course , if we want , indeed , to ease the conditions of monetary policy in order to make the policy mix more flexible .
We must not start to get involved in policies which involve playing with fire and reintroducing price rises or inflation into the economy , when one never knows how this kind of policy is going to end up .
Thank you very much , Mr de Silguy .
Illegal and harmful material on the Internet
The next item is the report ( A4-0098 / 97 ) by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the communication from the Commission on illegal and harmful content on the Internet ( COM ( 96 ) 0487 - C4-592-96 ) .
Mr President , the electronic communications network , like the language of Aesop , is the best and the worst of instruments .
However it is necessary to take into consideration the explosion in its use , because , in less than five years , several million citizens have connected themselves up to it .
Very great importance should be attached to the very quantity of information circulating on it , as several hundred thousand sites can be consulted simultaneously .
The quality of this information and this data must also be taken into consideration , since the data is scientific , technical , literary , artistic , commercial , financial , political too , and we will have to talk about that again , and personal .
This development has given rise to two major consequences .
First of all , lack of familiarity with the tool of the electronic communications network has led the anxious , the fearful , to advocate a directive , normative , and even repressive attitude , and often technically ill-adapted solutions .
Secondly , before such possibilities , the lawbreakers have moved more quickly than the good and the list of infractions of national and international laws is considerable .
There is trafficking of all kinds , in humans , of course , in arms , ammunition and drugs .
Furthermore , even exploitation of the credulity of the most fragile elements of the population is expressed commercially , politically , in relation to beliefs , developing all sorts of obscurantism .
Finally and especially , the most fragile element which we must protect is children , whether they are the target of unacceptable messages , or whether they are taking part , which is even more unacceptable .
Under these conditions , the protection of rights causes us to think .
In any case , when one right is sacrificed to protect another , both are lost irredeemably , make no mistake .
A few simple principles should guide our action .
First of all , freedom of expression , which is an absolute right , subject only to rare exceptions enshrined in law .
Secondly , scrupulous respect for private life , and very specifically for correspondence , with electronic mail necessarily being strictly protected .
Recent events which have arisen in Belgium , where we are sitting , have aroused legitimate emotion , to which our Parliament has not been completely impervious .
Attacks on physical and mental integrity , rape , assassination , torture and illegal confinement , have sent shockwaves through even the institutions of this country .
We believe it is right not to give way to a collective ghoul which would have us believe that all the horrors of the earth are coming to invade business offices and middle-class homes , through computer screens .
We should protect and fight in an appropriate way the illegal and harmful content of the network .
There are two things to which we should give priority . Firstly , responsibility and , secondly , solidarity .
First of all , by favouring the establishment of a code of good conduct which has been freely discussed and implemented by all the active parties involved , that is , manufacturers , service providers , site operators and users .
The British model , in relation to this , should be a subject for our consideration and we should probably take our inspiration from it .
Because it is a working group which provides monitoring of the freely accepted regulation , and which also provides a hot-line for users to report serious violations .
This is an internal action which enables the offender to be tracked down and invited to withdraw the unacceptable text or images , and which reserves recourse to the police or the law as a last resort .
At the same time , it will be appropriate to make the user responsible for himself and his family , since it is possible to take action at the level of the family by using screening software , there being always a great temptation to blame institutions , businesses or governments , making out that they are responsible for misfortunes which we are all able and duty bound to avoid .
Madam President , my compliments to Mr Pradier on his excellent report .
The Internet is something which opens up many new opportunities .
Of course there are also many negative effects which we must counter as far as possible , certainly when it comes to protecting minors and human dignity .
But we must take care that our concern to fight these alarming phenomena does not take precedence over the attention we need to give to the cultural revolution of today and tomorrow which the Internet makes possible .
Regarding negative effects , it is most important that we should distinguish between things on the Internet which are undesirable and those which are illegal .
As far as things which are illegal and harmful go , the Internet brings nothing new compared with existing printed media .
The difference lies in the content of electronic information which is harder to police .
But those who use the Net , and the service providers , are easier to identify and far easier to identify than is the case with the present-day media .
The problems of identifying harmful and illegal content are made worse by the fact that the Internet knows no frontiers .
But on the other hand we must also bear in mind the right to confidentiality of correspondence as enshrined in the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
Member States must not think that they can each regulate this sector individually .
This area can only be tackled supranationally , not only by the European Union collectively but above all at the level of the G7 , United Nations , World Trade Organization and OECD .
International co-operation is the only way to prevent the creation of safe refuges from which anyone can pollute the Internet at will .
And the importance of self-regulation must also be stressed .
Mr Pradier rightly talked about setting up a code of conduct .
Legislative measures can only be a support in this area .
I would once again emphasize the parental role .
That is very important and merits special attention .
I am grateful to the Committee on Civil Liberties for having adopted virtually all the amendments put down by the Committee on Culture .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as this report emphasizes , the Internet is extremely important in terms of citizen participation in public life .
The primary purpose of the Internet is not to disseminate illegal and harmful material .
I think that needs to be stressed .
Nor does this material spring to eye immediately .
In fact people have to search for it .
At the same time such material is not just offensive but certainly justifies the need to take precautions .
In my view , the Commission 's communication contains too few practical proposals and defers possible solutions to the distant future of global international agreements .
However , the report before us sensibly stresses that the European Union , as an economically strong and technically advanced region , can act as a forerunner in the world .
Going beyond the Commission proposal , I believe the following practical proposals in the report as very useful : the call for a clear sender-recognition code the requirement of minimum standards for service providers , own responsibility and liability for any material provided and liability for any unlawful content made available by thirdparty services if the carrier is positively aware of that content and if he is technically able to prevent its use .
Personally , I regard point 7 , which calls for quality ratings for service providers , as problematic .
I believe this project is likely to fall foul of practical problems or that these will at least make things far more difficult .
That is all the more reason for us as Parliament to call for any viable measures to be implemented as soon as possible .
Madam Chairman , we are currently seeing revolutionary development in information technology .
The Internet is an indispensable part of this , particularly in terms of the spread of information .
But there are also destructive elements which must be opposed .
The European Parliament must follow carefully developments on the Internet , but must also be aware of its role , which is to support and facilitate the development of the information society , not to regulate it out of existence .
Mr Pradier 's report is extremely perceptive in this respect .
It bases itself on the assumption that the Internet is difficult to regulate , but then complements this view with practical , tangible measures against illegal and undesirable material on the Internet .
When this subject was discussed in committee there were calls for a variety of regulations such as registration of Internet users and a ban on electronic encoding .
We could compare this with those who once wanted to destroy Gutenberg 's printing press : there is fear and ignorance of all things new , and people like to think that the ideas of the past are also relevant to the present .
We must remember that the majority of people who use the Internet have good intentions , but there are also those with evil intentions .
Limiting free and global access to information through regulation of the Internet is like throwing out the baby with the bath water .
There are two remedies in the fight against those who use the Internet for evil purposes , that is to give the police adequate resources and to encourage self regulation on the Internet market .
The PPE group have proposed , and had included in the report , that the police must have adequate resources to investigate illegal activity which takes place on the Internet .
This is not a question of introducing legislation which encroaches on people 's integrity but of providing resources in the form of knowledge and technical equipment to be able to take action against illegal behaviour .
There is a huge imbalance in terms of resources .
We have also proposed a European quality mark for those Internet suppliers who ' filter ' the content of their services , all with a view to facilitating and encouraging self regulation .
In conclusion , I would point out that the Internet is a vital part of the developing information society .
Ten years ago nobody would have imagined such broad use of the Internet or the great range of information currently available .
Similarly , we cannot imagine what the information society will look like in a further ten years time .
The only thing we know is that the Internet has developed without any form of controlling regulation .
Don 't let us suppress global ' networking ' because of ignorance and fear of things new .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank Mr Pradier for his excellent report and Mr Pex for giving us the opinion of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
The information networks are in full expansion and a massive volume of images and information can travel the airwaves promoting the exchange of knowledge and freedom of expression in countries where it is not guaranteed .
Europe is increasingly beginning to dialogue via the Internet ; unfortunately the governments of the Member States have some difficulty controlling it , unable to see the illegal and harmful messages sent over the Internet ; furthermore , different States use different legal instruments to regulate national security , the protection of minors and human dignity , economic and information security , the protection of privacy and personal reputation , and even the protection of intellectual property .
So cooperation on law and policy is needed at European Union level and international level , based on new conventions and legal instruments , taking account of the principle of subsidiarity and safeguarding the principle of freedom of expression .
Measures are needed to limit the provision of services by controlling the material travelling on the net , making a fundamental distinction between illegal content , relevant to the legal sector , and content harmful to minors which is essentially relevant to the moral and cultural field .
This harmful content can be blocked through filtration software or , in the case of electronic mail , by using key words .
There is no doubt that both access providers and service providers are responsible for exchange of illegal information and material .
Finally , thanks to the Internet , a vast range of economic and cultural sectors are being transformed , and a range of new opportunities are offered to small and medium-sized businesses .
But these too can be used improperly , so to avoid such abuse it is urgent to adopt new measures and rules of conduct , encouraging self-discipline and promoting a European evaluation system , with educational and awareness campaigns for the public surfing the net , particularly aimed at parents so that they can educate their children .
Madam President , Mr Pradier , on behalf of the Liberal Group my compliments on this excellent report .
The Internet is a huge world-wide network of computers providing a picture of the information and thinking which exists in our society .
A unique feature of the Internet is that it is at the same time a medium for publishing and communication .
Consequently , whatever is illegal off-line is also illegal on-line .
Censorship of the Internet constricts freedom of expression without giving people real protection against illegal content .
Furthermore , censorship restricts the free movement of services in Europe .
One proof of that is the blocking by the German Internet service providers of the homepages of the Dutch Internet provider Access for All .
Companies offering their services via Access for All are being taken for a ride .
In the view of the Liberal Group , it is the politicians ' job to encourage developments which make for a more democratic and open society .
So as legislators we should be cautious until greater experience has been gained of the Internet .
We don 't want to throw out the baby with the bath water !
It goes without saying that child pornography and racist material are outrageous .
But a cross-border medium like the Internet requires cross-border legislation , starting at the European level .
Here too cooperation between Member States in the area of justice is vital .
Although there are no watertight guarantees , technology would seem to be the best way of keeping illegal material off the Internet , to protect minors .
My Group is in favour of that .
And there is no need for the government to take over from parents here .
The responsibility rests with parents themselves .
Madam President , I myself was one of the people affected by the blockade imposed against the provider Access for All , because my homepage containing information on Europe was no longer accessible to many German users of the Internet .
But thanks to a very simple measure , the simple announcement via the Internet that this blockade was in place , and I can tell you why it was put in place - it was put in place to stop German Internet users from reading the content of the publication Radikal which as you know is banned in Germany but not in the Netherlands . So it was disseminated in the Netherlands through the provider Access for All , though Access for All was of course not responsible for it , and one of its users had placed Radikal on his homepage .
In any event , the blockade was lifted promptly following the simple expedient of users world-wide making ' mirrors ' and so publishing Radikal , so that there was no longer any point in the German providers cutting off these providers , because that messed up the Net for German users .
So it was counterproductive .
At the same time it is clear that it is not so easy to act .
Because something which is banned in Germany is not necessarily banned in the Netherlands .
Something regarded in the European Union as generally acceptable in terms of the criminal law is not regarded as generally acceptable in terms of the criminal law in the United States .
In short , even if we seek all manner of wonderful European solutions to curtail harmful influences on the Internet or keep illegal material off it we must bear in mind that different parts of the world may have different views and consequently it is no bad idea to try to regulate this at UN level .
Madam President , the opportunities which the Internet offers in the area of communications are unimaginable .
The first Internet users would have us believe that nothing but good could come of it .
The information superhighway would blaze a trail towards a new social order .
Since then it has emerged that the rapid growth of the Net has brought not only positive applications but also the ability to spread abhorrent information on a wide scale .
Once again there seem to be no grounds for an optimistic view of humanity .
What we see in the world we also see on the Internet .
Pornography , paedophile networks , drug pages and political extremism all contaminate the Net .
So there is no doubt that measures must be taken .
The national states will have to work for effective measures both individually and collectively .
The problem here is that there may be differences between national laws over the definition of illegal and harmful information .
One example is information on drugs , which may be freely available in some countries but banned in others .
It will also be difficult to make legislation on freedom of expression on the Internet different from legislation which already exists for other forms of communication such as the written word , TV and video , though the Internet can penetrate people 's lives more easily .
So I am glad that , in addition to active efforts to prevent things which are illegal from being available on the Internet , ways are also being sought of keeping harmful things off the Net .
But I remain very critical about the generally accepted distinction being made between illegal and harmful content .
Child pornography is illegal , adult pornography is only harmful to children .
How about that for a contrived difference ?
As if pornography was harmless to adults .
The practice of sexual abuse of women and children , sex tourism and child pornography made for adults teaches us differently .
Self-regulation and personal responsibility must remain the priorities , but matters which are beyond individual human control must be governed by clear moral standards .
Madam President , as the recent two-hour warning strike by providers in Austria has shown , the subject of this report is highly explosive .
It is a matter of creating a balance between freedom of expression and cultural services on the one hand , and preventing illegal content such as loathsome child pornography and incitement to violence and hatred on the other .
Like all self-contradictory questions , this is a difficult one to resolve .
And in the case of the Internet there are also technical difficulties involved in monitoring the contents .
The question of liability on the part of access and service providers is a delicate one .
In our view this opinion strikes a sensible balance between the different interests without making too many demands on the providers .
Even though our group believes that the proposals set out in the report could be implemented through inter-state measures , we approve the substance of the report .
Madam President , we in the European Parliament have always agreed that the protection of human rights and fundamental rights must be the top priority in all social and political areas and that these principles must apply even when we face new social phenomena , which can be quite frightening for some people .
So our main yardstick must still be the protection of human rights when we consider harmful and illegal content on the Internet .
However , in the case of such illegal content , I also think it is essential for us to ensure that penal and other sanctions are applied in full through new methods of investigation and pursuit adapted to the Web .
It will certainly also be necessary to provide the police and criminal prosecution authorities with better resources to that end .
But nor can we , as some earlier speakers have pointed out , get round the need at least to establish minimum common criminal law norms in Europe , in order to create a good point of departure for global negotiations .
By its nature , the Internet and other computer networks will call for imaginative forms of self-regulation to combat any illegal and harmful content , and here I think the report is particularly successful and has proposed very suitable measures .
The producers of hardware and software , the providers , have just as much responsibility here as the families , the children and the youth organizations .
I believe that they alone can use the offered filtering software in such a way as to meet the differing cultural and educational family standards in Europe and really offer the families some assistance here .
To conclude , let me call on you once again not to forget the useful effects of the Internet on children and young people when we discuss illegal and harmful content - and the exhibition in the foyer of this Chamber gives a good picture of this .
Madam President , in an interview on this subject our rapporteur described himself as an old liberal - in the sense of old-fashioned - and not an excessive moralist .
I confirm that he has been liberal ; he has certainly paid great attention to suggestions from colleagues on the committee and , called upon to deal with illegal and harmful content , he has rightly highlighted at the outset what an enormous revolution this is : the dream of a great planetary community exchanging knowledge through an intrinsically democratic device .
He is right , because President Clinton 's social programme mentions two universal ages : the age at which American children should know how to read and write , and the age - twelve , I think - at which they should all know how to surf the Internet .
So it is a marvellous tool and , as an old liberal , our rapporteur tells us about the difficulties facing legislators required to regulate such phenomena .
He tells us about the inadequacy of legal measures which threaten either to be window dressing which serves no purpose , or to diminish rather than increase freedom of expression .
The old liberal knows all this and , while he describes himself as not an excessive moralist , he knows and he states that we must address the issue of moral or ethical conduct if we are to prevent an instrument of freedom becoming an instrument of pornography , terrorism , incitement to suicide - as happened recently back home : all virtual , of course .
We must admit that this battle will not be won without a greater sense of responsibility and ethical conduct .
Why else call for individual and family responsibility ?
How else can standards of quality or a code of good conduct be set , what other basis is there for the regulations we hope to see ?
Even a multimedia police or cyberpolice will not be enough : we know how much time and money will have to be spent , and we also know how quickly a network can be re-established after discovery .
But I want to say , along with the rapporteur - whom I thank for this document - that we are all old liberals , seeking to understand the new frontiers of freedom and responsibility .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Bangemann , I am glad to see you here today , because the Industrial Affairs Council has also been concerning itself this week with the ongoing action programme .
I think this is an excellent opportunity of getting the Industrial Affairs Council to influence the various other Councils to take major steps in this area .
Looking at Mr Pradier 's important report , we see that the Councils of Ministers have said they will take a number of steps , but I do not see all that much progress .
This is what worries me most .
On the one hand , we are supposed to have more co-operation in justice and police matters and , on the other hand , enormous efforts are to be made in the area of education so that the education system in turn can benefit from the opportunities afforded by communications .
This week both Commissioner Bangemann and I attended an excellent conference organized by Mr Donnelly to review those opportunities .
I should like to ask the Commissioner what his plans are in this area for the Industrial Affairs Council ?
Madam President , what characterises Mr Pradier 's report is hypocrisy .
Indeed , for the first time ever , our Parliament is concerned , or is pretending to be concerned , about the dangers of paedophilia .
That 's fair enough , but it 's a bit late .
The Belgian paedophiles did not await the arrival of the Internet to commit their sinister practices , enjoying complicity from within the very heart of the Socialist government .
No more did French paedophiles await the Internet to batter young disabled people in order to satisfy their perverse instincts and they also enjoyed the protection of the Socialist authorities .
I am thinking of the sinister Coral affair , which was widely talked about in France in the 1980s and which never came to anything , because all police and legal inquiries were stifled .
Allow me to add that paedophiles from all countries and sexual perverts do not need the Internet to find what moral and legal laxity has put in the newspaper kiosks of almost all the countries of the fifteen European nations .
Mr Pradier 's discourse on paedophilia on the Internet is a sham which aims to justify the re-establishment of censorship , not on morals but on what is politically incorrect , culturally incorrect or historically incorrect .
What is targeted by the Pradier report is not unspeakable behaviour , it is opinions and ideas which are not in accordance with the thought police .
We will not approve the conclusions of the Pradier report , for four reasons .
Firstly , because we are attached to freedom of expression in the sphere of ideas and we condemn texts which destroy freedom .
Secondly , because we remember that the basis of the Internet is electronic mail and , unlike some totalitarians , we are attached to freedom of correspondence , including electronic mail .
Next , because technically , controlling the Internet seems barely possible to us , the way things are at the moment , at any rate .
Finally , because supposing it were technically possible , it would require a global government and we do not want one of those .
In this area as in others , we are saying no to the global big brother which some are trying to impose upon us or would like to impose upon us .
Madam President , I take a rather more favourable view than the last speaker of Mr Pradier 's report .
I want to stick to the question of the Net and how it has changed our whole view of electronic communication .
My professional life has been in broadcasting and that in turn gave way to what in English is called ' narrow-casting ' subscription cable and things like that , and there was the person-to-person communication via the telephone .
You could not leave messages for the generality on the telephone apart from leaving a rude message on your answering machine .
Now , however , every citizen is , potentially , his own bulletin board .
We are all websites now .
I would like to be able to take a robust first amendment position on this as has been upheld in the courts in the United States .
In that respect alone , I have some sympathy with what Mr Le Gallou has just said .
There is a danger of thought-police .
There is a danger that we may try to intervene where matters of opinion are concerned .
The dilemma before us today is not over matters of opinion but over matters of intrusion and what happens when people invade the space of others , bringing despair and threatening behaviour to their activities .
Technology cannot be allowed to take liberty by the throat .
Open media can be intrusive and the problem with the Internet today is that we have to find a way of dealing with the various segments within which its operations take place .
We all know that groups which indulge in sadistic and paedophilic practices mask their activities and hide behind other forms of identity .
We have to make sure that the access-providers as well as service and content providers recognize their responsibilities in this matter , firstly , for the identification of each service and secondly for the classification without which filtering will not be possible .
Filtering in itself will be for the responsible people who know a great deal about this system .
There are many other people at risk on the Net today and we have to be mindful of their needs as well .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Small and medium-sized undertakings
The next item is the joint debate on the following three reports :
A4-0104 / 97 by Mrs Torres Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission on the craft industry and small enterprises , keys to growth and employment in Europe ( COM ( 95 ) 0502 - C4-0503 / 95 ) ; -A4-0034 / 97 by Mrs Peijs , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the integrated programme for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and the craft sector ( multiannual programme ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0329 - C4-0490 / 96 ) ; -A4-0100 / 97 by Mr Garosci , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the coordination of activities in favour of SMEs and the craft sector ( COM ( 95 ) 0362 - C4-0120 / 96 ) .
Madam President , Mr Papoutsis , ladies and gentlemen , today we are going to discuss what has to be Europe 's main problem : employment . We are always talking about the need to create employment for the 18 million unemployed people , which the European development model has created , without finding a solution , which results from the fact that this is a complex problem , and the need to develop multiple types of action and have a structural character .
The fact that we have not yet found a solution to this problem , which we know to be closely linked to the need for economic growth at a higher rate than that achieved in recent years , results from the fact that the policies pursued and instruments used have not so far proved to be the best-suited for creating jobs .
In 1995 , there were about 16 million small enterprises in the European Union accounting for more than 40 million jobs .
In spite of all the challenges that small enterprises are facing today , such as administrative burdens , financing , training , transition to the information society , increasing competition , etc. they are the ones that create employment .
In the last five years , 60-80 % of all new jobs in the private sector have been created by small enterprises , the micro-enterprises being the most dynamic .
A survey published in 1996 under the patronage of the Commission demonstrated that whilst the average percentage of job creation in the 500 most dynamic SMEs was 158 % in the last five years , it was 1035 % in the enterprises with less than ten employees .
With a view to the situation on the labour market , all efforts should be made to ensure that the small enterprises and the craft industry can continue - and even improve - their contribution to job creation .
However , even recognising the important role of the craft industry and small companies in job creation , there is a manifest incoherence in Community policy when it comes to implementing actions and support programmes which are frequently of diminished value , delayed or suspended .
I am especially sorry that the Finance Ministries have yet to give the green light to European regulations guaranteeing loans for job creation , known as the ELISE programme .
So let us see what we expect of the Commission on this matter .
First of all , it should tell us what share of the Structural Funds - EAGGF , ERDF and the European Social Fund - is really given over to SMEs and , in particular , to micro-enterprises .
After all , it is far easier for medium and large enterprises to find experts who know how to fill in the extremely complicated questionnaires presented to them by the Commission .
On the other hand , giving a lot of money to small projects calls for far less effort in terms of analysis and monitoring than giving a small amount of money to large enterprises .
This problem of filling in forms is a vital one .
I should like to know how many members of this Parliament , Commissioners or Ministers , confronted with a Community form , would be able to fill it in .
This is not hot air but I can actually give you examples of leading university lecturers or presidents of professional orders who have already told me about this and complained about the complexity of all of these forms .
After all , we say that we want to support SMEs and micro-enterprises .
So tell me then please , Mr Commissioner , what percentage of the Structural Funds is really given over to this type of enterprise , so that they can create jobs ?
Instead of creating jobs every year large firms actually sack hundreds of workers .
Is the Commission really willing to simplify the whole process of access to Community funds by small and very small enterprises and , in particular , the craft industry ?
The second problem is one of credits and delay in payment .
We need a directive which puts an end to these intolerable situations in which people who do not need them receive loans while consumers and suppliers delay their payments in such a way that economically viable enterprises are made financially inviable . As the Commission itself admits , this means that 50 % of SMEs have a life expectancy of only five years .
The third problem is to do with the tax system , which penalises work and favours capital .
In all Community countries , the majority of those paying direct taxes are workers whereas others get off scot free .
Rules on VAT should be changed so as to make people want to work . There should be a taxation and tax-related overhaul .
Is the Commission really willing to carry out such an overhaul ?
And the final problem which I would like to put to you is to do with education .
The level of vocational education of most of our businessmen is very low .
That is why we really must give support where it is due , especially in remote regions or ultra-peripheral ones which also need support for marketing and exports .
We really must help young people and women in particular who make up two-thirds of all unemployed people .
We really must put an end to this hypocrisy : if the European Council and the governments in general are genuinely concerned about the problem of employment then they should give help to those who create jobs , in other words SMEs and micro-enterprises , the necessary means so that they can do this and increase their production and economic growth , something which the whole of Europe needs .
Madam President , it is too silly for words that we are only now discussing the integrated programme .
My first draft text was finished by the end of November 1996 and a full five months later we are discussing this report in the plenary .
Mrs Torres Marques 's excellent report deals with a conference which took place in 1994 .
So there are , to say the least , question marks as to the efficiency of Parliament itself .
Then we have the integrated programme .
It is good that the Commission is trying to take a consistent approach to all the SME initiatives it currently has onstream .
And the most important feature of the report is that it indicates , for each programme , who is responsible for co-ordinating that programme .
The Commission does not do this .
After studying the Commission 's communication I am still just as much in the dark as before about how each part of a programme is co-ordinated and by whom .
That is a pity , because a properly thought-out co-ordination plan would have been very helpful to all those involved and particularly small businesses at which after all the operation is ultimately aimed .
I only hope the special co-ordinating department which has just been set up within DG XXIII will be really effective .
My next point is this .
The integrated programme starts from the premise that small businesses must be helped primarily because they create jobs and so help to resolve the political problem of unemployment .
I have to admit that to begin with everyone involved with small businesses , myself included , was delighted with the high profile which this approach gave to small businesses .
But gradually I have had enough of it .
It is a way of looking at small businesses which does not do justice to the essential value and essential problems of this sector of the economy .
These firms are not different from others because they create jobs , but because their small size prevents them from benefiting from economies of scale .
And the ability to exploit economies of scale is precisely what characterizes the single market .
That is also the reason why we must fight hard at European level to defend the interests of small businesses .
Not because they are sad , not because they create jobs , but because their very nature prevents them from taking part in the single market .
Programmes for SMEs must be shaped with that idea in mind .
Not with the idea that these firms can solve our problem .
The inflexibility which politicians have brought to various areas of the market , for example the labour market , must be overcome by us as politicians and not dumped in the laps of small businesses .
Their programmes are made impossible by constant bureaucratic demands to preserve jobs .
In my report , rather than give another exhaustive summary of all the measures which should ideally be taken , as the Commission has already done , I confined myself to picking out the most important points .
Given that the Council decided to cut the budget for small businesses , my view is that the Commission must concentrate primarily on very specific projects .
I will mention some of them .
Simplification of the burden of bureaucracy on small businesses .
Making UIAPME a part of the social dialogue at last .
Today would seem to be a historic day in that regard , since as we speak UIAPME and UNICE are talking about how to solve this problem , and it has to be solved .
Improvement of the relationship between financial institutions and small businesses .
Preparation of small businesses for the introduction of the euro .
I will come back to that in a moment .
Support for small businesses in gaining access to the information society .
Encouragement for entrepreneurial endeavour and support for specific target groups , special attention to be paid to female entrepreneurs and their spouses working in the same small business .
And then , not least , the problem of succession in businesses .
The passing down of a business from one generation to the next .
In the European Union as a whole that costs 300 000 jobs a year and doubtless quite unnecessarily .
One final cry from the heart , Madam President .
I am not going to tell any more small businessmen that they must prepare for monetary union .
I think it is ridiculous that all manner of idiots in this Union keep rushing into print about whether or not monetary union is going to happen .
What we need is clarification .
If we are expecting business people to invest in a monetary union , the first provider of clarification must be the government which is asking them to do it .
I think that people like Mr Tietmeyer should keep quiet and small businessmen need to be told what is what .
Madam President , it is time we talked big about small businesses .
Jobs for our people in the EU and in Britain are at the top of our political agenda .
Getting jobs is our Holy Grail .
That is why we turn to the SME sector and , in particular to small firms which employ fewer than ten people .
Why ?
Because four out of five new jobs in the private sector have come from this unsung source .
What can the Commission and Parliament do to help provide jobs through small businesses in the European Union ?
I strongly support the Commission 's third multiannual programme for 1997-2000 .
The initiatives it contains are commendable .
However , at the top of the Commission 's agenda should be the deployment of DG XXIII 's slender resources to vet legislation and programmes which are brought forward by other directorates-general for their beneficial or adverse affect on Europe 's small firms .
For example , there are the huge structural funds which are used to favour SMEs throughout the Union , including my constituency of Cheshire West and Wirral in England .
Happy as I am that an SME facility has been set up for Euro-Wirral , is such spending instigated , delivered and monitored by DG XVI or DG XXIII ?
Is it set against an established , comprehensive SME policy designed by DG XXIII ?
I will welcome Commissioner Papoutsis to my constituency in July to witness helpful EU spending of SME funds in Ellesmere Port and on the Wirral .
In the meantime , he might like to ponder how EU labelling legislation can confuse and dismay small businesses if not properly explained and implemented .
There is a small chocolate manufacturer in Cheshire who rails against the big chocolate makers whose larger resources enable them to ride out problems which snag smaller fry .
We should always be sensitive to small firms ' needs without , in any way , diluting the force of good consumer legislation .
Congratulations to our three rapporteurs whose reports form this joint debate .
I applaud Mrs Torres Marques ' call to encourage a culture of risk-taking as part of education programmes .
We should , in particular , support the inculcation of the entrepreneurial culture in our secondary schools as well as in our universities .
Mrs Peijs rightly recognizes the distorting effect of differential VAT rates on Europe 's small businesses .
Hotels and restaurants in the UK , for example , are disadvantaged from being competitive with their continental counterparts because they fail to qualify for VAT remission .
Following on this , Mr Garosci pertinently highlighted the tourism industry as a potent element of the SME sector .
It is very much to be regretted that the Philoxenia programme has been stalled but the Commission knows only too well that two of its babies in DG XXIII - SMEs and tourism - properly nurtured could grow into Europe 's biggest job generators .
And jobs are what we want .
Madam President , the report discusses the second European conference in Berlin .
The basic aim was to issue recommendations to the Member States on how to make small and medium-sized undertakings more efficient .
But I think we should look mainly to the future .
Another conference of this kind is being held today and I believe it is urgently necessary to involve the European Parliament in the preparatory work of that conference and in setting its objectives .
At present Parliament is considering three important questions which are particularly important to small and medium-sized undertakings . First , the SLIM initiative , which gives priority , among others , to simplifying the economic statistics , which are a major irritation for our SMEs ; but it also concerns diplomas , for instance .
I think it is important for the future to look at means of cutting down on procedure so that if an undertaking has plans to expand , these can be implemented as quickly as possible .
The SLIM group is carrying out an important analysis here and perhaps the institutions could also consider involving the Economic and Social Committee more closely in this activity in future .
The second question the European Parliament is currently considering is the fiche d 'impact .
This is a question of preventive action , i.e. , of having slim-line and efficient legal provisions from the outset .
That is of course an urgent task for the European Parliament , which could clear the way by doing away with many provisions that subsequently become a burden for undertakings .
The third question we are currently considering is benchmarking .
Here the aim is to provide comparative facts on own capital resources , tax burdens and wage costs .
This objective approach is a quite central and important point .
Perhaps the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development would be the appropriate committee to do more work in this field , because benchmarking is particularly important for the regions .
We must also reinforce training and further training .
We should consider whether the resources currently available for LEONARDO are adequate .
Let me point out that calling last year the year of lifelong learning was a very important step because it raised people 's awareness of the importance of lifelong learning and showed that learning can be an enjoyable pastime .
Research and development is an important area , not just product research but also market research .
We should also consider where small undertakings will find their markets in future .
Madam President , I very much welcome the report on SMEs and join with other Members in congratulating the rapporteurs .
When one takes into consideration that SMEs are responsible for up to 80 % of new jobs created over the past five years , this highlights the potential for job-creation in small to medium-sized industry and also the need for Parliament and governments to create the economic environment for their continued growth .
The fact that half the new projects fail within five years surely indicates that we have neglected to provide their promoters with assistance in the research , market development and management skills which are so essential for their survival .
Cash flow is also a problem for new industries .
However , we should not allow such a high failure rate to discourage us in our efforts to create new jobs in what has been a much neglected area up to now .
Neither should we forget that the failure rate and job losses in so-called large industry is much greater .
From my work in rural development and the number of new jobs created in programmes like LEADER and other Community-based enterprise schemes , I am of the opinion that in the past we have ignored the potential of our human resources , our people , to play a meaningful role in the generation of wealth .
As legislators , we have overregulated their lives and reduced their natural inclination to become entrepreneurs .
Time does not permit me to elaborate on the many aspects of SMEs which require our urgent attention , other than to say that SMEs should now receive greater priority in national and EU programmes for job creation .
Member State governments must put in place a favourable tax regime which will encourage and reward enterprise , bearing in mind that a tax concession which encourages enterprise is far more cost-effective than the payment of social welfare to the unemployed .
We must also assist in promoting marketing structures to cooperatives to enable small enterprises to compete and successfully market their products .
This should also be reflected in EU competition policy .
In conclusion , we should facilitate enterprises which create new jobs in rural areas , regardless of scale .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to highlight the importance of this debate which demonstrates the interest shown by both the European Commission and the European Parliament in SMEs , which are decisive for the proper operation of the European economy and have a major impact on levels of employment .
The three reports which we are examining in this joint debate and which the group of the European Liberal Democrats and Reform Party supports - with some reservations concerning the odd aspect , as we shall see later - deal with and expound a number of aspects which it will be impossible for me to discuss in detail in this short speech , but I should like to point out five of them , in particular .
First of all , the proposals made in the three reports show that we need greater coordination in the European Commission and , in particular , DG XXIII , and we hope that the creation of Directorate C will improve the level of coordination and the application of the European Commission 's own actions .
Secondly , it is very important to revise , simplify and improve the fiscal treatment of SMEs , something that must also be applied to administrative treatment , as illustrated by a very graphic example by the rapporteur , Mrs Torres Marques .
Thirdly , we have still made no real progress on easier access to financing .
We have already pointed out the need to set up , for example , reciprocal guarantee companies , risk capital and even earmarking credits from the European Investment Bank , and once again we would like to ask for this , something which unfortunately has not yet been put into practice , despite the fact that we have already asked for this ; well , now the rapporteurs are calling for it again .
Fourth , we must emphasise the importance of vocational training .
And finally , my fifth point , is that SMEs must be given easier and improved access to international markets .
Madam President , all the fine words about growth and tackling unemployment in Europe that we heard earlier on from Mr de Silguy will bring no practical result unless specific measures are taken immediately to support SMEs , and in particular small enterprises which , as the Commission itself has pointed out , are the seedbed of job creation .
In fact , craft and small enterprises have accounted for 60 to 80 % of the new jobs created in the past five years .
It should concern us , however , that the average survival time for SMEs is just five years .
The European Union is failing to put in place the measures that are needed to improve the environment in which small and medium-sized enterprises function .
The ELISE programme is still being blocked in the Council .
We have no illusions , of course , about the effectiveness of such isolated programmes in the overall context .
Even so , experience has shown that they do help .
Proper implementation of them could have a positive impact .
The Commission could implement the proposal on reducing VAT for labour-intensive SMEs as a growth incentive and to combat unemployment . It could look at specific measures to facilitate access by SMEs to the credit system on terms that take account of their special characteristics .
In the preliminary draft budget for 1998 it could make more money available for actions in this field .
The unwarranted exclusion of SMEs from collective bargaining and consultation procedures at the Community level must cease .
Madam President , we support the positive recommendations made by the three rapporteurs and the endeavours of Mr Papoutsis to energize the sector .
One has doubts , however , about the long-term prospects for SMEs and job generation when consumption is being squeezed so hard by the merciless austerity programme . And , of course , these enterprises are the first victims .
We feel obliged to express reservation , Madam President , about the effectiveness of the Union 's policies which , as in the case of the employment problem , are most notable for producing a lot of talk and no practical effect .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think the question of small and medium-sized undertakings is often discussed from the wrong ideological perspective , as though it were a matter of finally achieving Adam Smith 's utopia of a society of lots of small producers .
That is not the real issue .
Inspite of all our support for SMEs and inspite of all the Community 's eloquent words we see a process of centralization everywhere , a process during which small and medium-sized undertakings are being forced into dependency on larger undertakings .
Here we need to introduce a specific programme that really takes account of the fact that the crafts , services and self-employment offer new job chances and that cannot and must not act as a breakwater for deregulation and the atomization of small firms but that enables them to benefit from the fact that there are regional economic links that work , benefit from the fact that innovation is also supported by setting the appropriate standards and targets .
In this sense - and looking also at the cooperative and alternative movements in our countries - we consider support for SMEs an important issue .
But that must mean giving real priority to environmental aspects , to economic independence , to improving working and living conditions and , above all , to the development of the local economy and its survival and efficiency , rather than to some utopia of small producers , to the idea that we have to increase the number of small firms in relation to the total number of firms , or whatever .
That is something we certainly regard as misguided .
On the whole , however , these reports tend in the right direction .
I would particularly like to thank Mrs Torres Marques on her useful report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , once again we are debating a subject which keeps appearing on our agenda in this assembly : the creation of employment and stimulating the activity of SMEs .
Sadly we have to admit that the effectiveness of the measures taken by European authorities to fight unemployment is inversely proportional to the time and effort dedicated to it .
For some twenty years now we have been unable to stop unemployment soaring .
There is no lack of explanations or reasons for this drama of continental proportions : the energy crisis , economic globalisation , technological progress and the demographic explosions , in other words we have plenty of explanations but still no jobs .
Fortunately , the countries of the European Union have been pioneers in the creation and maintenance of a system of social protection which protects people from poverty and abandonment and therefore has helped tens of millions of Europeans without jobs .
However , this system is being maintained at the cost of strong fiscal pressure which is making it increasingly difficult not only to create but also to preserve enterprises , especially the small enterprises in existence .
It is also a hard fact that the number of people wishing to set up business and create jobs is decreasing every year .
As far as this situation is concerned , everyone with anything to do with running public life in the European Union is responsible .
At municipal , regional , national and Community level there are more and more regulations imposing endless obligations on people who want to set up such an activity , and you almost need the intrepid spirit of a 15th century explorer to launch into the adventure of setting up an SME in today 's European Union .
Perhaps the interventionism of the authorities has in many cases reached an excessive level .
We have sacrificed the spirit of enterprise to guarantee welfare .
Most of our youth have their eyes set on a job in the public administration , they all want to be the civil servants and , although we know that civil servants are vital for a properly run public administration , we have to accept that they do not create wealth .
In this rather wretched context , I would like to add that the proposals which we are discussing , and which my group will support , will not be enough to change things .
For example , it is an excellent idea to bring down VAT , especially for SMEs , and it is also an excellent idea to support cross-frontier cooperation or the training of apprentices and employees employed in craft industries , but in practice small enterprises are being ravaged by growing competition , increasing taxes and costly funding .
When interest rates go down , they go down for the powerful , for those whom the banks see as good customers , but these decreases in interest rates are never applied to small companies .
Large enterprises , not to speak of multinationals , always obtain better financial conditions , better access to markets and better support from the public institutions , which often compete among each other , offering huge incentives for large enterprises to set up business within their municipalities .
Against this background , the authorities must accept the idea of positive discrimination in favour of SMEs .
It is vital to relax the demands imposed on these companies and to reduce fiscal pressure , if we want these enterprises to have any possibility of survival .
Among the measures proposed , I would pick out three : reducing VAT , creating guarantee banks and changing the rules on awarding public contracts so that , whenever possible , priority is given to SMEs .
At the same time , we should bring down some of the barriers to the creation of enterprises and stimulate the development of an enterprising spirit among our young people .
Madam President , all good things come in threes , so we are told .
These reports by Mr Garosci , Mrs Peijs and Mrs Torres Marques on the small- and medium-sized business sector make it plain that the European Parliament is keen to shift European employment into top gear .
But unfortunately the engine is stuttering a bit .
Perhaps because it is starved of fuel , because the Council refuses to free up enough funds for the various SME programmes .
But that is not the main reason .
Mrs Peijs puts her finger on it when she points in her report to a lack of proper co-ordination .
EU programmes cut across national schemes and SMEs themselves are unable to find their way through the subsidiarity jungle .
We cannot blame the Council and Commission alone .
The European Parliament must not just play Father Christmas , but must apply itself to securing more simple and more transparent legislation .
Nor is education be the main villain of the piece , as Mrs Torres Marques would have it .
Risk minimization is not something taught at school , but a cultural and anthropological reality .
It would be rash to burn down the whole system of education just because of one finding .
In practice we see that people with a higher education often combine their careers with a small self-employed consultancy , or start up on their own later in life .
Consequently we should scrap recitals J and K from paragraph 12 of the motion for a resolution .
Creating more jobs is a noble endeavour , but not at the expense of the environment and natural resources .
A sizeable proportion of environmental pollution is created by small businesses .
The recent informal Environment Council debated this problem .
Will the Commissioner tell us what initiatives the Commission intends to pursue in this regard ?
Good old Europe ; the symphony plays on , more out of tune than ever .
There is assistance , but never enough : many small and medium-sized enterprises and craft businesses have never been helped .
Aid application procedures are complex and discourage initiative .
Information is difficult to obtain and only the wellconnected few can get hold of it .
So many proposals and projects , but the reports and opinions are a waste of time and the objectives rarely achieved .
We wonder why 50 % on average of small and medium-sized firms go bankrupt in the first three years of business . Despite this , small and medium-sized firms represent 99.8 % of all Union companies and their ebullience stimulates them to create jobs and boost the economy of the whole of Europe .
On the other hand , many Member States consider this dynamism inexhaustible and have identified entrepreneurs as the one island for perpetrating the worst acts of piracy .
The Italian government has identified this island in Padania and hopes the patience and tenacity of Padanian workers and entrepreneurs will know no bounds .
The latest tax manoeuvre takes another 20 thousand billion out of businesses , forcing them to operate under a double tax burden .
If we want to save entrepreneurs , Member States must adopt unified procedures and provisions to prevent unfair or damaging competition .
This requires the greatest possible simplification of the letter and application of the complicated tax laws , putting the cost of money within the reach of new firms and firms courageous enough to regenerate themselves , investment in research and projects to stimulate and encourage research and , finally , involvement of young people through school so that work is not just a synonym for sacrifice but means collaboration and cooperation .
Madam President , colleagues , it has been calculated that if each small or medium-sized enterprise could recruit one extra employee , unemployment in the Union would be dealt with at a stroke .
There is something of a conflict between potential opportunities and exactions here .
How is it possible - as happens in a number of countries - to adopt such a bizarre approach as to impose on small businesses much the same bureaucracy and obligations as on large ones , for example employers ' contributions , book-keeping , value added tax , accounts , audits , compulsory insurance and so on ?
As a result , the per capita administrative costs of a business employing five people can be just as high as those of a business with a staff of 100 .
Mrs Peijs 's excellent report quite rightly stresses the need to simplify the regulations applicable to small and medium-sized enterprises .
We need a Union programme to help SMEs to become networked in the internal market .
At the same time , marketing by SMEs should be facilitated , because it is difficult and expensive for small businesses , with their limited resources , to break into big markets .
The way in which taxes are levied is utterly misconceived .
At present , any enterprise which recruits a new employee is penalized for doing so .
Taxation is concentrated on labour , rendering it expensive .
But if an entrepreneur purchases a machine or an automaton , he does not need to pay any wages or any secondary labour costs .
This has led to a situation in which recruitment of people is penalized and the replacement of people with machines is promoted .
It is no wonder that the information society has brought high unemployment .
We absolutely must quickly shift the focus of taxation away from labour , for example to added value , turnover and capital .
This would promote labour-intensive enterprise and employment .
The question is , what does the Commission intend to do to bring taxation up to date in the age of the information society ?
That is really the issue at stake right now .
Madam President , a year or so ago in another debate on SMEs I quoted a slogan which says that SMEs are not big companies in pocket format , but have many features which are specific to them and they need a policy designed specifically for them .
The Commission acknowledges this specific identify of small businesses and that is a good thing .
But as yet it has not recognized the other reality , which is that by far the majority of firms are small- and medium-sized firms .
Current policy allows for the specific needs of small businesses by granting them derogations .
But a plethora of derogations makes for complicated laws and unfortunately does not always make life easier for the business world .
This is borne out by a Commission study of intra-Community transactions and the INTRASTAT and VAT obligations involved .
So I think there is an urgent need to stop regarding small businesses as irritating mavericks , forever wanting special treatment . Policy must be geared to the realities .
This means that small businesses must be the rule and not the exception .
The Maastricht criteria have forced governments to rationalize their budgets .
Let us now introduce the idea of small businesses as the norm in order at last to find solutions to all the various problems which previous speakers have mentioned .
If governments then show as much enthusiasm for the norm of the small business as we have shown for the Maastricht criteria , we shall be on the right road .
Derogations are good for dealing with minority problems , but when the exempted minority is in fact the majority it is time to change track .
Madam President , I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Peijs , when she says that the Commission is brimful of good intentions but that when it comes to concrete measures , small businesses are all too often left out in the cold .
To be fair , we should say that there has been some progress in European policy on small businesses as a result , for example , of the EASDAQ facility for small businesses and the SLIM project .
But there are quite a few impasses , and I will name two of them .
Firstly , why are small businesses not involved in the social dialogue ?
Parliament has been advocating their inclusion for a long time .
Secondly , there is still too little being done to provide small businesses with easier access to sources of finance .
Commission and Parliament are enthusiastic supporters of the ELISE programme because of the powerful leverage it provides .
But what do we find ?
ELISE has been blocked for months now by the national governments .
Hence my question to the Council , but I fear that the Council is not here today , my question is this : when is this obstruction of the ELISE programme going to end ?
Madam President , Commissioner , SMEs account for 70 % of employment .
Over the last five years , they have created between 60 and 80 % of the new jobs registered and are , I believe , a source of what must be a priority for the European Union : job creation .
However , they come up against a number disadvantages : administrative barriers , excessive red tape , a lack of participation in social dialogue , a lack of support for training and funding difficulties .
If the European Union really wants to foster SMEs it must make proposals which actually do something ; above all , apart from small enterprises , there are also the small craft industries , whose fundamental function is also to preserve the cultural heritage , the traditional heritage of the peoples , and sometimes also the environment .
Therefore , we think it is fundamental to make a proposal , and the Commission really should bear in mind the difficulties which are currently facing small enterprises .
Madam President , we see , as the Commission recalls in its communication , the essential importance of SMEs in the European Union .
Firstly the number of them , since they account for 99 % of all businesses , then their economic power , since they employ almost 65 % of the Union 's workforce .
Starting from this observation , in the perspective of a policy of employment and maximum growth , it was essential to grant SMEs a special place , in terms of interest and aid , and an attempt has been made to do this since the integrated programme of 1994 .
This programme has now been extended by the 1996 programme , which takes up the same methodology again - multiannual programme , concerted action with Member States , other actions in favour of SMEs - but redefines the objectives in the form of five priorities : simplifying and improving the financial , fiscal and administrative environment , helping SMEs to internationalise , enhancing competitiveness and promoting entrepreneurship .
We consider this programme demagogic in the sense that it is obvious that it is necessary to consider the importance of SMEs in the European economic scene , but is this the best way to do it ?
Once again , a whole series of good intentions are talked about , but what SMEs need are concrete , effective and speedy measures .
Their strength lies in their flexibility and their ability to react to the needs of the market .
It is in this that I go along with the rapporteur , that is , that it is interesting to look at what SMEs lack .
But they are awaiting more concrete measures .
These are not large industrial groups , mindful of the macro-economic measures taken by Brussels , but small structures which struggle daily to try to reconcile on-going management , the conquest of markets and practical difficulties .
Now , what is the Commission proposing , and in particular in what form and how quickly , to face the structural shortcomings in equity capital of SMEs , the problems of management which they come up against ?
To meet the needs of SMEs , economic and monetary union , the need to educate and train in business culture or to create a common and simple VAT system are brought up .
Is this not provocation ?
Let us start by removing their administrative , fiscal and social shackles at a local level , let us harmonise the VAT systems of Member States and let us create a stimulating fiscal environment which takes account of the particular nature of SMEs .
Besides , that is all they are asking for .
It is easy to make grand declarations in favour of the creation of jobs by means of support for SMEs .
But suppose these measures were actually put in place , what would the real cost be ?
It seems to me that once again we are hearing about another abstract theoretical programme , tracing an observation , while many incidental questions relating to day-to-day management , far from receiving concrete answers , have not even been mentioned .
Madam President , at this time the European Union 's main aim should be to boost employment .
But in the framework of globalization the SMEs will only be able to make promising jobs available if they are innovative in their activity .
Innovative activity involves , firstly , research and development .
Accordingly we must improve the aid measures here .
There is a range of different programmes , but at present it is still a jungle and they are not easily accessible to the SMEs .
Participation in the research framework programme is currently still quite inadequate .
We have to produce a package of aid that is specifically geared to the SMEs , both financial and legal aid , so that the SMEs can actually transpose their findings into products .
Here the question of intellectual property and patenting creates great difficulties .
The exchange of findings between small and medium-sized undertakings is not always a matter of course , because afterwards they very often have to compete among themselves on the market .
We should also consider whether it is not possible to administer and utilize the aid , the advice and also the money , including that under the framework programme , more decentrally .
Centralized advice only reaches those SMEs that are able and willing to come all the way here to obtain information .
I think it is our job to provide the information in the field .
Madam President , I must take this opportunity of complimenting Mrs Torres Marques and the other colleagues on their work .
The activities of the craft industry deserve more attention and support and I welcome the intentions of those people who are going to try and bring about the conditions so that this support can be given .
However , in all of these reports , there is link between the craft industries and small enterprises which could lead to confusion or ambiguity .
The activities of craft industries may - and in many cases do - have characteristics of a cultural nature , the respect and transmission of traditions .
They may be - and in many cases are - activities of resistance in which craftsmen continue to be very closely linked to their tools and means of work , and this is not always compatible with a business activity such as it is presented in these reports .
Therefore , while emphasising the positive aspects of these reports , I also wanted to make it quite clear that I refuse to allow them to be interpreted as mixing up certain independent activities carried out by tiny enterprises with the type of work characterised ironically as ' careerjobs ' , or ' civil service ' .
This alternative is completely unacceptable and we really should deal with the craft industry separately , as it deserves .
Madam President , the special quality and strength of the European economy lies in its structure , which relies so much on small and medium-sized enterprises .
But this small-scale structure also creates vulnerability and disadvantages in a world moving towards globalization .
Crafts firms and small firms often operate only on a local market , nevertheless they are fully exposed to the increased competition in the single market .
The Commission and the Member States must therefore do their utmost to promote systems of cooperation that will allow them to face up to this stronger competition .
Let me point out that the European tourist industry - a potential source of additional jobs - is made up to a large degree of small firms .
So any measures to support small and medium-sized enterprises are of long-term benefit to this major branch of the economy , which unfortunately still has no legal basis in the EU treaty .
Madam President , since I have to be brief let me just take up one point in Mrs Torres Marques ' excellent report , which is specially important to Austria , namely the call for special support for small firms in frontier regions .
Firms in the most peripheral EU regions are particularly tempted to move abroad where things are cheaper , thus increasing the strain on the job market within the Community .
It is only the specific structure of these small firms , that are so important to the national economy , the close ties between families and between firms , love of country , cultural roots and the generally better quality of life that stop them from moving elsewhere .
This has quite significant social and cultural implications for the Union and for that reason alone we should provide substantial aid .
Madam President , everything has been said about small and medium-sized firms by now .
There is never a debate in the European Parliament about the huge employment crisis which does not favour consolidating already existing small and medium-sized firms and the possibility of creating new ones .
The three reports make the right points .
The Council of Ministers is determined to block any instrument Parliament approves , like the ELISE programme to promote forms of credit guarantee for small and medium-sized firms .
There is a need to cut bureaucracy , and simplify administration and tax procedures ; there is a need to promote access to innovation and to Community policies for small and medium-sized firms .
I could continue but I risk repeating things that have already been said .
I would just like to make one point : very small firms , individual craftsmen , are weak in the world market ; they cannot make it .
But when they are part of a positive local context made up of networks of relationships and positive service policies , craftsmen and small and medium-sized firms become factors of competitiveness .
Here I would particularly stress the demand for action from the Commission and the Council of Ministers to put small and medium-sized firms in a position to compete in the market with everyone else .
From this point of view the policy of real services is about strategic choices which promote training and internationalization . It is a policy of real services to encourage small firms and craftsmen and put them on a par with other companies in Europe .
Madam President , allow me first of all to thank the three rapporteurs , Mrs Torres Marques , Mrs Peijs and Mr Garosci , for their splendid work .


Concerning the report of Mrs Torres Marques , I can assure the House that we intend to respond to the call for the introduction of measures in favour of the craft industry and small enterprises .
From what has been said today it is quite clear that everyone agrees on the need for coordinated measures to promote their growth and competitiveness .
As the rapporteur herself emphasized earlier , that is essential if they are to contribute to the increase of employment .
I agree also that training and education systems have an important role to play in creating a spirit of initiative , responsibility and entrepreneurship .
The Commission has had wide-ranging discussions with the bodies of the sector in preparation for the Third European Conference on the Craft Industry and Small Enterprises scheduled for Milan in November .
Craft industries and small enterprises need to be able to turn to intermediate bodies such as their professional associations and cooperatives for help in meeting the challenge of new developments in Europe as they occur .
The Commission will shortly be publishing an invitation for the submission of proposals with a view to providing support for European initiatives embarked on by such bodies .
This invitation will offer opportunities for the promotion of high quality plans , and in particular plans involving young entrepreneurs and women entrepreneurs who wish to become active at the European level .
As regards Mrs Torres Marques ' question concerning the involvement of the Regional Fund , I can tell her that on average about 10 % of the total resources of the Fund are disbursed specifically for measures designed to activate and improve the economic environment as it affects SMEs exclusively .
That percentage is even higher in the Objective 2 areas , in the areas which are in industrial decline , that is to say , and in the Objective 5b areas , the rural areas , where the average is between 15 % and 20 % .
As regards the report of Mrs Peijs , I welcome its support for our efforts to improve the coordinative role of the Directorate General for Enterprise Policy .
When Directorate General XXIII was restructured in April of 1996 a new unit , with the principal task of promoting coordinated actions , was set up .
Our main goals are the improvement of access to other Community programmes and more effective coordination with related horizontal Community policies .
We are moving in exactly the direction that Mr Quisthoudt-Rowohl has urged .
The Council also , for its part , has requested the Commission to submit a recommendation on ways of improving the access of SMEs to the Community programmes .
I believe that we are now ready to offer a specific follow-up to that request for the coming twelve months , for the coming year .
Unfortunately , time does not allow me to elaborate on the particular points of Mrs Peijs ' resolution .
However , Madam President , I would like to inform you that in general terms I agree with her recommendations , and I hope that the House will give her report its undivided support .
Permit me , however , to emphasize three factors .
First , I completely agree with rapporteur that the big challenge is the single currency , the euro .
I can inform you that the Commission has a number of initiatives in mind with a view to helping small and medium-sized enterprises to prepare for the major challenges that lie ahead with regard to the use of the euro and , at the same time , to prepare their relations with the banking system .



Second , in connection with a point that many speakers , among them Mr Paasilinna , Mr Gonzáles and Mr Hyland , have focused on , namely the importance of establishing a fair taxation regime for SMEs , I can tell you that the Commission is preparing a new system of value added tax for the single currency which we believe will also be of benefit to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The introduction of the new system is scheduled for 2002 , but there may well be some delay .
The Commission proposal for the specific legislation is still at the preparatory stage , but we expect to submit it within the first half of this year , by the end of June , that is to say .
However , the negotiations with the Council , on this matter too , will obviously be extremely difficult .
The Member States have strong reservations because in the new system they will be much more reliant on each other than at present , and , as you know , the Council is always extremely cautious on taxation matters .
Third , as regards tourism .
You will be aware that I attach great importance to the development of tourism .
Small and medium-sized enterprises which are active in tourism have benefited from measures included in the integrated programme in favour of those enterprises .
In the next annual report of the observer on SMEs there will be an assessment of the particular situation of small and medium-sized enterprises which are active in the tourism sector under a special heading .
Turning now to Mr Garosci 's report , I can say that I believe that the 1995 report of the Commission on the coordination of activities in favour of SMEs and the craft sector provides a complete picture of the Community 's horizontal measures for these businesses .
This report is an important tool for the coordination of the Community 's activities and programmes .
And , as I said when making reference to the report of Mrs Peijs , the Commission has set the coordination of the Community policies as one of its highest priorities .
We do , therefore , intend to strengthen this dimension of our policy even further , and I welcome the European Parliament 's support for this broad objective .
Coordination of the Community 's activities has a twofold purpose : to include the SME dimension in the formulation and implementation of Community policies , so that better account can be taken of the particular characteristics of these enterprises , and , as Mr Rübig has urged , to increase the actual level of participation of SMEs in the programmes .
Madam President , we are indeed endeavouring to simplify the administrative procedures . As Mr Paasilinna emphasized so very clearly , so very eloquently , that must be one of our principal objectives in all of the Member States .
I can inform you that only today the Commission adopted a recommendation to the Member States on the simplification of the administrative environment for business start-up ; on the simplification of the environment , that is to say , in the very early stages when activities are being commenced and new SMEs are at their most vulnerable .
Training , as Mr Gonzáles Álvarez has stressed , is another fundamental parameter with regard to the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is why we have paid particular attention to the training of management personnel .
And another central aspect , for both small and medium-sized enterprises and the craft sector , is international cooperation .
In addition , our efforts must be targeted on achieving better access for small and medium-sized enterprises to standardization activities and certification systems .
You have quite rightly placed great emphasis today on the access of small and medium-sized enterprises to finance , and have proposed further development of the SME facility to include subsidized loans for job-generating SMEs .
As you know , the Commission has already proposed an extension of this mechanism .
Unfortunately , the proposal did not win the support of the Council .
I share your disappointment , as expressed by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , and I fully understand the importance that Parliament attaches to the matter , as pointed out by Mr Filippi .
Like you , we are disappointed with the Council 's refusal to approve the ELISE loan insurance proposal .
However , funding is the very lifeblood of SMEs , so the matter will not go away for long .
I believe that the results of the Round Table of Banks and SMEs are important .
The round table report makes mention of a wide range of best practices which can be adopted by the European Union as a whole . It also contains specific recommendations for improving the access of SMEs to financing .
I can also inform the House that work has been completed on a report on the SME capital market .
The report examines the main obstacles to the growth of the SME capital market and will be approved by the Commission very shortly .
The Commission itself is willing to devise schemes to provide small and medium-sized enterprises with better access to the financing that they need for growth .
I agree totally with Mr Gasólina I Böhm on this matter , and I have requested our services to look for new additional initiatives that can be put in place .
I hope that in the coming months we shall see the results of the preliminary draft evaluation in connection with start-up capital funds .
I can assure you that I shall endeavour to ensure a good follow-up and specific action in this area .
Another important aspect that you have touched on is improved participation by small and medium-sized enterprises in the European Management and Audit System in regard to the environment , the EMAS .
In the autumn of 1996 the Commission set up a trial , a pilot action , in the environmental audit field , called Euromanagement , with the principal objective of helping 500 to 700 SMEs to integrate the new environmental management requirements into their operations and , also , to help a smaller number of SMEs acquire the eco-audit label .
This constitutes a sincere effort on our part to promote the aspects referred to by Mr Wolf .
I must say that I am pleased by the emphasis that Parliament has placed on the need for direct representation of small and medium-sized enterprises . This objective is encompassed in the new multiannual programme for SMEs and the craft sector .
I can tell you also that our services have already begun the preparation of our next report , which will provide more recent data .
These reports will be compiled every two years and will focus on the progress that is being made on including the SME dimension in all of the Community 's policies and programmes .
Madam President , in finishing I would like to restate the Commission 's strong commitment to the promotion of the interests of SMEs in all of the Community 's policies and programmes .
In that regard the views and recommendations of this Parliament are very positive and very constructive , and I promise that we will consider them very carefully .
And permit me , of course , to agree with Mr Thyssen 's final assertion concerning the need for the Member States to make coordinated efforts to support their SMEs just as they are striving to achieve economic convergence .
If that is done I believe that we shall see a significant strengthening of the presence of these enterprises in the economy .
Madam President , I wish to thank Mrs Peijs , Mrs Torres Marques and Mr Garosci once again for their reports .

I would also like to thank all of you for your efforts to help small and medium-sized enterprises and for your continuing support for the Commission and the excellent cooperation that has so far been achieved .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Adjustment of the financial perspective
The next item is the report ( A4-0135 / 97 ) by Mr Tillich , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union on the adjustment of the financial perspective to take account of the conditions of implementation ( submitted by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 10 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 ) ( SEC ( 97 ) 0364 - C4-0111 / 97 ) .
Madam President , the report on the adjustment of the financial perspective pursuant to paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Interinstitutional Agreement is a document that comes up again every year in the course of the budgetary procedure .
This was not a problem in the past .
There was hardly any discussion and Parliament and the Council agreed .
It was simply a technical procedure .
This year we have a problem . In addition to the usual procedures , namely transferring unused commitment appropriations from 1996 to the year 1999 - ECU 545 million for the structural funds and ECU 17 million for the cohesion fund - the Council wanted more this time .
The European Parliament had and has no problem with the transfer of resources from 1996 to 1999 .
The Committee on Budgets unanimously approved the Commission proposal .
But the European Parliament cannot endorse the Council 's wish to transfer another ECU 1 billion of commitment appropriations again from 1998 to 1999 , after they had been transferred to 1998 from earlier years , not least because the Commission notes in its proposal that following the inadequate use of resources in 1994 and 1995 , the situation improved considerably in 1996 .
That does not just mean that all the original appropriations were used up in 1996 , contrary to the situation in the two preceding years , but also that a small part of the backlog at the beginning of the programme period could be made up .
The Council has ignored this finding by the Commission and repeated the same view in the trialogue in early April .
The Council emphasized that this 1 billion had to be transferred again from 1998 to 1999 in order to achieve the zero growth rate of the 1998 budget .
The European Parliament too is well aware of the Member States ' endeavours to pursue a careful budgetary policy and to satisfy the criteria for monetary union .
But it is also aware of the Edinburgh decisions on the structural funds , on the financial perspective , and it is well aware of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1993 .
The aim of the European Parliament is to remain faithful to the guidelines adopted in January for the 1998 budget and to adopt a budget that reflects a responsible expenditure policy in all its headings and that economizes in areas where the same situation recurs every year of money being transferred back to the Member States .
That is why we support this Commission proposal not to transfer the entire 1 billion from 1998 to the year 1999 , but only ECU 500 million .
We want to leave the remaining ECU 500 million of commitment appropriations in the 1998 budget , to enable us in autumn this year , thanks to more precise predictions , to adopt better forecasts of agricultural expenditure in the 1998 budget .
This is entirely in line with paragraphs 9 and 10 of our guidelines and the Dutch presidency agreed to this compromise at the trialogue last Monday .
I only hope that the Council will do the same , by the latest at its meeting tomorrow morning .
Although the Council is not present this evening - but I am sure it can read up what I said in the Report of Proceedings - I would like to make two more personal comments on the subject .
As general rapporteur for the 1998 budget I took over the burden of pressure of the last budgetary deliberations on the 1997 budget .
The tensions that existed at the time have not yet eased entirely , and many Members of this House once again feel that the Council is trying to use the European Parliament in order to work off its own inability to reach a consensus .
We proved that we can reach a consensus at that time and again now .
The Council , however , should carefully peruse and note the relevant passages in the Treaties and in the Interinstitutional Agreement , which state that the budgetary authority has two arms and that these two arms -the European Parliament and the Council - must reach agreement .
I recommend to the House that it adopt the draft report tomorrow .
Madam President , the Tillich report is bone dry , I agree , but frankly its importance is such that there is no excuse for this debating chamber to be virtually deserted .
This short report by Mr Tillich hides the fact that its gestation has been frankly laborious , as well as alarming .
What seems to be beautifully simple , given the presentation by the rapporteur , was drafted in an environment of extreme tension between the two arms of the budgetary authority , tensions which were very different from those which usually arise in serious negotiations between the Council and the Parliament on budgetary matters .
During one part of the negotiation , a majority of the Council tried to impose its criterion on the European Parliament without giving any reason , demonstrating an attitude which , if I were not watching my tongue , I would refer to as blackmail .
May I repeat what the rapporteur said and remind you of the situation : in accordance with the Inter-institutional Agreement of 1993 - a subject on which I was rapporteur - the Commission is meant to make the necessary proposals to adjust the financial perspective at the beginning of each budgetary exercise .
On one hand , on the basis of Article 9 , it must notify any adjustment of the agricultural guideline and the amount of the other categories of expenditure in ratio to the change in GDP and prices .
This is a technical and automatic adjustment and the budgetary authority must be forced to accept it .
On the other hand , here I come to the heart of the matter , on the basis of Article 10 of the Inter-institutional Agreement , it must propose an adjustment to credits for Category II , the structural expenditure , in accordance with its execution so that unused appropriations are not lost .
Since 1989 , i.e. since the first Inter-institutional Agreement , this has been carried out without any major problems .
However , this year the modest transfer of 562 million ECU from 1996 to 1999 did not obtain the initial go-ahead from the Council , which wanted to add 1 , 000 million incorporated in Category II for 1998 .
This is a curious way of proceeding , because it set it at one thousandth of the maximum amount expected for payment credits for 1999 , but also used a mechanism which was designed to recover non-executed appropriations or , in other words , to announce a non-execution at a time when there was a threat of violation of the political-budgetary agreements reached in Edinburgh .
In the light of this , the Commission has presented a new proposal for a compromise which we can accept - and which we are going to vote for - in order not to lose the 562 million ECU earmarked for the more explicit machinery of solidarity and fighting unemployment in the Community budget .
However , as the rapporteur has pointed out , this cannot be a precedent and I should like to add that only good political will is preventing us from considering this procedure as a covert revision of the financial perspective .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgets fully supports , almost unanimously , the proposed compromise as the lesser of two evils .
The Socialist Group will support the rapporteur , whom it congratulates on a difficult task well achieved , emphasising that we would like to see appropriate payment credits earmarked , focusing on operations in Objective 1 and 2 areas , as the rapporteur also suggests .
But we do have questions . Why has this been so complicated ?
If we recall that the decision on those who are to be part of the ' euro club ' should be taken on the basis of 1997 figures , what political or economic balances are endangered by the famous billion ECU from 1998 ?
Is there any country which might see its fulfilment of the Union Treaty mechanisms on excessive deficits put at risk ?
None at all .
It is not national finances , including co-funding , which could put in danger the fulfilment of convergence criteria , because we are talking about thousandths of points of GDP .
We are witnessing a rather hypocritical exercise , ladies and gentlemen .
When the European Parliament committed itself to an austerity budget policy , for a budget which represents less than 2.5 % of the Member States ' public spending and only 1.2 % of the Union 's GDP , what is this war all about ?
It is the richer countries which most openly admitted , in the Council of Ministers , that they were unwilling to execute the Structural Fund .
Perhaps we should change our minds over who can benefit from these funds , but there is no doubt that we should do something about these credits which are designed to reduce the gap between the richer and poorer in the Community and to fight against unemployment .
To postpone them , as the Council is proposing , would only make the problem worse .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , we socialists , fighting for a fairer Europe and for a more effective policy of solidarity , are going to support this compromise measure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the difficulties which the Commission 's original proposal met along the way are a very clear example of the difficulties which are going to crop up in the budgetary debate over this year .
Tomorrow , the European Parliament is going to approve a Commission proposal on adjusting the financial perspective which is different from the one originally presented by the Commission .
This proposal is the only one that seems to have reached a certain degree of consensus , a sufficient consensus in the Council - and I say ' seems ' because , as the rapporteur , Mr Tillich said , we shall still be in doubt until tomorrow .
If this consensus is not finally reached , there will be a major inter-institutional conflict in which the Parliament will have to support the Commission against the Council , all of this just a fortnight away from the presentation of the preliminary draft budget presented by the Commission for 1998 .
A favourable vote by the European Parliament should not conceal the fact that it is not the ideal solution nor is it the only one possible .
We note a reduction of 500 million ECU in the amount of credits earmarked for 1998 , an amount transferred to 1999 on the basis of a statement by the Commission , which says that it will not be possible to execute more than 600 million ECU in the 1998 budgetary year .
In any case , we think that the Commission has done everything possible to solve an impasse in the Council which could have made it impossible to fulfil the obligation of honouring the agreements reached in Edinburgh .
Mr President , honouring agreements and guarantees for fulfilling agreements reached within the European Union is the very cement of our credibility and the vital pillar for our political co-habitation .
From this point of view , we accept the Commission proposal in that - and this should be made very clear here - the genuine political debate will come about when we see what the Council makes of the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
The vital agreement on the growth percentage for the 1998 budget , compliance with signed agreements remaining fully in force and maintenance of the figures for payments credits , will very much condition the possibility for the three institutions to reach an agreement over the budget .
Furthermore , the European Parliament must accept that it will have the final say on non-compulsory expenditure in Category II and that it should negotiate for all it is worth on Category I. All I have to do now is congratulate Mr Tillich , the rapporteur , once again on his openness to agreement and compromise .
I think that the Council should cooperate more with the rapporteur and not make his task more difficult than it actually is .
Finally , I hope that the vote tomorrow will bring together more members of the European Parliament than are present here today .
In any case , I hope that the absence of the Council is due to the fact that its representatives are taking a very close look at this latest proposal put by the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Stanislaw Tillich 's report on the adjustment of the financial perspective has come at just the right moment to illustrate the brief debate we had earlier with Commissioner Yves-Thibault de Silguy on respect for the convergence criteria , putting before us on the very same day what is a real textbook case .
If we carry over to 1998 the whole of the billion Ecus unused in 1995 and already carried over to 1996 , and not used once , we are increasing Heading II of the European Union budget for next year by more than 6 % and we are setting a very bad example of our willingness to respect the convergence criteria .
The reason for this is simple .
By obliging net contributors to contribute from their national budgets the billion in question starting in 1998 , we would be showing that we give little credence to the concept of durability , by this giving the feeling that , for our House , only 1997 counts .
That does not seem to me a good policy .
On the other hand , carryover of the whole of the credit to 1999 , creates unconcealed and particularly intense emotion in the countries which are the principal beneficiaries of the Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds , specifically Greece , Portugal and Spain , who can , quite rightly , express doubts about the genuine willingness of Member States to respect the programming agreement for the period 1994-1999 .
The South could find evidence in this to illustrate the evil designs which are sometimes attributed to the countries of the North .
Commissioner Liikanen , who has demonstrated great wisdom on the subject , has arranged things with Chairman Samland such that a transactional solution will be found .
It is this proposal which is the subject of the report by our colleague Mr Tillich and which , I sincerely hope , will have the agreement of the qualified majority of our House and of the Council .
Indeed , it seems to me that 500 million in 1998 , which actually generates a saving of 300 million in payments for the same year , and a commitment of 1.62 billion for 1999 , is a good solution with , the same year , recuperation of the difference in payments .
So it is that on behalf of the UPE Group I can announce our support for this report , but it seems to me all the same that because of the size of the sum and the sensitivity of the heading , precise indications must be given at the time of the definitive vote for the 1998 and 1999 budgets .
And I share the opinion of Jan Colom i Naval : a sum of one billion Ecus deserved a Chamber which did not look like a desert .
Mr President , the budget transfer under consideration is based on two proposals .
The Commission proposed in March that ECU 545 million which had been saved from 1996 should be transferred to 1999 .
In addition , the Council has proposed transferring ECU 1 billion from 1998 to 1999 .
If both proposals had been adopted , it would have resulted in an accumulation of Structural Fund commitment appropriations in the last year of the programme period .
This would have caused major problems for those responsible for implementing regional and structural policy .
It was therefore sensible to divide the ECU 1 billion transfer into two and spread it between the last two years of the programme period .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Tillich , on his good work .
The transfer of Structural Fund commitment appropriations now under consideration is already the third in this programme period .
Altogether , ECU 4.3 billion has been transferred to a later year - a sum which can only be described as substantial .
More than 18 million people are unemployed in the EU , and unemployment continues to rise .
In addition , regional disparities are growing in many Member States .
Regional and structural policies therefore face greater challenges than in the past .
The blame for the under-use of Structural Fund appropriations can of course be laid at the door of the Member States , but the EU cannot entirely evade responsibility here either .
An enormous and complex bureaucracy has been established to administer the Structural Funds .
Another obstacle is the strict rules governing the Structural Funds .
The requirement for projects to be innovative is often excessive , as is the slowness with which investment is supported .
These shortcomings can paralyse otherwise rational projects .
If regional and structural policies were viable and effective , this would be reflected in competition for EU Structural Fund resources .
Regrettably , this is not the case at present .
Fortunately , however , this transfer does not eliminate resources , so that it deserves support in all respects .
Mr President , we shall not be opposing the adjustments to the financial perspective , concerning structural actions , as they stem from the modified proposal by the Commission .
It seems to us to be a fairly balanced proposal , in particular as compared with the all-out position , which was unacceptable and really amounted to blackmail on the part of the Council .
It does enable us to recover the 562 million ECU which have not been executed and it also makes it possible to make these adaptations gradually over time .
From our point of view , it is also possible to accept the suggestion made by the rapporteur , a suggestion made by myself , according to which guarantees will be made for the full inclusion of these appropriations in the budget , including the payments for the years 1998 and 1999 .
I cannot conceal certain worries , however .
Despite the well-founded reasons of a technical nature , this adjustment cannot be separated from options of a political type .
First of all , that of consolidating budgetary contention which is something we do not go along with .
Secondly , as I mentioned in my opinion on this matter , because this confirms the tendency for excessive concentration of budgetary appropriations of structural actions in the final years of this Community support framework .
And this is no accident .
Apart from other aspects , this situation is very closely linked to the guidelines and measures which are being adopted at Community level with that objective in mind , but on a different pretext .
But these are aspects which we shall have to leave for a future debate .
Obviously there will be plenty of opportunities for that .
However , for the reasons I have already mentioned , we shall be going along with this adjustment to the financial perspective .
Mr President , under paragraph 10 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 , the Commission presented a proposal to Parliament and the Council for the adjustment of the Financial Perspective to take account of the conditions of the implementation .
The proposal was to transfer to 1999 the allocations for the structural funds and the Cohesion Fund which were not used in 1996 - a total of ECU 562 million .
During the preparation of the preliminary draft budget for 1998 , it has emerged that with the transfer of ECU 1 billion of commitment appropriations from 1995 , decided upon in 1996 , the allocations foreseen for structural operations for 1998 exceeded the requirements .
The excess of available allocations in relation to implementation capacity would be about ECU 500m .
The Commission has therefore decided to amend its original proposal .
In addition to the transfer of ECU 562m from 1996 to 1999 , the Commission also proposes to transfer ECU 500m from 1995 to 1999 .
The adoption of the amended proposal would secure satisfactory implementation of the programmed expenditure .
It would actually facilitate full budgetization before the end of 1999 of the allocations for the structural funds provided for the period 1993-1999 .
I wish to congratulate Mr Tillich for his very good report and also thank Parliament for its good cooperation on this issue .
Finally , I have just received the news that COREPER has also accepted this proposal this evening .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Safety regime for fishing vessels
The next item is the report ( A4-0068 ) by Mr Le Rachinel , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0255 - C4-0255 / 96-96 / 0168 ( SYN ) ) setting up a harmonized safety regime for fishing vessels of 24 metres in length and over .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report in question is on a proposal for a Council Directive setting up a harmonised safety regime for fishing vessels of 24 metres in length and over .
To grasp the importance of this text correctly , I am going to run through a brief historical outline of the standards and conventions which have been involved on the subject .
Because fishing vessels were excluded from the scope of the 1974 SOLAS International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea , the need became apparent to establish a convention defining the rules for construction of new vessels , taking account of the peculiarities of these vessels , as well as the characteristics which equipment associated with the safety of fishing vessels should respect .
That is how the International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels , known as the 1997 Torremolinos Convention , came to be signed in 1977 .
However , because there were an insufficient number of ratifications , the 1977 Convention never entered into force .
In 1993 , the International Maritime Organisation , the IMO , proceeded with a revision of this Convention by adopting the Torremolinos Protocol .
However , it is only obligatory for vessels of more than 45 metres .
This proposal by the Commission is therefore necessary , as of all the vessels of 24 metres and over , 85 % are vessels measuring between 24 and 45 metres .
The Torremolinos Convention therefore currently applies only to 15 % of vessels .
A consequent legal gap therefore needed to be filled .
We must be glad about any measure which aims to reduce the risks to which fishermen are exposed in the exercise of their profession .
In taking up the provisions of the 1993 Protocol again here , a harmonisation of standards relating to the construction and equipment characteristics of vessels in the European Union has been undertaken , which guarantees a higher level of safety .
The fisheries sector , in its various sections , is an extremely sensitive sector .
Consequently , the introduction of new requirements in terms of construction , safety equipment and on-board procedures , has had to be the subject of particular attention .
The different committees , organisations and associations which represent the sector concerned have been consulted .
They are unanimous in their interest in this new text governing their profession .
Indeed , the difficulties associated with their sector have not been aggravated despite the introduction of these new technical requirements .
Furthermore , the minimal safety conditions necessary for the safety of human life , of vessels and of the environment , are guaranteed .
Thus , because of the economic impact which the application of these safety measures would have on existing fishing vessels , it has been proposed that only the measures initially provided for in the Protocol for existing vessels should be applied to them .
These standards should cover the whole of the Mediterranean and all coastal countries .
When it comes to third countries wishing to fish in internal or territorial waters of the European Union , or to land their catch in the port of a Member State , the situation is a little more complex .
Naturally , they must respect the same requirements as Community vessels , but it will , however , be difficult to control the application of this .
It would mean Member States reinforcing their resources for checking on land as well as at sea .
Anyway , this proposal could be considered a first step on the road to a coherent safety regime applicable to the fisheries sector .
Indeed , following this , it will be a question of looking at how far it will be possible to apply these new standards to fishing vessels of less than 24 metres in length .
Furthermore , safety on board ship must also involve the adequate training of crew in the sector .
To this end , a report by our colleague Eolo Parodi is currently under submission to the Parliament 's Committee on Transport .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , safety at sea is a matter for all of us and this report on the safety of fishing vessels , which I have the honour of presenting to you , enables it to be guaranteed .
Let us help it to become a reality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the Commission 's current proposal is the result of a very long and difficult but necessary process aimed at improving the safety of fishing vessels .
The high rate of accidents at sea demonstrates the dangers of this activity and the scant success achieved to date highlights the reluctance of the main seafaring powers to do anything .
Therefore , we must welcome the fact that the Commission has adopted this initiative , which has been needed for a long time , as it should benefit safety in this precarious industry .
The draft directive calls for the extension of the technical provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol to all new boats measuring between 24 and 45 metres fishing in European waters and not only boats flying Community flags , but also boats belonging to third countries fishing in Community waters or landing their catches in European Union ports .
As the Commission itself acknowledges , this is only a first step as it only affects only 4 % of the Community fishing fleet , 57.4 % of the total tonnage and 77.4 % of the total volume of catches .
But the adoption of a directive also seems necessary , at this moment in time , in order to bring into line the legislation of the different Member States and enable them to incorporate specific situations , albeit in keeping with basic common principles .
Therefore , as long as it is recognised that this is an initial measure , we think that this draft directive should be supported and approved as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I should like once again to congratulate Commissioner Kinnock on bringing forward yet another proposal to enhance safety at sea .
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur for all his efforts in steering this measure so swiftly and effectively through the committee .
As he has already outlined the background to this particular proposal which very importantly fills a legal vacuum , I do not need to repeat it
As the proposal says , safety is amongst the most important considerations of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
We are well aware that fishing is one of the most dangerous professions in the world .
In Community waters during the last ten years over a thousand lives have been lost in the fishing industry .
Worldwide many more lives have been lost .
Everyone will recall that the common policy for safe seas called for the measure that , I am glad to say , Mr Kinnock has now brought before this Parliament .
It is important to address the requirement for safety of vessels of between 24 and 45 metres in areas outlined in the directive such as fire protection , life-saving and radiocommunications .
The directive does just that and it will , therefore , command the full support of the Socialist Group .
It will ensure a uniform and harmonized level of safety requirements whilst also avoiding distortion of competition .
In conclusion , while we are on the subject of fishing vessels - and I am sure Mr Kinnock will understand why I raise this - some French fishing vessels have been blocking the ports of Boulogne , Calais and Dunkirk , causing great inconvenience to many lorry drivers in my constituency .
I would ask Mr Kinnock - and I apologise for the lack of notice - briefly to comment on that dispute and to see how we can best work together to ensure the free movement of people and goods in the future .
Finally , I have spent a lot of time in the Dover area in the past few days - for reasons which Mr Kinnock will be well aware of - and many of my constituents would like me to convey their best wishes to him .
I am very pleased to do so .
Mr President , I apologise profoundly to Mr Le Rachinel for my late arrival in the Chamber .
It is a discourtesy which I have never committed before and I do not intend to repeat it .
I was detained in another meeting and I tried to time my arrival too finely .
I very much regret that .
Thankfully it is forgivable in the European Parliament - just one sign of its sophistication and grace .
It would not be forgivable in the Parliament with which I was more familiar for twenty-five years .
Perhaps everyone has something to learn .
I also thank Mr Watts for his good wishes which I certainly reciprocate and hope to do so in person in Dover before next week is out .
I am glad to note that there is common understanding on this proposal and that its main objective , namely the harmonization of safety standards for fishing vessels operating in the internal waters and the territorial seas of the Member States , has been fully endorsed .
I am sure we all share the view that , when implemented , this measure will provide further support for our efforts in the Commission , Parliament and the Council to ensure a high and uniform level of protection for human life in Community waters .
That is the primary aim of this proposal .
It will also , however , help to avoid the distortion of competition that can arise when operators make inadequate provisions for safety .
I therefore commend the proposal on those grounds too .
May I express particular gratitude to the Committee on Transport and Tourism and specifically the rapporteur , Mr Le Rachinel , for the excellent report on the proposal .
I appreciate the efforts he and colleagues in other committees have undertaken to consult with the different parties in the fishing industry and I am pleased to note that their response has been almost unanimously positive .
Briefly , I want to react to two specific and very valuable comments made in Parliament 's report .
The Commission will readily respond to the specific request that this House be regularly informed on any amendments and any alterations adopted through the committee procedure and we will certainly comply with the Commission 's commitments to the European Parliament on transparency .
The Commission also shares the concern expressed in the report that different levels of penalties in the Member States could lead to distortion of competition .
It is precisely to avoid such problems and to ensure full transparency that the provisions of Article 13 require Member States to notify their systems of penalties for breaches of national provisions that are adopted on the basis of this directive .
May I conclude my response to the report by thanking the House for facilitating the early adoption of a common position on this important measure which will promote the safety of fishing activities in Community waters and , in particular , the protection of the lives of European fishermen to whom we all as a Community owe so much .
I will briefly respond to the point rightly raised by Mr Watts .
This morning I wrote to Mr Pons , the French Minister of Transport , expressing my urgent hope that action would be taken by the French Government to ensure restoration of the freedom of movement at and around the Channel ports .
My office has also been in contact with the French Ministry of Transport by telephone .
Mr Pons has naturally been in communication with his relevant colleagues in other departments in the French Government .
That government is now clearly seized of the urgency of the situation .
I hope there will be little delay in securing the re-establishment of the freedom of movement in compliance with the legal requirements of the Treaty and , indeed , the legal obligations of individual Member States .
I am grateful for the opportunity to make that statement to the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Vessels carrying hazardous goods
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0073 / 97 ) by Mr Novo Belenguer , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 93 / 75 / EEC ( COM ( 96 ) 0455 - C4-0544 / 96-96 / 0231 ( SYN ) ) concerning minimum requirements for vessels bound for or leaving Community ports and carrying dangerous or polluting goods .
Mr President , the aim of Directive 93 / 75 and that of this amending directive , is to improve maritime safety and prevent accidents , enabling support action to be taken when necessary .
The maritime disasters which have recently occurred in Community waters only add to the huge importance of this Directive and the need for all Member States to take measures with the same purpose .
The Commission proposal contains nine resolutions adopted at the International Maritime Organisation , in particular the inclusion of boats transporting radioactive cargo .
This is not a question of imposing safety standards on packages but providing necessary information to Community port authorities in respect of goods being transported , adopting technical appendices and altering the activities of the relevant Community committee in order to up-date Community legislation and bring it in line with international standards .
We can consider the objectives set out in this proposal to be positive and worthy of the European Parliament 's support .
However , in my opinion , there are some loose ends which are not tied up by this Directive .
First of all , the safety measures contemplated in it do not affect boats transiting through Community waters , without docking in a European Union port .
So how can we ensure that these boats are complying with standards and the relevant codes ?
Perhaps we should propose that the contents of this Directive should also be extended to boats passing through Community waters , without any prejudice , of course , to their right to innocent passage , something recognised in international conventions .
We should not forget that those same conventions also provide for the possibility of confining boats to certain maritime routes .
Secondly , it is surprising and even dangerous to continue to allow the transportation of radioactive cargoes in boats also carrying passengers .
A number of members of the IMO have voiced their reservations over this .
So perhaps it would be wise to ban this practice or , failing that , demand the minimum requisite of announcing the fact and publishing the list of passengers carried on these boats , another aspect being looked at in a specific Directive , 96 / 574 final , on passenger lists .
Thirdly , Appendix I - which according to Article 6 of the directive should be notified to the relevant authority of the State affected in cases of accidents - does not consider the need to notify the number of crew on board when a boat is involved in an accident .
On the other hand , Mr President , I should like to point out that the amendments tabled and approved in committee have helped to improve the shape of my report .
Concerning these amendments , however , I should like to point out some details and make some comments .
Amendment No. 1 - I have been told that Amendment No. 3 has been withdrawn - refers to radioactive material being transported on boats .
Amendment 7 strengthens the obligation on destination States to convey information received to all Community States along the route to be taken by the said boat .
This was approved by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , where Amendments Nos 5 and 6 were also approved , containing the obligation on boat operators transporting hazardous cargo to inform all of the States affected by its route and not only the destination State .
But possibly this is a slightly complicated situation .
With respect to Amendment No. 8 , it should be said that this is a technical addition to Article 11 of Directive 93 / 75 and it refers to the new numbering of the sub-paragraphs of Article 2 of that Directive , all of which refers to the INF code .
I thought it might also be useful to include in the information to be conveyed to the authorities prior to departure , the number of crew members on board , which should improve the mobilisation of emergency services when accidents take place .
Amendments Nos. 10 and 11 are designed to offer all of the necessary information to emergency services on radioactive cargoes and the procedures to be carried out on board in the case of accident .
Finally , Mr President , Amendment No. 12 on communicating the list of passengers is vital .
Furthermore , in accordance with the draft directive by the European Commission on this matter , published on 25 November 1996 , this subject is to be discussed by the European Parliament during the ' mini-session ' next May .
Mr President , Mr Kinnock , the Socialists support Novo Belenguer 's report .
At the same time we are able to state that , in our view , it is both right and proper that the Commission should improve the 1993 directive .
But we support the twelve amendments designed to tighten up on the directive , though I now hear that one of these may be withdrawn .
We are naturally pleased about our port state controls , but we do not have the reporting requirement in international waters .
We have another report on the European reporting system , which has been a long time coming .
We have discussed whether the present report could act as an impetus for progress in the other matter .
Clearly it makes things difficult if one cannot get ships in transit to report , and direct ships in transit through safe waters .
I would therefore ask the Commission whether it would be possible for us , together with Parliament , to adopt a position on this , since it relates in part to the legal basis for this proposal .
I hope we can move forward .
It is 3-4 years since the other proposal was produced .
We support this proposal , but we would also like to draw attention to the fact that it is not only ships in transit which are the problem .
Use is also being made of substandard ships .
It may therefore be necessary , in conjunction with port state control , for us to have a more rigorous system for ships used to transport nuclear materials .
It is becoming more and more common for many countries to ship such materials abroad using various forms of transport such as rail and sea , and whenever this occurs there are demonstrations .
It is my view that some of the ships are not up to the appropriate standard and fail to report their movements in the right places .
I hope therefore that we can make progress both with EUREP and with this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the transport of dangerous goods is always of great interest to our citizens , since it is a question of ensuring maximum safety .
In shipping in particular , we have a major responsibility here , for this really is an international problem .
The rapporteur rightly pointed to the importance of this directive , but also to the importance of regulating ships that sail through our waters without calling at any European port .
A speaker has just referred to the port states directive , on the basis of which we were able to regulate quite a few matters for ourselves .
Here we are dealing with a practical issue , which we must tackle jointly .
The Group of the European People 's Party will therefore support all the amendments , in order to make the transport of dangerous or polluting goods even safer , give coastal regions lasting and effective protection against pollution or even destruction and ensure the maximum level of safety for the crews of vessels .
So I want to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report .
He really has tackled problematic questions which we have not so far managed to resolve .
Commissioner , I know you are about to tell us that you cannot accept the majority of our amendments because they do not necessarily belong here .
Nevertheless - and I am asking you this on behalf of the EPP Group too - please take our views and wishes seriously !
Help us , so that we can find a good solution to all these questions , even if we do not manage to do so now with this report .
Mr President , the Green Group also believes the Commission has acted positively in presenting this directive incorporating Directive 93 / 75 which is designed to improve the system of preventing accidents at sea involving vessels carrying hazardous and harmful substances and mount appropriate rescue operations , and which is now extended , through this new directive , to the transport of radio-active material .
But we think account should also have been taken of the fact that Directive 21 / 95 on control of ports and other international standards have been issued in the meantime .
So we support the Commission 's objectives but we also support all the amendments passed in committee and the way the report has been presented by the rapporteur , whom we thank .
In particular , we think there is no question of excluding movement across territorial waters or the need for containers which may be used for radioactive material to meet AIEA standards .
Mr President , first of all I would like to say that we welcome this report .
I do not think that any of us here can go too far in showing our concern about the handling and the transport of toxic waste , especially radioactive material .
We feel very strongly about this issue in my constituency with last year the experience of the Sea Empress and the impact of that on the local environment .
People in that area are now desperately anxious to get back to normal life , and we would strongly recommend that there should be no complacency shown when it comes to this directive .
The thrust of the Transport Committee 's position is to ensure that legislation applies to ships passing through EU waters , not just ships which are docking in EU ports .
Let us make sure that the coastal authorities are aware of the presence of vessels carrying hazardous material .
Local authorities can then , in the light of that information , take the appropriate action in the event of any incident .
Also two main points need to be made on nuclear fluid , plutonium and radioactive waste .
They should be brought under the scope of the directive .
Firstly , we need to ensure radioactive material must only be carried in containers meeting the latest , International Atomic Energy Agency requirements .
Secondly we must make sure that radioactive material should never be transported on ships carrying passengers .
These are minimum conditions which we must insist on .
It is common sense to separate toxic material from passengers and to observe international agreed regulations .
If we do this we will certainly minimize any kind of risks in the whole question of transporting toxic materials , but particularly , of course , nuclear material .
Mr President , could I first of all thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Belenguer , for his excellent report on the proposal .
I am also pleased to be able to follow a fellow Welshman whose concern about the possibilities of accidents at sea producing appalling consequences of pollution is well-known to this House , as it is in his constituency .
I am very glad to note that on this proposal there is a common understanding and an endorsement of its main objective which is to strengthen and to improve the existing directive for establishing notification requirements in order to improve prevention and intervention in the case of accidents at sea to vessels carrying dangerous or potentially polluting goods .
The Commission welcomes Amendments Nos 8 and 9 .
The former will allow the committee set up by this directive to take future amendments to the INF Code into account , and the latter , which requires the operator of a ship to provide the competent authorities with information on the number of crew on board , should help to improve emergency responses to accidents at sea .
With regard to the other amendments , I must emphasize very strongly that the Commission shares the concern expressed by the committee about the specific risks related to the carriage of radioactive materials by sea , as well as the weakness of the notification system set up by the 1993 Directive .
As Members have already said in this debate , this does not cover the transitting ships .
We share that concern but I think it worth reminding the Parliament , without any complacency , that 80 % of these ships that are transitting in European waters are in fact bound for Community ports .
Whilst transitting therefore , they are also subject to the requirements that relate to ports and there is some further reassurance in that .
The Commission cannot accept the amendments that Parliament has entered .
It is not because of a divergence of views but mainly because the points which are put in the amendments are already covered by other Commission proposals or because the Commission is envisaging specific new initiatives in this area .
Mr Ferber anticipated me in his remarks - not for the first time , always a sensible contribution - and we are obviously already engaged in undertaking exactly the tasks that he sought .
The same applies to the propositions put by Mr Sindal .
More precisely , the first series of amendments in relation to the conditions of transport of radioactive materials by sea , are outside the scope of this directive which only deals with notification requirements .


That is particularly the case with Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , unless Amendment No 3 has been withdrawn , as Mr Belenguer indicated , because those amendments would prohibit the transport of radioactive materials on board passenger ships .
It is also applicable to Amendment No 2 on compliance with IAEA regulations and on Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , which would add a number of safety requirements issuing from the INF code to the annexes of the directive .
The Commission is , however , considering various initiatives to strengthen the existing regime applicable to the transport of radioactive materials , including , if necessary , binding legislation for all ships calling at a European port and carrying radioactive materials .
As far as the other series of amendments are concerned , those related to the extension of reporting requirements to ships in transit , the Commission considers that Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 6 are already reflected in the proposed Council directive for a European Ship Reporting System , the so-called EuroRep , which was adopted by the Commission in December 1993 , and is still before the Council .
It would be inappropriate and confusing if the Commission was to accept the inclusion of such provisions in Directive 93 / 75 while discussions could resume at any time in Council on similar requirements as described in EuroRep .
Amendment No 7 requesting Member States to exchange all information , received on a routine basis is unacceptable since this would overburden the relevant national authorities with a huge amount of data , despite the fact that such information could only be needed for safety purposes in very exceptional circumstances .
Finally the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 12 concerning the presence of a passenger list .
It would be redundant as the proposed Council directive on the registration of persons sailing on board passenger ships was adopted by the Commission on 25 November last year .
Summing up , the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 8 and 9 , but , while we share the concerns they reflect , we cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 11 and 12 .

May I conclude by again thanking Mr Belenguer and the House for facilitating the speedy achievement of a common position on this important measure which will obviously have a direct and significant effect on the transport of dangerous and potentially polluting goods on our waters .
Could Commissioner Kinnock inform us as to when he might possibly be bringing forward legislation on the whole question of the transport of nuclear material ?
I am grateful for the question , Mr President .
Work is actively underway , and has been for some time .
I will not be absolutely specific about a date , because I have no wish to mislead the House , even to the extent of nominating a month , but I can assure Mr Morris that the proposals will be forthcoming .
If he would like to get in touch with me in writing I will try to be more explicit as the weeks pass .
I would be happy to give him a firmer indication when the work has , in our view , reached an adequate stage of preparation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 8 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

New maritime strategies
The next item is the report ( A4-0067 / 97 ) by Mr Danesin , on behalf of the Committee of Transport and Tourism , on the Commission communication ' Towards a new maritime strategy ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0081 - C4-0237 / 96 ) .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank my colleagues on the Committee on Transport and Tourism , briefly but sincerely , for their commitment .
They have contributed valuable ideas and hard work on the amendments which led to the report being unanimously passed in committee .
Ladies and gentlemen , 90 % of trade between the Community and the rest of the world takes place by sea and the percentage is 35 % within the Union .
The Union 's future maritime strategy , as proposed by the Commission , is based on four pillars : safety , maintaining open markets , competitiveness and state aids .
I regard the safety issue as fundamental , first because it is linked to environmental problems and the protection of human life , and secondly because , as I will seek to demonstrate , it is the point of departure for maintaining both employment for European seamen and the competitiveness of our fleets .
The human factor is basic : 80 % of all maritime disasters are precisely ascribable to the human factor .
The problem is aggravated today , with multilingual crews finding communication difficult in emergencies .
So it is essential to take every possible measure to preserve skills , foster professionalism and promote training for European seamen .
In addition to problems linked to training , there is - as I see it - a strategic point here : the registers and the resulting flags of convenience .
The situation today is that a shipowner registering a ship under a non-Community flag , especially under certain flags , has massive objective economic advantages , in terms of staff costs , taxes , etcetera .
So it would be hypocritical not to recognize that under current circumstances the problem will be very difficult to resolve .
The first consequence will be the inevitable loss of the very idea of the Community seaman and the competitiveness of our fleet .
The second will be an inevitable increase in the number of sub-standard ships ploughing our seas , with all the easily imaginable environmental consequences .
Parliament has called many times for an aid plan , including financial aid , to stimulate activity in this sector , including a precise definition of the concept of European shipowner , but many proposals have never reached the stage of legislation because of the Council 's inability to take any decisions on the subject .
What measures can be applied today to establish a real Community maritime strategy ?
We live in a globalized market economy and for the companies involved the constraint of the balance sheet is the basic fact of life . So if the enormous cost advantages of flags of convenience are not balanced by strict safety controls on the one hand and tax incentives on the other , the best intentions will be irredeemably doomed to failure .
One such measure is the Port State Control Directive .
This measure makes it possible to carry out inspections at the port of disembarkation and apply sanctions up to a maximum of impounding the vessel if irregularities are found .
I believe we should give strong support to a Community task force to ensure strict application of the directive by the Member States .
In terms of getting the results we are looking for , it does not seem realistic today to force shipowners to take on Community crew by setting compulsory minimum quotas . This would simply encourage the exodus to flags of convenience , through the natural advantage to the aforementioned balance sheet .
Instead it would be more useful to create conditions , through tax and contributions concessions , which make it competitive to take on European seamen .
Any chance of combatting the invasion of open registers is linked to ensuring that they lose their current advantages .
To conclude , I think the Commission should promote genuine measures to protect the Community fleet .
I am talking about the situation - which in my view is unacceptable today - whereby certain non-Community countries , benefitting from Community funding through cooperation aid or other schemes , issue official certificates to vessels far too easily and fail to check their seaworthiness properly , even when they are aware of the risks involved .
I believe we need to have the strength , shown , for example , by the United States but other countries too , to impose a certain reciprocity between Community aid and respect for minimum standards , in order to protect our seamen , our shipowners and our marine environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when one uses the word ' strategy ' , I think one should always be prudent , because if the proposed trajectory is oriented towards positive targets , experience has all too often led us to experience a let-down , to feel that something is missing , and therefore to temper any enthusiasm we began with .
On maritime transport , the Commission is no exception .
That is why , as draftsman for the Committee on Regional Policy , I am expressing the feeling of my colleagues , which oscillates between approval and frustration .
Approval , firstly .
If the Commission presents us with a text intended to shape a new maritime strategy , it is because it is fully aware that the initial measures of 1985 , based upon free trade , have not completely achieved what they were aiming at .
This sector of the economy has been experiencing serious difficulties as a result of globalisation and deregulation .
The sad figure of 50 % for job losses is striking evidence of this .
The Commission is therefore right to react and to orchestrate its offensive on several levels : safety , training , research , an aid regime and modernisation .
All of these elements are determining factors .
They must be encouraged and even built upon .
I spoke about frustration .
It is with an intense regret which I would like you to share , that I felt the weakness of the regional dimension .
It is skimmed over , is more abstract than we would like , and finally it is cut off from any complete reasoning .
Many areas of the European Union are maritime regions , and some are even island regions .
This facet generates or accompanies economic and commercial activities .
Similarly we are disappointed that the Commission did not seize the opportunity to take stock of its thoughts on shipbuilding , when its postulates , which have led to the removal or restructuring of sites , have changed .
I lament the fact that the place of ports has been given so little consideration .
For some regions , these are the doorway to their land , their only tool for development and also a strategic role for their country and their hinterland .
They are spontaneously and peremptorily ignored .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the Committee on Transport for being willing to take into consideration two comments and I hope that this new strategy does not remain just another theory , otherwise I am afraid this new edition will become merely a stab in the water .
Mr President , The research committee has unanimously accepted my written opinion and supports the proposed deregulation of the EU 's Maritime Industry , provided that rigorous international standards of safety and environmental care are maintained together with a moderate level of tolerance for National aid mechanisms .
There is of course quite justified concern over the increasing age of the EU fleet which may require some financial stimulus to improve technical performance standards and criteria .
It is important to note that global initiatives are required in this sector to improve the training and qualifications of seafarers and to make it less tempting for vessel owners to use cheaper poorly qualified crews .
Regard for safety and the environment places demands on the EU shipping market .
This means that research and technical development will inevitably play a key role in ensuring a sustainable and competitive future for the sector in several areas including shipbuilding , vessel safety , propulsion systems and the prevention of pollution .
There is a special programme for transport within the fourth framework programme for research which includes a separate section on shipping .
The committee supports the research programme for the sector but would like to see further development of fuel efficient , environmentally sound propulsion systems , more energy efficient vessel construction and the implementation of a broad socio-economic research programme to investigate the social impact of the maritime science and technology which is developed .
The committee supports the principle of today 's working party with regard to future maritime systems and strongly urges that this be extended to the fifth framework programme as well .
The committee requests that , before the fifth framework programme , the Commission allocates increased resources for the development of safe and environmentally sound shipping .
Mr President , on behalf of the Transport Committee Mr Danesin has pointed to the great importance of a healthy maritime sector in the European Union .
On behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations I wish to call attention primarily to the position of the European fleet in the world market .
Competition there is extremely fierce .
In recent years this has led to many ships sailing under so-called flags of convenience .
This flagging out has enormous detrimental consequences for the European Union .
Not only is the Union increasingly dependent for its maritime transport on third-country ships ; a significant area of economic activity is also lost as a result .
In the form of jobs , to begin with , but in the long term there is also the risk that coastal activities will be moved elsewhere .
In the Netherlands it has been calculated that a good 70 % of the value added in the maritime sector is generated on the coast .
The process of flagging out can be countered by making the registers of Member States more competitive .
In its communication the European Commission offers Member States the opportunity of taking support measures to help ship owners achieve this .
Now that the Euroregister is up and running , I very much support the Commission 's approach .
Since January 1996 the Dutch Government has granted tax concessions to maritime companies formerly under the Dutch flag or based in the Netherlands .
As a result a few dozen vessels have returned to the Dutch flag .
Lastly , I have a specific question for the Commissioner .
Paragraph 33 of the Danesin reports says that maritime transport should not be regarded as an industry which exists merely to serve European imports and exports , but as a self-contained industry in its own right .
That is rather different from the Commission communication which says that maritime transport is a service industry with a subordinate function .
Can the Commissioner confirm that he backs the view of the Transport Committee ?
I will end by observing that regrettably the large number of intrinsically well-intentioned pronouncements in the Danesin report mean that the main points are obscured too much by secondary points .
Mr President , on behalf of the Party of European Socialists I would like to welcome this new approach to the maritime sector from Commissioner Kinnock .
Like him , we believe in a vibrant maritime industry for the whole of Europe .
It is vital in our view for strategic industrial reasons , strategic employment reasons and to ensure and enhance the competitiveness of the European Union .
And it will of course make a vital contribution to ensuring that we meet our environmental obligations .
I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Danesin , for his cooperative and comprehensive approach , which has secured widespread support , not just throughout this Parliament , but indeed throughout the industry itself .
I am sure tomorrow when it comes to the vote we can as a Parliament give with one voice a clear commitment to the future of Europe 's maritime sector .
However we face a stark challenge .
Back in 1970 a third of the world 's ships were proud to fly a flag of a European Member State .
In 1994 the figure had fallen to just 14 % .
In my own country in 1979 we had 1200 British-flagged ships , today the total is less than 250 .
We face an enormous challenge , not least in jobs .
A third of a million jobs in 1970 throughout the EU , today barely 100 , 000 .
Two thirds of the whole of the industrial sector maritime industry wiped out .
But our Group feels there is tremendous potential .
Liner growth for example has been almost 7 % per annum throughout the world over the past ten years .
There is growing demand for specialized services and there are clear environmental benefits to encourage the maritime sector .
We particularly welcome the fact that the Commission proposal is based on four key elements : first - safety , secondly - maintaining open markets , thirdly - securing competitiveness and finally - clear guidelines for state aid .
I would like to give a few examples of why we support this new strategy .
On safety , we fully support the Commissioner in his efforts to make non-binding IMO resolutions binding and compulsory through EC legislation .
On maintaining open markets , we support fully his bid to forge international agreements .
In terms of securing competitiveness , we believe in common action to promote maritime training programmes , research and development , and in particular encouraging young people to the profession .
Finally on state aids , we too support revising state aid guidelines to focus more on support for employment , R & D and training , rather than just general state aid provison .
Parliament would also like greater emphasis in a number of areas .
One is to make port state control more effective .
Let us do what we can within the scope of our existing powers .
Let us make more use of the controls such as port state control .
Secondly , we want to encourage more workers back into the industry , particularly EU young people .
That means improvements in working conditions and working hours on board ship .
Third and finally we want to see swift action to tackle the scandal of flags of convenience which are a disease , a plague , spreading throughout the world 's shipping industries , and here in Europe too .
They must be tackled if the strategy is to come into reality and provide benefits , jobs and a boost to our economy .
Europe has a proud maritime past , I believe this strategy , as outlined by Commissioner Kinnock , will lay the foundations for a great maritime future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European People 's Party , for which I speak , supports and will give its votes to the Danesin report . We compliment Mr Danesin on his work .
The Commission communication on a new maritime strategy is a rather unbalanced text . It contains some good proposals , but on quite a number of points there is a vagueness about its true intentions .
For example , it proposes removal of the share capital veil from shipping companies in the name of ensuring that they comply with civil , taxation and criminal code obligations arising from the operation of ships .
Could it be that the Commission has plans to extend the removal of the share capital veil to other branches of the European economy , such as industry perhaps ?
Some of the other proposals are also quite worrying .
First , the establishment of common criteria which the Member States will be obliged to conform with when placing ships on their registers .
Second , the abolition of the criterion of the shipowner 's nationality as a condition of registration .
Third , the introduction of a range of legislative measures to control the ownership of ships prior to and over the course of registration .
If all of those ideas are turned into reality , ladies and gentlemen , you can be sure that apart from short distance ships and the ferries there will not be a single European ship left on the Community registers .
Elsewhere in the text the Commission declares that it intends to withdraw its proposals on the Euros register and the Community status of the shipowner which , as you know , this Parliament improved .
Why ?
What is the purpose behind the withdrawal of those two proposals ?
In the motion for a resolution that we are considering the Committee on Transport commends and endorses whatever is good in the Commission communication .
At the same time , it distances itself from other positions of the Commission - some of which I have mentioned - about which it has serious reservations .
In addition , it urges the Commission not to withdraw the proposals on the Euros register and the Community shipowner .
Lastly , the motion for a resolution contains new ideas on reversing the flight of ships and owners from the registers of the Member States , among which is a proposal that the Commission should take a hard look at the damaging repercussions for European shipping and European seafarers ' employment of the Black Cutters practice of the International Transport Workers ' Federation - the IFS - which is applied globally to third country seafarers working on ships flying flags of convenience .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the shipping industry is truly strategic for Europe and for world trade .
It has a magnificent heritage and represents one of the most ancient and noble facets of European identity .
The Commission 's communication and the fine report by Mr Danesin highlight the ongoing problems in the sector , which has suffered shipyard closures , an exodus of vessels from Community registers and severe unemployment among seafarers .
This trend must be reversed , especially as I believe the prospects should be more favourable in the years ahead , in view of the steady increase in trade and traffic .
One indication is the overcrowding of the European and Mediterranean routes , via Suez in particular , which are once again becoming the principle arteries of world transport .
So I am in full agreement with the measures suggested by the Commission for training , encouraging research , vessel technology , telecommunications systems and establishing a telematics network , logistics and traffic control , including satellite navigation , and promotion of integrated transport at ports , particularly boosting rail transport and trans-European links .
By contrast , the Commission does not seem to have come up with definitive answers to the phenomenon of shady flags and unsafe sub-standard vessels with exploited crews .
However I think the link made with safety rules is strategic and should be supported in the multilateral WTO negotiations externally and by tax incentives internally .
I hope the Commission will pursue this issue and I fully underwrite Mr Danesin 's report .
My compliments to the rapporteur who , like a true Venetian , has shown us how to rule the seas again .
We need to appreciate that 35 % of intra-Community transport goes by sea .
The chances are that this may become less as the big container ships only call at one port per continent .
More of our onward distribution would then need to go by ship than by road .
For that to happen , and both the Dutch Government and this House have secured this in the trans-European networks , we need to strengthen our coastal transport systems .
This requires a number of things to be done .
First of all , we need to improve the training of crews and to spend more money on that .
The Netherlands has shown the way here .
Through tax concessions , as Mr van der Waal said , but on the other hand we must also realize that our schools of maritime navigation have to stay open , for foreigners too .
And we need a better system of group vessel loading .
I believe the Commission should include that in the fifth framework programme with a view to its computerization .
I have also said here repeatedly , on the subject of the Sindal report too , that it must also be possible to use the 45-foot containers routinely used in maritime transport for overland transport too .
Port dues must be kept low , but must on no account create a competitive edge at the expense of the environment and safety or a less rigorous or harmonized policy .
The Union must remain alert to the fact that some islands and peripheral regions have no alternative to maritime transport .
If we are not prepared to make every effort to preserve a viable maritime transport industry in the Community , both the big main ports and the peripheral regions will suffer .
As elected representatives of the people we cannot allow that .
The communication and Mr Danesin 's report are thus an excellent starting point .
Mr President , Mr Kinnock , Rapporteur , as my colleagues are no doubt aware , maritime transport is very dear to me and I would like to point out that we in Europe have neglected the development of maritime transport .
We have failed to develop an approach with which we can meet the challenges of the future .
We have global maritime transport and we have local maritime transport , and there is a connection between the two .
They are interdependent .
Local maritime transport supplies global maritime transport .
It is therefore important that we see things in context .
But allow me to comment on global maritime transport .
Even if our records show that we have fewer European ships in the ports of the world , and that we have fewer employees , I must emphasize the fact that most ships at a global level continue to be significantly controlled by European economic interests , though this is often under flags of convenience and often involves different registers .
The officers are European , but the crew are from other nations .
What we are complaining about , in fact , is that we are missing out on economic opportunities , because we know that the ships are actually owned by European cities .
Throughout the world there is competition in terms of standards , ship quality , safety and pay .
But , ladies and gentlemen , Rapporteur , one does not improve maritime transport through reductions .
One improves it only by creating quality transport .
It is my view that we need some OECD agreements in this area .
We have our European port state .
This arrangement must be extended so that it applies globally .
We have training for seamen , we have safety mechanisms , and finally we have the discussion on flags of convenience .
It is Danish , Dutch and Norwegian registers that are doing battle with these flags of convenience .
But it is really the same thing : the economy is in Europe , but the ships sail elsewhere , crewed by non-European seamen .
I hope the Commission will be successful in its discussion of navigation and the future .
I hope that , through this discussion , the Commission can produce something better for the agenda .
The matter could be taken up with the big shipping companies operating in Europe and one could attempt to have them realize their responsibility , the obligation they have , with us , to ensure the maritime future of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the House agrees that your communication is a positive step in support of European shipping .
The House also agrees that Mr Danesin 's report is an excellent one .
May I therefore make one comment to the Commissioner : we were unanimous in the report in regretting that the Commission 's strategy contains timetable for its implementation and that too few of the specific proposals match up to their tasks .
Let me follow on from this .
In the fourth area , the creation of fair conditions of competition for shipping , I would like you to agree now that you will be submitting new proposals , for my Dutch colleagues who spoke here today rightly referred to the laudable initiatives of the Dutch government .
It is our obligation to ensure fair conditions of competition for all shipping companies in the Community of 15 .
We cannot have the shipping companies of other Community states , whose budgets do not allow them to introduce aid measures such as the Dutch ones , suffering disadvantages because one country gives special aid to its shipping and then shipping companies flag out their ships to another country .
That does not make sense in a European single market !
So , Commissioner , we are waiting with some suspense to hear whether you can tell us today when you will be making further practical proposals and to what extent these proposals will also take account of the fact that we must have fair conditions of competition between shipping companies , which is only possible if we have the appropriate national framework conditions .
Either all the other 14 countries or - leaving aside Luxembourg - the other 13 countries will take the same tax measures as the Netherlands or we will have to consider whether the Dutch provisions are compatible with Community legislation , for we cannot have seafarers and companies suffering disadvantages because of the lack of uniform conditions of competition .
I await your answer with some suspense !
Mr President , the report by Mr Danesin on a new maritime strategy is a wide-ranging and comprehensive document , which makes it clear that the subject has been studied thoroughly .
Its principal theme is , rightly , broad cooperation and efforts to achieve worldwide organization .
However , one cannot help observing that the report says nothing at all about one vital dimension of cooperation , which is even of decisive importance in ensuring maritime safety .
I am referring to cooperation with seamen 's unions .
They do important work in their own field both at sea and in port to ensure that vessels are in the best possible working order both technically and as regards their crews .
The report devotes ample attention to the very same hazards to maritime safety which seamen 's unions have spent decades trying to combat .
These are inadequate or non-existent training of crews , defective vessels and the resultant substandard working conditions , which mean that crews ' motivation cannot be optimal , and many other similar matters .
It would therefore only be natural to exploit to the full the wealth of experience which seamen 's unions have all over the world in improving maritime safety .
At a time when the European Union is adopting a new maritime strategy and trying to influence world standards , there is every reason to hope that this dimension will be utilized to the full in the further consideration of the subject .
The fundamental question is this : to what extent are so-called market forces to be given free rein in determining conditions in maritime transport ?
It must be possible to distinguish between maximum openness of maritime transport markets and market forces which endanger maritime safety .
By means of a common decision and agreement and sufficiently effective supervision , it should be possible to regulate these market forces in such a way as to ensure that the maximization of purely short-term economic advantage is not allowed to threaten maritime safety .
Mr President , it is extremely important that we find a way to develop Europe 's Maritime Industry so that it becomes both safer and more competitive .
Transport by sea accounts for 90 percent of transport to countries outside the Union .
It is also an important key to free trade which is why we clearly have an extremely important task in helping the industry .
But , in my opinion , there is one area which is lacking in this report and that is the industry 's responsibility to deal with the environmental problems which it creates .
It is important in a process such as this , where the Commission is quite rightly trying to take an overall view of the maritime industry , that environmental problems are not forgotten .
There are currently particularly serious environmental problems in the Baltic Sea .
It is one of the dirtiest seas in Europe and the maritime industry must bear a large part of the blame for this .
In recent years , in Swedish waters alone in the Baltic , there have been about 500 oil discharges per year .
The graph shows a curve which is rising catastrophically and quick action is required , which the Commission does not seem to understand .
A considerable part of this has to do with the newly appearing countries around the Baltic .
It would seem that one of our most important tasks is to work towards a situation where many of these countries eventually become Members of the EU so that the Baltic is immediately surrounded by EU countries .
Then we can jointly make far greater demands .
In the short term , a simple remedy would be to do as has been done in Denmark and Sweden which is to allow the discharge of oil , free of charge , in each port .
This is one action to resolve the problem which we should all be able to support .
Let me conclude by asking the following question of the Commission : Is the Commission able to revert with proposals to tackle the particular environmental problems which the maritime industry itself causes ?
Mr President , my compliments to the Commissioner and to Mr Danesin for their emphatic choice in favour of a European maritime strategy .
It underlines the broad importance of maritime transport .
The central aims of this policy are in my view the improvement of the European fleet 's competitiveness together with better safety .
I will touch on two points .
Firstly , flagging out .
This needs to be vigorously opposed .
It is unacceptable that over half of the EU 's tonnage sails under flags of convenience .
That is bad for jobs , bad for safety and it leads to a displacement of economic activities .
Can the Commissioner give us an idea of how far the measures envisaged will reduce flagging out ?
My second point concerns the dredger fleet .
The European dredger fleet has a first-class reputation for environmentally responsible harbour clearance and maintenance world-wide .
Will the Commissioner agree to bear in mind the competitiveness of Europe 's dredger fleet too in the implementation of the proposed measures ?
Here I would also like to ask the Commissioner what the position is concerning access by the European dredger fleet to the American market ?
Is that access still denied by a very strange interpretation of the ' Jones Act ' ?
Will the Commissioner investigate and if necessary raise this with the US Government ?
In conclusion , I would ask the Commissioner to harmonize the procedures and laws relating to transport between European ports , given the importance of the role of coastal transport .
Mr President , could I first of all commend the Transport Committee and the other committees involved in this report , and of course I express my particular thanks to the rapporteur Mr Danesin , for the work that he and his colleagues have done .
The motion for a resolution now before the House shows a real commitment to advancing the work on the maritime strategy paper .
That has been reflected in most of the contributions in the course of the debate and naturally I am pleased that the resolution substantially concurs with the approach taken by the Commission .
As the House will know , I based my reflections in the strategy paper on the role of the shipping industry in the world , on its difficulties as a global industry and on our common desire to maintain the industry and as many jobs for European seafarers as possible .
Some claim , though thankfully not in this House , that the objectives of competitiveness and employment are somehow mutually exclusive .
I believe that view to be defeatist and wrong , not to say reactionary , and I am therefore gratified to note that the great majority of the comments on the White Paper reflect a similar view .
I am pleased to recognize that the motion for a resolution supports the new strategy and its three main pillars .
The first pillar is the competitiveness of the European fleet .
We all agree that this is essential and we all know that the necesssary expertise exists .
But unfavourable operating conditions over a broad front and for several years have resulted in a loss of competitiveness of our shipping industry .
As honourable Members will know , and some have pointed this out in the debate , the results have been very negative .
First , flagging-out has greatly reduced the number of European seafarers , both in officer categories and amongst ratings .
Secondly , that has had a repercussive effect on shore-based employment , particularly in those tasks where experience at sea is of great value .
Thirdly , hard-hit shipping and related industries have simply moved away from the Community which has obviously resulted in further job losses .
Competitiveness is therefore fundamental to future success as the Dublin Conference on the future of the European seafarer clearly recognized .
It would have been unrealistic to have expected that or any other meeting to produce instant answers to the deepseated problems of European seafaring employment .
But the conference did contribute to identifying issues which need further and urgent attention .
Those issues clearly include the use of incentives and financial support - touched upon by several speakers in the course of the debate - and also the need to make the younger generation more aware of the career opportunities .
Those factors rightly have prominent reference in this resolution before the House .
The issue of state aids obviously has relevance to these matters and I report to the House , and specifically to Mr Jarzembowski , that after having taken into consideration the comments by Member States , by the industry and now by the Parliament , the Commission is currently in the process of finalizing new guidelines .
They will be produced very shortly .
I realize the point that Mr Jarzembowski makes about substance and specifics in the strategy paper and I share his desire for what he described as concrete proposals .
What I wanted to avoid was concrete proposals that actually sink .
That is why in a strategy paper we set out the pillars of policy in the way that we did in the hope , indeed in the knowledge , that it would generate intense debate and further action .
So far that has certainly been the case and I do not intend the matter to rest there .
The encouragement I get from this House , including Mr Jarzembowski , to proceed further , is welcome encouragement indeed .
I am pleased to welcome the support for our thinking in the sphere of external relations .
We all agree on the necessity for open world markets .
It is clear that in those conditions the Community must pursue our interests , especially since we are an open market so far as third country competitors are concerned .
It is only reasonable to expect them to do the same .
Our specific communication on maritime external relations has , as the House will know , recently been published and I look forward to honourable Members ' comments on that communication in due course .
The third pillar of our strategy linked safety and fair competition .
That is a proper relationship to stress as we continue to emphasize the urgent need to achieve quality shipping in all parts of the maritime trades .
There is no doubt that the various areas of shipping are affected to different degrees by unsafe operators , but wherever they exist they must be denied the unacceptable competitive advantages that they now gain by neglecting the safety of human beings , the safety of vessels and the safety of the environment .
Seafarers , port workers , the general public and all those operators who obey the rules have a vested interest in ensuring that effective action is taken against those who flout the rules , and by so doing imperil life and gain commercial advantages .
I am grateful for the strong and long-established support of the House on this matter .
Finally , Points 7 and 32 of the resolution call on the Commission to undertake or to sponsor an in-depth study on the practices of the International Transport Workers Federation .
I have to inform the House that the Commission has no real legal authority in this area .
The ITF practices are based on freely negotiated collective agreements between the parties concerned , and , consequently , they are a matter for the labour laws of Member States .
The Commission sees no reason on the basis of the information currently available to carry out any further investigation on this matter .
I therefore , regret to say that the Commission cannot accept this proposal in the resolution .
I hope that the House will understand the reasons and not press the matter .
One of the paragraphs that has been raised in the course of the debate was raised by Mr van der Waal , who asked whether the Commission agrees with Paragraph 35 of the report from Parliament .
I answer very specifically , yes , we do agree , and I hope that neither Mr van der Waal or others , whose interest in this subject is very well known indeed , will interpret any reference in our strategy paper as down-grading or allocating a secondary role to shipping .
It is a free-standing industry , it has its own identity and it must pursue its own interests as an industry .
In so doing it will be serving the remainder of the transport market and many other markets too .
I conclude my specific response to the report by expressing my appreciation for Mr Danesin 's report which offers the Commission welcome encouragement .
Perhaps I might take up a little more of the time of the House to respond to some interesting questions that have been raised in the course of the debate .
I must say to Mr Stenmarck that I welcome the issues that he raises relating to the environment .
I can respond by saying that the Commission bases its specific safety and environmental measures to the largest extent possible on existing international rules .
In this respect the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships , the so called Marpol Convention , sets standards at international level on prevention of pollution by amongst other things , oil , sewage and garbage from ships .
Discussions are on-going within the European Union to supplement these international convention provisions with European Union regulations on exhaust emissions as well as on the subjects that I referred to .
On this point the Commission 's response to a request in the December 1995 Environment Council will be to present a communication on a Community strategy to combat acidification .
That will include a chapter relating to action on emissions from maritime transport .
Although not subject to any international rules , it is proposed to submit the sulphur content of sulphur fuels , for instance sulphurous oxide , to control under the Marpol Convention .
In the light of the above and the things I have already reported to the House and the problem of air pollution emissions , particularly from ferries in the Baltic and North Sea , which was specifically raised by Mr Stenmarck , the Commission is monitoring developments within the IMO for the recognition of these two areas as special areas for air pollution measures related to shipping activities .
We are prepared to take appropriate action should the IMO fail to provide a satisfactory outcome .
There is the question raised by Mr Cornelissen relating to the dredging industry .
Time forbids me from answering the other points that he raised .
I have to say that the dredging industry is not covered , as he said , in the strategy paper , but that does not mean for one second that the interests and the significance of the industry are neglected so far as the Commission is concerned .
Their crucial infrastructural importance obviously has to be acknowledged by all sensible people .
They have a direct imput into the maritime industries forum and are especially active in the marine resources panel .
So far as contact with the industry is concerned I happen to have a meeting arranged in the very near future with representatives of the industry in the European Union .
Finally on the point relating to external relations , clearly we only have negotiating mandates thus far with India and China but in all negotiations I can assure Mr Cornelissen and the rest of the House that the interests of the European dredging industry , which offers very competitive performance and excellent standards will certainly be taken fully into account , regardless of the current status of legislation in other parts of the world .
We think they have something to offer , we believe that they deserve opportunities and we believe that fair trade requires that they get access to new markets .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
UK structural measures
The next item is the report ( A4-0126 / 97 ) by Mrs McCarthy , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on development problems and structural interventions in the United Kingdom in the period l994-1999 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my report on the implementation of structural funds in the UK is the result of a very wide consultation undertaken with both users and applicants for EU structural funds .
Over 2 , 000 letters and questionnaires were sent out to partners in the regions and I engaged in over twentyfive hours of hearings in nine different places across the UK .
Nine regions were asked for their views .
Over 300 pieces of written evidence were submitted to my office .
The groups consulted and involved in this report included a very wide spectrum , chambers of commerce , training enterprise councils , the voluntary sector , economic development agencies , universities , local authorities , rural development councils and interviews with government offices .
As such I cannot claim all the credit for this report .
It is not my personal report .
It reflects very much the views of peoples in the regions .
Finally , we held a hearing in March in the European Parliament with a senior member of the House of Lords committee of inquiry into structural funds in the UK and the cohesion funds in the EU .
They presented their preliminary findings to our committee .
Indeed , they were remarkably similar to the recommendations contained in this report , in particular vis-à-vis the problems of delays and bureaucracy .
It was regrettable that the UK Government chose not to send a political representative but fortunately we were able to have a Brussels-based civil servant read out a statement , instead of having the policy of the empty chair .
I should like to thank those across the political spectrum who attended , and provided evidence .
I have added a 50page working document which is a genuine attempt to reflect their views .
I would remind the Group of the European People 's Party , and its Conservative Members , that to abstain or vote against this report would be to ride roughshod over and disregard the views of local partners on the ground , although the UK Government is no stranger to that process in its management of funding .
I would like to say how the EU funds have played a vital role in developing economic and social cohesion in the UK .
The result has been that some 240 , 000 jobs have been created or maintained , in particular in Objective 2 regions and I would also like to say that they are a clear expression of European solidarity for declining regions and regions lagging behind in the UK .
I know that the Group of the European People 's Party did not want me to use that term in my report .
They provide a model of collaborative approach to economic development .
They are welcomed by partners in the regions and they have stimulated new and innovative partnerships .
In fact , they have filled the vacuum and the absence of a UK strategic regional policy and compensated somewhat for the government 's winner-takes-all gameshow approach to regional development .
Partners have welcomed this strategic framework and it is an important catalyst to regional economic development .
They have also opened up new opportunities for local communities and the voluntary sector to engage in projects .
There I should like to congratulate the Commission on developing new models of best practice .
The Merseyside pathways initiative , the RECHAR initiative in Sheffield Manor Estate , the East Durham partnership and the Northern Ireland Peace and Reconciliation Programme .
We also have examples of best practice in the independent secretariats in Scotland and the ending of top-slicing of the European Social Fund in the Merseyside programmes .
As I already said , they have provided additional sources for regeneration which , due to continued government cutbacks and lack of investment in the regions , have provided a vital lifeline and , in some cases , have led to an overdependency on EU funds .
For the record , UK Government investment in regions has fallen since 1984 by 75 % .
Indeed , the EU funds accounted for half of the single regeneration budget which is the main regional investment fund for our regions in 1995 .
So you can see how much they are filling the gaps in the UK .
Where there should be additional funds , in reality they often fill a vacuum .
The real problems we find in the regions centre on the government 's mismanagement of funding .
Partners are too often faced with the nightmare of paperwork , too much bureaucracy .
In fact , Michael Heseltine 's scheme , Regional Challenge , was heavily criticized as producing more bureaucracy and more paperwork .
The government has yet to provide to the Commission an evaluation of the value for money of that scheme .
There is no transparency , no accountability in the allocation of funding and decision-making bodies are run as government quangos with very little elected representation , although I have to say that the pressures from this House and from other colleagues across the regions has meant that we have made some progress in getting elected members on English regional committees .
I have some examples - in fact I have too many and I cannot give all of them here tonight - of the litany of disasters in terms of delays in the European Social Fund .
It is a pity that Commissioner Flynn is not here tonight to answer some of those questions .
For the most part , they are due to government incompetence .
One college in the East Midlands has been faced with the loss of £ 156 , 000 of grant .
One of my local authorities has paid out £ 31 , 000 in interest payments and the voluntary sector now believes there is no practical value or effort in them applying for these funds .
If this government cannot make funds of £ 1.6 billion work , why should they be trusted with public spending of £ 300 billion in the UK funds .
As a consequence of this , partners are accruing massive interest rate payments .
One manager of a public / private partnership said : ' We have paid out so much in overdrafts and bank charges that we are considering a new programme sub-measure , support to financial institutions ' .
A cynical comment but it shows their frustration with the system .
In Scotland they paid out nearly ECU 0.5m in interest payments in 1995 alone .
Yet we are told that the British economy is booming .
Why is it that since 1994 almost 50 % of people in the UK live in an area qualifying for European financial assistance .
This is failure , not success .
It is not a success story .
It is a powerful reminder of the real state of the British economy .
As the cohesion report said , poverty has increased in the UK .
We now have 17.5 % of households living below the poverty line and one in three children live in poverty in the UK .
The question we have to ask ourselves is : Where would Britain be without European structural funds ?
How much better could it have been if the British Government had shown a real commitment to partnership .
I therefore ask this House to vote in favour of my report and to vote in favour of improved democracy , accountability and a more efficient use of EU structural funds .
Mr President , it would have been nice if I could have praised the rapporteur for her work .
Instead , I must deplore both the manipulation of the parliamentary timetable to bring this report before this minisession and the blatant , partisan , party-political nature of much of the text .
We have just heard a sample .
It is to be regretted that Socialists have broken with the practice of not doing a report on one 's own country .
It is quite exceptional for the timetable of a report like this , which is not an urgent legislative matter , to be so compressed that it is brought to the plenary session just two weeks after being voted in committee .
Anyone would think there is an election going on in the UK and the Socialists wish to exploit this Parliament for narrow , national , political point-scoring .
This , of course , is the position with this report .
I particularly condemn the way the Socialist rapporteur has indulged in Old Labour negative knocking of her country , just to score points against her political opponents , and has abused the tradition of this House consensus in the process .
To say that the UK has low growth and low productivity is a travesty of misrepresentation when the UK economy is booming with falling unemployment and rising prosperity .
Even worse to my mind has been the slighting reference to the work of the officials who prepare employment statistics .
It is a slur on their reputation to suggest their figures do not give a true picture .
To be fair , there is much that is sensible in this report .
So all the more pity that the rapporteur has let her Old Labour instincts loose to run down and attack her country in this way and to spoil this report .
Mr President , if an Irishwoman may intrude on this debate and pour oil on troubled waters , I will confine myself to European topics .
I particularly welcome this report and its emphasis on the regional administration of the structural funds .
From my own experience and my Green perspective , this is a very effective way to deal with these funds and can be more effective than national administration .
It is demonstrated throughout this Community that , in particular when dealing with employment problems , local administration can be very effective in dealing with the European funding .
The rapporteur refers to the experience of Scotland where local authorities take a lead in planning with other partners and this has been positive .
In Ireland we need more regionalization and less centralization .
The emphasis in this report on decentralization is very welcome wholly from a European perspective .
Mr President , I should like to welcome the report .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
I know she has worked extremely hard over a long period of time to bring this report before us this evening .
She has held hearings throughout the United Kingdom , including Northern Ireland .
Unfortunately she was not prepared to invite people from Northern Ireland to the hearing in Brussels but I am not going to fall out with her on that this evening .
There has been long-standing concern and debate within the United Kingdom on the government position on government programmes and how they are brought about .
The utilization of such programmes has always been of concern , especially when it involves additionality .
That has been one of the greatest concerns .
This is an area of great suspicion , not only in my own province of Northern Ireland but in the United Kingdom as a whole .
That must be resolved .
There must be more transparency and objectivity as far as regional funds are concerned .
Centralization in London does not work .
Ultimate Treasury control most certainly does not work and has to be ended .
So I am in total agreement with Ms McCarthy on that .
I am also in total agreement with her on the matter of more involvement of local councils and local authorities .
There we would have transparency and accountability and people who really know what is happening .
In Northern Ireland we have district partnerships under the Peace and Reconciliation Forum .
These have been a great success .
Yesterday morning in my own area people who previously could never have hoped to have any input into European affairs , were greeting me as their European representative and saying how glad they were to see me there .
They said how glad they were that Europe was able to contribute money to areas such as Castlereagh and to other parts of the province .
I have one point of criticism .
I was a member of the Committee on Regional Policy for five years and with the greatest respect it is not up to Ms McCarthy to produce such a report .
In future when the committee is appointing its rapporteurs , it should ensure that they are not drawn from the Member State which is the subject of the report .
Rapporteurs should be disinterested and Parliament should adopt this principle in future .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs McCarthy on her excellent report and also on the research that has gone into it .
Rarely , in my experience , has so much research gone into a report for the Committee on Regional Policy .
This is a very difficult subject firstly because it is difficult to examine in detail the structural funds in any of the Member States .
Secondly , it is particularly difficult in the case of the United Kingdom .
Why is this ?
We have all the problems which Mrs McCarthy has outlined .
The lack of partnership ; I know this because I work in an Objective 2 area and I see these things happening .
There is a lack of partnership in many areas and almost complete lack of democracy on the programme monitoring committees .
We still have problems with additionality , added to which we have the problem that the British Government has removed from local government every scrap of finance that can be used for matching funding .
They are only left with what they have to use for statutory duties .
So , they rely on things like the lottery .
Good God , here we are in the European Parliament and one of our Member States is relying on the lottery for regional funding , while people are still sleeping on the streets .
This is ridiculous .
It is wrong and we should say so .
The report clearly states one concern that Mr Nicholson has mentioned , namely that we have no regional government .
We have a deprivation of democracy at local level in Britain and that I hope will at least begin to end after 1 May .
There is an additional problem in the UK .
It has abandoned its own regional policy almost totally .
It is no wonder that the gap between Britain 's richest regions and its poorest regions is still continuing to widen .
I have no doubt it will continue do so if these policies persist .
Finally , we have to accept that European and Member State regional funding is an intervention in the market and if we subscribe fully and completely to market principles , this gap will not be closed .
We have to have some limitations on the forces of the market .
Otherwise we will never have cohesion in the European Union .
Mr President , I welcome Arlene McCarthy 's excellent and extensive report .
It is a superb analysis of the role played by the structural funds in creating a quarter of a million jobs in the UK between 1989 and 1993 , in helping to offset the serious disparity between rich and poor referred to by my colleagues and exaggerated by the political decisions of the present British Government .
In a time of increasing scepticism about the European Union 's effectiveness , it is essential to highlight the positive contribution that the structural funds and Community initiatives have made to economic and social cohesion , to encouraging new partnerships and to job and business development .
However , Ms McCarthy 's report rightly spells out very clearly what is wrong with the processes which are the responsibility of the present UK Government and which have hindered the effective operation of the funds .
In my own constituency of Birmingham , we have just heard the sorry tale of Objective 3 submissions .
The process of submitting applications this year under Objective 3 of the ESF has been fraught with dreadful problems .
The interactive computer discs prepared by the government for applicants were not sent out from the Department of Education and Employment until 14 February with a closing date for applicants of 10 March .
Even then the discs had not been tested properly and did not work properly .
A week after the closing date for the applications , the Birmingham City Council local authority was issued with revised assessment guidelines for the selection criteria which meant that all Birmingham City Council 's initial bids had to be re-written .
This is no way to run the structural funds and no way to run a country .
Perhaps Mr Chichester could double as a stand-up comedian as well as an MEP .
Mr President , there are two important issues to make here particularly for the people on the benches opposite , because there is an allegation that this is a partisan report .
First of all I would like to quote the evidence that was given by the regional CBI .
Perhaps Mr Chichester could check this in the extensive report that Ms McCarthy has put together .
The regional CBI claimed in the evidence that they gave to the inquiry conducted in the United Kingdom , that they were not listened to , that they were not involved properly in the procedures , and that for a government that is committed to the business community , large sums of money were given to the privatized utilities in the United Kingdom , rather than to small or medium-sized enterprises .
The sum of £ 435m was quoted by the regional employers ' organizations .
Surely even Mr Chichester and his colleagues in the PPE must accept that when the regional employers ' organizations complain about the way in which these funds are being allocated then even they must listen to what is being said .
In addition , a very senior , recently retired , civil servant , submitted evidence to Ms McCarthy .
In his written evidence he said that there was clear evidence of delays in decision-making by the British Government , inadequate briefing of potential applicants , poor or ineligible applications blocking systems , inadequate appraisal of applications and a potential conflict between the applicants and decision-makers , particularly in the case of the government itself , as the programme manager and applicant .
There was a conflict of interest where the government was the programme manager and the applicant .
This is not a partisan report .
This is an honest report , conducted after an extensive inquiry .
The background document is there for people to see and I hope that all Members of this House realize what a shambles the structural funds are in the United Kingdom and how that money is being manipulated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Committee on Regional Policy and its rapporteur , Mrs McCarthy , for its excellent report on UK structural measures .
In my view this report shows in exemplary fashion what an important role the European Parliament can play in flanking European structural policy by not just relying on information from the Commission services but supplementing this with hearings in situ and the views of the regions .
So this comprehensive preparatory work means that the report and its recommendations carry great weight .
For instance they indicate the decisive part played by national implementation in the success of European structural policy .
Your recommendations , proposals and criticisms are , therefore , rightly addressed not just to the Commission - after all , we are used to that - but equally to the UK government and the regional and local actors .
National co-responsibility concerns not just the financial implementation of structural policy but even more the quality of the structural measures .
In view of the great number of points raised in the report , I want to concentrate on a few important questions here , for the other points will be dealt with in the Commission 's follow-up to this report and I am sure I will have several opportunities to discuss the questions raised about the future shape of structural policy during our regular meetings with the Committee on Regional Policy and with Parliament in the coming months .
The resolution acknowledges that in the UK the structural funds have contributed a great deal to economic and social cohesion , to economic restructuring and to job creation .
I believe that is a very important finding , which I hope will be noted by the people of the United Kingdom .
I am also encouraged by the acknowledgement of the impact that European regional policy has in many cases had on strategic regional planning and local and regional partnerships .
The principle of regional partnership is a crucial aspect of regional policy .
I think the examples you quote , such as Pathways to Integration in Merseyside and the special programme to promote peace and reconciliation in Ireland are indeed important ones , and not just for the UK but for the European Union as a whole ; and if I am right , there seem to be no differences of opinion at all among the parties about the positive value of the partnerships in Northern Ireland .
The Commission can indeed offer incentives to improve partnership .
In the framework of current legislation , however , it is not possible for the Commission to determine the type and role of partnership , nor am I sure whether this would always be desirable , because partnership has to be built up from below .
Nevertheless I would emphasize that we have achieved some success recently in England too with partnership , especially in regard to the participation of elected representatives at local level .
Meanwhile the private sector is also represented in numerous Monitoring Committees .
This reflects its increased participation in the programmes .
Moreover , during the objective 2 negotiations , the government recently accepted the possibility of including elected representatives in the Monitoring Committees in all the regions .
Yet I still maintain that it would be desirable also to involve the unions , i.e. all the social partners .
In your report you call on the Commission to introduce improved administrative and financial procedures for implementing the programmes and I believe there is certainly room for improvement here , although quite a lot has meanwhile been done .
For instance , new project evaluation procedures have been introduced , to ensure greater transparency in selection and we have an exchange of information about the most effective means of implementation.In Sweden a conference was held for the secretariats of the objective 2 programmes in 1996 , which specifically discussed administrative and financial procedures .
The Regional Fund is also supporting an objective 2 network for exchanges of experience .
I keep being asked about the problem of payments - especially for small organizations , which can soon get into difficulties if payments are late .
But let me emphatically point out again that the European Commission does actually make advance payments , as I also told the House of Lords .
For instance , on signature of a programme we pay 50 % of the first annual tranche , in the case of smaller amounts even 50 % of the total programme amount .
The further payments are made on submission of statements of expenditure that show that the programme is running according to plan .
It is only the final payment for the last annual tranche that is not made until after a full and exact final report has been received .
In the case of the UK , there are indeed delays after the conclusion of old programmes and in the final payment , which in some cases are due to the fact that the financial details forwarded to us are not consistent with the declared expenditure .
But inspite of these problems I believe that progress in transparency has been achieved in relation to the programmes for the period 1994 to 1996 .
To conclude , let me point out again that I also agree with your call for the European Union 's structural measures to be made clearer to the general public and that this also means an obligation to provide information on the part of national and regional authorities and project backers .
For the rest , that is something I have often complained about during visits not just to the UK but also to other Member States - excluding , as a rule , the southern Member States .
So I only hope that the sound and informative report on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , which basically takes a positive view of European structural policy in the UK , despite the necessary criticisms , will be widely disseminated and thus make an important contribution to providing the necessary information on European structural policy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Development of ultra-peripheral regions
The next item is the report ( A4-0128 / 97 ) by Mr Fernández Martín , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on development problems in the outermost regions of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to greet the representation of the Joint Committee of the Spanish Senate and Congress , responsible for European Union affairs , who are in the public gallery .
The ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union were defined in the Treaty on the European Union in the Declaration No. 26 appended thereto .
According to that Declaration , the ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union are the French overseas departments , the autonomous Portuguese regions of Madeira and the Azores and the Spanish Canary Islands .
This Declaration also recognises that ultra-peripheral regions suffer major structural lags , made worse by various phenomena including , to name just a few , their remoteness , in terms of thousands of kilometres , their isolation , their harsh climates , apart from other geographical and demographic factors , high rates of unemployment , education problems , cultural difficulties , etc .
The concept of the ultra-peripheral region was not invented at Maastricht ; before their mention in the Treaties , these regions went down long historic roads parallel to the very growth of the Union from the Treaty of Rome until now .
In fact , in the case of France , there was already recognition of the specific features of its overseas departments in Article 227 of the Treaty of Rome .
As far as Spain is concerned , the Treaty of Accession of the Kingdom of Spain to the European Community contained a specific protocol , the so-called Second Protocol , which included the special features of the accession arrangements applied to the Canary Islands , according to which the Canary Islands were exempted from the application of the policies which were then , eleven years ago , the backbone of the European Community .
In the Portuguese case , the special features of the application of Community law to the regions of the Azores and Madeira were made explicit in the Treaty of Accession .
These special accession conditions for what we now call the ultra-peripheral regions have been amended over the years , as the respective accession arrangements have been adapted to the process of integration and construction of the European Union .
The treatment of the specific nature of the outermost regions in application of Community law has been consolidated in the three programmes of options specifically relating to remoteness and insularity - POSEIDOM , in the case of France , POSEMA , in the case of Portugal , and POSEICAN , in the case of Spain , as well as the Community initiative Regis Programme , all of which are in force and will be applied until 1999 .
But after 1999 the ultra-peripheral regions will face uncertainty , which would be a blow for their development and hamper the process of economic and social cohesion in the terms of Article B of the Treaty on European Union . This is an uncertainty added to so many others hanging over the future of the European Union , such as those relating to integration , deepening of the Union and enlargement .
This uncertainty is due to specific local causes related to the fact that they are ultra-peripheral , including structural weaknesses which make them particularly fragile vis-à-vis the impact of the Single Market , without their benefiting from any of its advantages , which either does not function or functions in a very different way - compared with the European continent - in territories located thousands of kilometres away .
Therefore , against the background of the Intergovernmental Conference which is looking at the reform of the Treaties , in numerous resolutions , the ultra-peripheral regions themselves , in the Committee of the Regions , and other institutions of the European Union such as the European Council -in particular at the Madrid , Turin and Dublin summits - the European Parliament has repeatedly come out in favour of the inclusion of an article in the new text of the reformed Treaties granting the ultra-peripheral regions legal recognition , in terms of primary law , which makes it possible to apply specific policies and speed up their development and their economic and social cohesion .
The actual wording of this article to be proposed , which coincides in substance with the proposal already included in the declarations made by the Spanish , French and Portuguese governments at the Dublin summit , is set out in the first paragraph of my report , which is why I am asking the Assembly to vote in favour of it . I must take this opportunity to thank all of the groups and all of the regional authorities of the ultra-peripheral regions for the support that they have given me in drafting this report which I hope - I repeat - will be approved by the Assembly .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have been a Member for only two months and in this my maiden speech in the shrine of European democracy I feel very happy and privileged to be giving wholehearted support to this report by Mr Martin concerning the need for us to express solidarity with the people of the outermost regions of Europe as authoritatively and effectively as we possibly can and to give real effect to the principle of economic and social cohesion that is enshrined in the Treaty on European Union .
There is an obligation on all of us to be heedful of the hardships , the visions , the hopes and the frustrations of the people of those regions where per capita GDP is low , employment is high , transport costs for goods and raw materials are high because of the remoteness and the education and training systems are anything but adequate .
Coming from Greece , with its many island groups , I am only too well aware of the problems faced by these regions .
The European Union has a duty , on the basis of its legal commitments and , above all , morally and for the sake of fairness , to make a determined and sensitive effort to strengthen the legal , political and economic measures which are designed to reduce regional disparities and to compensate for the disadvantages that stem from the wide geographical dispersion and remoteness of its ultra-peripheral regions .
The measures should adapt Community policies to the requirements of these regions , especially in the areas of employment , transport , taxation , social infrastructures , technology and environmental protection .
But even assuming that that is done , we still lack an integrated European policy and strategy for the promotion of equality of development opportunity in the island regions of the Union , for tackling the problems of those regions effectively and for genuinely strengthening their economic competitiveness .
To meet all of these requirements an integrated European policy must be drawn up and incorporated in the new treaty , both for the ' ultra-peripheral ' regions that are the subject of this debate and for all of the European Union 's island regions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by congratulating Mr Fernández Martín not only on his report but also on the methodology which he has used in drafting it , which brought him into contact with many regions , many people and which , therefore , translates the very feeling of many European citizens .
The very title of the report is suggestive , as is the respective resolution , in recommending exclusively the inclusion of an article in the Treaty on European Union to give a specific answer to the special problems of ultra-peripheral regions .
The representatives of the citizens of the 15 Member States , would be focusing their attention on seven regions , some of which are also furthest away from the average parameters of development , finally ensuring that those respective citizens are given a say in European construction .
Approval of this report , therefore , takes on a profound political importance . It confirms that the European Union notes the difference in a movement of convergence in which the regions adapt to the European Union and the European Union adapts to the regions .
This ability for mutual adaptation is what makes the difference between a Europe with a face , a personality , and a Europe which is completely faceless .
The European Parliament once again accepts that it wants a Europe which citizens can see as their own , because at the same time it meets the great world challenges , while paying attention to all of its citizens .
There are development problems in the ultra-peripheral regions .
The ratio between the different levels of development between the less and most developed is practically 1 : 5 , a politically and socially unacceptable ratio .
The substantial support of the European Union must be permanently adjusted to practical problems .
Among other measures , there is a proposal for the effective subordination of all European Union policies and measures to the principle of economic and social cohesion .
Secondly , the inclusion in the Treaty on European Union of an article which provides for modulation of policies and the adoption of measures that actually meet the specific and acknowledged needs of the ultra-peripheral regions .
Thirdly , an attempt to make the POSEI programmes meet expectations .
This would relaunch the POSEIMA programme making the most of what is efficient and bringing it into the new areas .
In the Azores , for example , we really must extend POSEIMA to the fisheries sector , relaunch it in the energy sector and open it up to SMEs .
There is also a proposal to concentrate the resources of the Structural Funds in those regions which most need it .
Why not transfer what has not been used in other regions to those regions which most need the money ?
Fifthly , we must really also make sure that we have funding for projects under the Cohesion Fund , which have yet to reach the ultra-peripheral regions despite the fact that they are the regions which are at the greatest disadvantage because of reductions in public spending stemming from the application of convergence criteria in order to bring in the single currency .
Finally , this text also clearly lays responsibility with the Member States for combating the development asymmetry which has only got worse - by means of aids to transport and energy , while also adopting special tax-related measures .
I can only hope that the representatives of the Member States who are meeting in the Intergovernmental Conference , who have to deal with many and complex questions , will listen to this very loud and eloquent alarmbell which has been rung by the European Parliament .
The very principle of economic and social cohesion is at stake and we are , in this text , affirming the political vocation of a whole project .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the integration of French overseas departments within the Community is a textual reality which goes back to 1958 .
The well-established jurisprudence of the Court of Justice of the European Communities leaves no doubt about the matter .
However , in spite of the provisions of Article 227 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Rome , then of the Treaty on Union , which provides for adjustments in certain subjects for the application of Community law in these departments , the Court of Justice seems to grant a pre-eminence of legal egalitarianism compared with an essential recognition of the economic and social realities of these regions .
The steps which have been taken for some time by our Parliament , and particularly those of today , are the logical consequence of a collective awakening , on the part of all the institutions of the Union , to the structural handicaps which the seven outermost regions of the Union suffer and to the mitigated result of the sustained effort at European solidarity thanks to specific measures .
All those measures intended to make certain Community rules more flexible to take into account the backwardness of these regions are invalidated by the Court of Justice , through the restrictive interpretation it gives to the notion of specificity .
The Treaty on Union , in its Article 130A , demonstrates an unprecedented political willingness in the domain of social and economic cohesion , even if , must I recall it , the four French ultra-peripheral regions , that is , the majority of these regions , recognised today by the Executive Committee as the poorest in the Union , do not benefit from the Cohesion Fund provided for by Article 130B of the Treaty on Union , because they belong to a home country whose overall gross domestic product renders them ineligible .
The provisions formulated in the draft motion and the protocol which have been submitted to us , are intended to correct this ill-conceived integration by a substantial modification of Article 127 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on Union .
These modifications , if adopted by the IGC , will give these regions a legal regime which will enable the Community authorities to adapt , by means of derived law , without exceptions in terms of subject , all policies on the basis of the specific features of each of these regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the populations of the outermost regions , and more specifically those of the banana-producing countries , have been concerned about the consequences of their integration , the degree of solidarity they may enjoy and the Community preference granted them , since the publication of the interim report of the WTO panel on the ' bananas ' OCM .
The Fernandez Martin Report , of which I stress the pertinence , gives us the opportunity to demonstrate our political will to make available to these regions the legal means to ensure their full development within the European Union , while taking into consideration and respecting the specific features associated with their environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to congratulate the author of this report , Mr Fernández Martín , who has drafted a magnificent report on the ultra-peripheral regions .
These are lessfavoured regions , some of the regions with the most difficulties in the European Union .
Only a few days ago we were celebrating the 40th Anniversary of the Treaty of Rome and I remember that Paul-Henri Spaak said , before the Treaty of Rome was drafted , that free markets were not enough to ensure the harmonious and uniform development of all of the regions of the European Union , that the richest regions would profit from this unification of the market and that the poorest regions would be badly affected by it .
On that score , it has indeed been the European regions which have suffered most of all , especially mountain regions and frontier regions , and here we are talking in particular about ultra-peripheral regions .
I hope that the European Parliament will also be able to look at the particular problems facing island regions , which is another subject which really ought to be dealt with .
These ultra-peripheral regions face the problem of a lag in their economic and social development and , in particular , face problems due to their very remoteness . On this score , it is important that the European Union should take account of the problem which is facing regions in this situation .
One of the most important factors for dealing with these problems is to make sure that they have sufficient political autonomy , political autonomy which enables local authorities to know exactly what the problems are and take decisions accordingly without depending on orders which often have to come from many kilometres away .
Self-government may be one of the most efficient ways of tackling these problems .
But I also think it is a responsibility of the European Union , in terms of economic and social cohesion , to make sure that these regions receive the aid they need .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , over many years it has been difficult , for lack of consensus , to recognise the need for a legal status to translate the permanent disadvantages faced by these regions all of which are characterised by their extreme remoteness , their insularity , their harsh relief and climate , all of which limit and condition their possibilities for developing on the same footing as the remaining territories of the European Union .
These difficulties were only recognised in the Maastricht Treaty by dint of their inclusion in an appended declaration .
It was on this basis that the POSEI programmes were approved , in the launch of which our Group played a decisive role and which , because of legal insufficiencies , had an overall temporary character , incompatible with the permanent nature of the difficulties I have already referred to .
Now there is a consensus that the IGC - Intergovernmental Conference - must include in the new Treaty the status of ultra-peripheral regions .
Therefore , we are going to vote in favour of the excellent report drafted by Mr Martín which deserves our support .
But it is fundamental that now we must begin to take new political steps which could give practical substance to this new legal status .
It is therefore essential that we adapt common Community policies to the regional reality ; that we resume and strengthen actions taken in the scope of the POSEI programmes ; that we create or develop fiscal , commercial and customs policies which actually promote local investment ; that we adapt agricultural , fisheries and industrial policies to accommodate special local production features and parameters and promote diversification ; and we should also guarantee that people living in those regions are supplied with raw materials and consumer goods and can circulate throughout the Union without any difficulties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the populations of islands such as the Azores and Madeira recognition of the status of ultra-peripheral regions is very important .
That is why we are fighting for it so much .
But what will really be decisive and what will really have an effect on public opinion is whether we really can bring about change and that will require practical policies to be adopted in order to tackle any local difficulties which arise .
Mr President , I too find that in this report the rapporteur really has displayed a very strong commitment to the development of the ultra-peripheral regions .
He has described the objective of optimum and sustainable development under these very specific conditions in very great detail and offered many new ideas .
But it is rather curious that the term ' outermost regions ' does not really say what the true issue is .
For it is not a question of regions in Europe but of regions in the Atlantic , in the Indian Ocean and in Central America , of former colonies and military bases .
Europe 's idea of development was not always the one the local people wanted .
The use of rain forests for a European station in Central America with consumers who come from Paris is not what we understand by autonomous regional development .
That is why we welcome all the report 's proposals that are designed to ensure genuine autonomous regional development in these areas and ask the rapporteur to accept our amendments which are aimed at eliminating single crops in these areas and which support his proposals to that end .
We do not accept the idea of introducing a separate chapter because that only establishes the old colonial situation .
We think it is right for this protocol to discuss the specific features of these areas in detail and believe that is an adequate means of satisfying these regions .
Mr President , the ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union are characterised by deep structural backwardness which is made worse by a set of unfavourable and permanent social and geographical circumstances which means that the average GDP of these regions is among the lowest in the European Union .
In recognising this reality and in order to tackle the consequences of the remoteness and insularity of these regions , the Community created a set of instruments including the adoption of specific option programmes known as POSEI and the subsequent inclusion , in an Appendix to the Treaty , of a declaration on the ultra-peripheral regions .
Since 1994 , recognition of these special features has been diminished because of changes made to the POSEI programmes ; the existing mechanisms and instruments were applied only to some of the areas where they could have been .
That is why it is necessary to include in the Treaty on European Union a whole article dedicated , for good , to the concept of ultra-peripheral regions which makes it possible for the European Union to take adequate and coherent measures in respect of the principle of economic and social cohesion .
As a corollary of the European Parliament 's determination to tackle the specific features of ultra-peripheral regions , involving other initiatives , the Portuguese , Spanish and French governments have presented , at the IGC , a joint proposal calling for the inclusion of a specific article in the Treaty on European Union referring to the ultraperipheral regions and the drafting of a protocol to be appended to the Treaty setting out the special conditions for adopting specific measures and derived law .
The amendments which we have tabled and which were approved at the Institutional Committee should strengthen the proposals already presented at the IGC from two points of view .
First of all , making explicit the enshrinement of ultra-peripheral regions , aimed at guaranteeing equal opportunities and economic and social cohesion .
Secondly , promoting the institutional enshrinement in the new Treaty on European Union of the autonomy of ultraperipheral regions .
In respect of this aspect , our aim is to establish that the very bodies of the autonomous regions should be informed when legislative initiatives are being taken , so that the self-governing institutions can actually find out about proposals dealing with specific affairs relating to the regions before they are included on the Council 's order of business for discussion .
After all , this is in line with what was proposed in the plans for Dublin II in respect of national parliaments .
I take this opportunity to send my greetings to the populations of Madeira and the Azores and I hope that they will benefit from a real opportunity for development as a result of this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by congratulating the rapporteur who obviously possesses considerable knowledge of the real life situation experienced by the populations of ultraperipheral regions .
It is true that these regions have to face very serious structural and traditional problems but it is even more important to pick out those problems which are related to their ultra-peripheral nature .
We are speaking in particular about their remoteness , insularity , small surface area , difficult relief and climate , which make them terribly dependent on the outside world and are reflected in the very low per capita income still registered in these regions , despite the very positive effects of POSEI programmes , in particular the POSEIMA programme applied in the Azores and Madeira .
It is no accident that these ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union have the lowest GDP per capita .
Being able to establish this difference between structural deficiencies - which albeit considerable and far-reaching could sooner or later be resolved - and the very problems related to the fact that they are ultra-peripheral which is a permanent problem , justifies in itself , in our opinion , inclusion in the Treaty on European Union of every legal guarantee which would enable these regions to be properly compensated .
We believe that through this tiny enrichment of the Treaty it will be possible to adapt common policies so that effective support can be given to the strategic sectors of these regions , such as transport , energy , telecommunications , without harming any of the other vital forms of support which are already being given .
Finally , given that we now recognise the practical effect that these programmes are having on the ground , I think that we should perhaps put right some of the mistakes which have been committed , improve certain areas and , all in all , make sure that the programmes are extended to attain objectives which have been suggested or which are the wish of the inhabitants of these regions .
Mr President , the proposals contained in this report cannot be understood without bearing in mind the real problems which have arisen concerning fulfilment of the principle of economic and social cohesion , when it is applied to action taken in favour of the development of ultra-peripheral regions .
These problems have shown the urgent need to work out a permanent specific status which really takes account of the special features of these territories , governing the implemented policies with a fundamental legal support instrument to act as an effective base when specific measures are taken to deal with the special features of these particular regions .
This report has the virtue of solving this problem by proposing that we set up , through inclusion in the Treaty , a legal base which provides for the specific treatment of these regions .
It also has the virtue of taking a generous look , in the proposal for an additional protocol , at other questions which really need to be dealt with vis-à-vis ultraperipheral regions calling for specific treatment .
Among these questions , on one hand , are the peculiar difficulties facing those regions which justify that the Union should give them greater support , far beyond that afforded by the POSEI programmes , whose limits have been shown by their markedly compensatory character , and on the other , because the POSEI programmes , which to a large extent mix up problems relating to their ultra-peripheralness with structural problems , do not at present guarantee stable development of the ultra-peripheral regions , because it is not enough to take measures to adapt Community policies or compensate for geographical location , unless we really tackle practical problems and end some of the uncertainties due to the void to exist from 1999 onwards .
We think that this report is based on this reality and we go along with its philosophy .
Our Group can support it , as has been demonstrated by the fact that the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , belonging to our Group - Mr Gutiérrez Díaz - has also lent his full support to this report , in that it represents an important starting-point for achieving economic and social cohesion in the ultra-peripheral regions .
Mr President , like previous speakers I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his magnificent work .
I should also like to greet , in the public gallery , the Spanish Member of Parliament , Mr Segura Clavel , who is here today with us .
At the same time , I should also like to congratulate Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , our Vice-President , on his magnificent opinion on this subject , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
I should like to point out that most of the speeches which we have heard this evening have come from members of the European Parliament who live in these very islands .
That is why I should like to thank those speakers whom we might call ' continental ' , such as Mr Gutiérrez Díaz himself , Mrs Karamanou , Mr Vallvé and Mrs Schroedter .
I think that , at this time , the comprehension shown in this European Parliament of the ultra-peripheral regions is very important .
However , I should like in particular , Mr President , to address my words to the Commissioner , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , who perfectly understands the problems of the regions , and I should like to point out to her that at this very time , in the Intergovernmental Conference , we must tackle the subject of the legal status of the ultra-peripheral regions .
It is not just that there is no legal status , because in some ways there is in the form of Article 227 or the Acts of Accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Community , as well as other expressions of derived Community law , such as Regulation 1911 / 91 on the Canary Islands .
And it also seems to me that the European Commission has supported the proposals by giving them a more stable legal base , through a specific article in the protocol . I should like to ask the Commission , through Commissioner Wulf-Mathies and the other Commissioners who are here with us today , to bear in mind that this is not a mere whim .
I should also like to correct one of the remarks made earlier which suggested that these territories are former colonies - they are not .
For example , in the case of the Canaries , Azores and Madeira , they are part and parcel of national territory and there is a European settlement on those territories .
Please remember the very special nature of this European population living thousands of kilometres away from the European heartland . All we are asking is that they should be given a distinct status which recognises , in a Community treaty , the very special situation in which they live .
Mr President , Commissioner , if we are dealing with a positive report , it is calling out to us .
After decades of integration in the Community , the overseas departments are still ranked among the most disadvantaged in the European Union .
The social and economic indicators remain desperately in the red , with in particular a notoriously high rate of unemployment .
Despite the implementation of specific programmes , despite injections of national and European credits , the economic and social situation there continues to deteriorate .
With the single market and the application of the Treaty of Maastricht , the integrationist logic of the construction of Europe has been strengthened in the overseas departments .
In the name of harmonisation and the constrained adaptation of the Treaty , certain specific features , in particular in the fiscal domain , such as excise duties and certain dispensations , have been questioned and subjected to very strict control by the Commission .
Experience has shown that the Declaration on the outermost regions annexed to the Treaty , but not legally binding , has given no guarantee , nor protection , against the consequences of deregulation , since it has privileged the objective of completion of the internal market .
It is essential , therefore , that in the home straight of the Intergovernmental Conference , the full and complete specific nature of the overseas departments and the outermost regions is recognised statutorily in the Treaty , with a dual objective : to apply specific measures in their favour and to authorise dispensations to Community regulations , for as long as these regions have not caught up with the average social and economic level of the European Union .
Such recognition of the status of the overseas departments in the Treaty could enable the implementation of a new type of development , based upon regional assets and potentialities , while remedying the many handicaps particularly associated with distance , and with insularity .
Finally , this kind of development would allow the inhabitants of these countries at last , at last indeed , to play an active part in their own development .
Mr President , we can give our assent to this report by Mr Martin for a number of reasons , but chiefly because it introduces the new descriptive term ' ultra-peripherality ' for the extremely remote regions and calls for additional new measures over and above the support provided through the ordinary regional policy and , even , through the special programmes of additional measures .
From those standpoints it is not a bad report .
Nevertheless , we feel obliged to say that it is blemished by an element of distorted reasoning .
We are looking for regions of this sort in the Indian Ocean , as has been said , and in other faraway oceans , whose only connection with Europe is that they were once bound by colonial ties .
Never mind , let them have support .
However , Mr President , we seem to have forgotten the many Greek island groups in the Aegean , and especially the islands of the northern Aegean , which are an inseparable part of Europe and were the cradle of Greek and , afterwards , European civilization .
The report does not apply the term ' ultraperipherality ' to those islands , whose situation is indescribably bleak and which are being abandoned because of the absence of support , even though they are just as far from the centre of the European Union and , in some cases , farther away .
Therefore , we are requesting , with this report , not the introduction or the incorporation of a policy - which is why we are not putting down an amendment , and , anyway , the Commissioner is here listening - but rather that the policy be extended to those island which are losing their populations and being blighted by Turkish expansionism which is holding back development of the tourism that is the only livelihood that the people there have to rely on .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fernandez Martin , on this report , in which he has drawn the European Parliament 's attention to all the outermost regions for the first time .
The report and the motion for a resolution describe the specific disadvantages facing these regions .
The problems he lists also reflect the concerns which the presidents of the outermost regions expressed at our talks last week during my visit to the island of Reunion , where I did indeed find that we are very far away from what we normally regard as Europe , and I think it is important that we should always remember that .
For the rest , your requests coincide with the wishes various economic operators expressed again and again during my visit .
All this makes me even more convinced that these regions will need special arrangements in future too .
Since 1989 the Commission has been endeavouring to take account of their special features in its programmeplanning documents .
This also applies to the Regis I and Regis II Community initiative programmes adopted for 1991 and 1996 , to which speakers have already referred .
Like Parliament , the Commission believes - and President Santer has repeated this on several occasions - that the concept of the Union needs to be confirmed , deepened and strengthened for the outermost regions .
It has also supported the draft Treaty article and protocol jointly submitted by Spain , France and Portugal at the intergovernmental conference , confirming this at the last meeting of the intergovernmental conference when this question was discussed .
For unfortunately we must admit that the Posei programmes are increasingly in question in the absence of a clear legal basis .
For instance , the Commission has discovered that at times the Council finds it difficult , during discussions of proposals for the outermost regions , to persuade the Member States to acknowledge the commitments the Community has entered into under the Posei programmes , as the recent application to the European Court of Justice has also shown .
That is why we have to consolidate this concept and thus give the outermost regions the necessary clarity , legal certainty and transparency in order to strengthen their cohesion with the European Union .
In relation to structural fund measures , I simply want to refer to the concerns expressed with regard to aid after 1999 and emphasize once again that in future too the outermost regions , which are the poorest regions of the Community , will be entitled to the highest level of aid .
I also agree with the rapporteur on the need to improve the cohesion of Community policy vis à vis the peripheral regions .
An interservice group already exists for the coordination of the Commission 's services and I believe that we can still improve our cooperation with the outermost regions in future too .
Let me therefore thank the rapporteur again .
The Commission will continue to work with you on improving the situation in the outermost regions .
Thank you very much , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Budget discharge
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0138 / 97 by Mr Kellett-Bowman , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , giving discharge to the Management Board of the European Centre for the Development of Professional Training ( Thessaloniki ) in respect of the implementation of its budgets for the 1994 and 1995 financial year ; -A4-0139 / 97 by Mr Kellett-Bowman , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , giving discharge to the Management Board of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Dublin ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the 1995 financial year .
Mr President , these two discharge reports should not be burning the midnight oil here in Brussels , they should have been taken as part of the general discharge debate in Strasbourg at the last session on Wednesday morning .
The reason why these reports are delayed is that the Council had not given us their recommendations as to discharge .
These were finally received last week and I would like to thank the Council for sending them to us because it enables Parliament to deal with recommendations for discharge in April , which is the requirement of the rules .
First may I turn to the Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin .
I want to thank the Court of Auditors for their report .
I am a friend of the Court of Auditors but I want to make two remarks about this report .
The first is that the early copy before the contradictory process was leaked in Denmark which caused great embarrassment to the Foundation and secondly the tone in English is unnacceptable .
I do not care if the auditor had a bad journey and did not find his hotel comfortable ; the nuances in this report should not occur again .
It may not be obvious in the other languages but they are quite clear in English .
The difficulties for these small bodies is that they are not large enough to have their own financial controller .
That means that a great amount of expenditure has to be spent out of the imprest account in order to keep their suppliers happy and it is very difficult for them to divide the legal responsibilities between the authorizing officer , the payments officer and the financial controller .
I welcome moves by the Commission to try and deal with this situation by carrying out Parliament 's recommendation of having part-time financial controllers .
I look forward to an opportunity to see electronic visas being issued by the financial controller in Brussels which should get rid of the criticisms which the Court levies .
We are quite happy for the Budgetary Control Committee to recommend the House to grant discharge to the Dublin Foundation .
I then turn to the Centre for Vocational Training which is now in Thessaloniki .
There are two recommendations here , one for 1994 and one for 1995 .
I am sorry the Council is not here .
It is the second time I have found them not here on an important occasion .
It was perversity in the European Council which looked round the whole of the European Community to find a European body which did not have the requirement of mobility of its staff written into its contracts .
For that reason they decided to move the Foundation from Berlin to Thessaloniki .
The Council are the rogues , the Council were perverse and they are to blame for the problems which have since arisen .
Had they wanted to kill off the Foundation they probably could not have gone about it in a better way .
However , having blamed the Council we now look to the Commission to pick up the pieces .
The question is whether they have picked up the pieces or not .
We were unable in the Budgetary Control Committee to recommend discharge for 1994 , which should have taken place last April , because the Court gave us wind of some rather unusual circumstances whereby the management board and the director had to inveigle staff to transfer from Berlin to Thessaloniki .
I stress it was not their willingness to go to Greece but the fact that the people not having mobility in their contracts very often had social responsibilities which made them choose to work there , responsibilities for older generations , children with difficult health etc . , they needed to be in the same place .
We heard about these difficulties so we deferred discharge for 1994 and the Court of Auditors brought us a further report covering the year 1995 which revealed some of the extreme moves which the board of management and the director had to make in order to keep CEDEFOP alive , in order to persuade people to go to Thessaloniki .
Some of them went out of sheer loyalty to the institution and went on the basis that they expected degagement to be awarded to them at a later date .
These people have been good Community servants and have been treated shabbily by the Council , but the Commission on their white chargers should have come to their defence and they have not .
I want to pay credit to the director because he has managed under these difficult circumstances to keep the centre going and I think we can look forward to a useful future and product coming from the institution .
I am fed up with the Commission and I think this will be shown by the fact that two amendments have been put down to this discharge report .
One by Mr Garrigo Polledo on behalf of the Euorpean Peoples ' Party Group and one by Mrs Wemheuer on behalf of the Socialist Group .
We want to indicate to the Commission our dissatisfaction with what has happened .
I am going to leave Mr Tappin to speak on the amendments because on the Budgets Committee he has been playing a very useful role in dealing with all the agencies and has been very helpful with this one in particular .
I have great respect for the powers of the Commission and I invite them to use their powers to assist the casualties of this remarkable decision by the Council to move the centre from Berlin to Thessaloniki .
We recommend discharge , despite the problems , and at the same time commend the director for the way in which he has managed to keep going .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Kellett-Bowman on his two reports .
I wish to address my remarks solely to the issue of CEDEFOP in Thessaloniki .
There are two things I want to focus on .
Firstly , the matter of staffing .
Unfortunately , as Mr Kellett-Bowman has said , members of the Council who are the protagonists in the great problem we have with CEDEFOP are not here to listen to our complaints and those of the Court of Auditors on the staffing question .
I feel sorry for Commissioner Liikanen who is being treated rather like a tennis ball , being lobbed backwards and forwards between Parliament and Council , trying to resolve an issue which is not of his making but of the Council 's .
It ought to be pointed out to the Commissioner that both Mr Kellett-Bowman and myself have worked extremely hard to try to seek dégagement for the staff remaining in Thessaloniki , Berlin and other capitals and institutions who , because of the terms of their contract , which was originally CEDEFOP , do not seek or are unhappy with the move to Thessaloniki .
We have engaged in correspondence on this and to that end , because of a lack of satisfactory conclusion , we have put down an amendment on behalf of both the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European People 's Party to resolve this problem this year .
We would ask the Commission to use his best wiles and skills as a politician as well as a Commissioner to seek dégagement for those staff who are currently unhappy with the false move to Thessaloniki .
This move is preventing Mr Van Rens operating a tight ship in Thessaloniki itself .
The second issue is that of buildings .
The Court of Auditors quite properly has raised the matter of the appalling contract which was agreed between the Council and the Greek state on the provision of a new building .
Although two payments have been made by the European Union , not one brick has been laid .
This is totally unsatisfactory as far as we in Parliament are concerned and for the budget for 1997 we have put the payment for this year on hold until some progress has been made .
This brings me to my last point .
Without the investigative powers of Parliament , many of the problems with Thessaloniki and other institutions would not have been brought to light .
I call upon the Commission , as a part of the budget process for 1997 , to bring forward the harmonization of regulations for discharge for all the agencies , so Parliament can have some control over discharge .
Finally , I congratulate Mr Van Rens .
He has been placed in an invidious position in running Thessaloniki .
He is doing a magnificent job but to paraphrase Winston Churchill : Give him the tools so he can carry on functioning as an agency head and not with one hand tied behind his back .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Kellett-Bowman for his excellent report .
I will confine my remarks to the Dublin Foundation .
I know that the Dublin Foundation greatly appreciates the efforts Mr KellettBowman has made and for the measured response in his report .
Recently I visited the Dublin Foundation , as a Member representing Dublin .
As a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I was interested to see the work carried on there .
I found that it carries out its duties in an open , conscientious and entirely appropriate manner .
Last week members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs had an opportunity to have an exchange of views with the director of the Dublin Foundation and the report before us clearly shows that the Dublin Foundation is managed carefully .
I therefore agree that the discharge should be given for 1995 .
Mr President , as was mentioned here by previous speakers , the decision about the transfer of CEDEFOP to Thessaloniki was taken at the summit .
Mr Kellett-Bowman and Mr Tappin have been actively following the case which , unfortunately , includes difficult decisions at a personal level .
There are still a few officials who find the situation unsatisfactory .
As far as the Commission is concerned , we are ready to do what we can for those who want to transfer to Luxembourg .
I wrote a letter to our services to try to find solutions for those .
For the others , we can find solutions on a case-by-case basis .
We are ready to study them with open minds .
Unfortunately the Council unanimously rejected our efforts to find a solution for dégagement in the context of enlargement .
Parliament took a much more favourable view of the possibility of dégagement .
There has been no sign that the position of the Council would change .
Secondly , I have to say that the Commission trade unions are strongly against the solution of a dégagement which would only apply to one part of the personnel .
They feel that if there is any solution of that sort , it should be open to all .
So , I regret that there is no easy answer .
At any rate , we must remember that the officials who have been , and still are , working within the Staff Regulations , have the right to a pre-pension scheme .
It is not very generous but it guarantees a certain basic security for them .
I am going to study the possibilities here but they are , unfortunately rather limited .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
Before declaring the debate closed , I should like to give the floor to the rapporteur .
Mr President , I had hoped that we might have had sufficient response from the Commission that would have enabled the two groups to withdraw their amendments .
That has not occurred .
I deplore the fact that the Commission is unable to treat these people whom I have called casualties .
They are casualties through no fault of their own and it is pathetic that the Commission is unable to find a route to help them .
Can I ask what solution Mr Kellett-Bowman is proposing ?
Mr President , can I be blunt .
The solution I would like to see is the one which follows the undertaking which I thought was given to Mr Tappin and to myself by the Commissioner who has just spoken .
That is why I am cross .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Fisheries restructuring
The next item is the report ( A4-0141 / 97 ) by Mr Baldarelli , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Decision on a specific measure to encourage Italian fishermen to diversify out of certain fishing activities ( COM ( 96 ) 0682 - C4-0037 / 97-96 / 0308 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , as those who have been following the debate can attest , this is a highly significant report affecting part of the Italian fishing fleet . At the same time it is a report which signals a reversal of the trend towards over-capacity of the fleet , and can also serve as an example for other situations in other countries .
Certainly this conversion plan we are going to vote on is rooted in the recognition that these fishing activities are unsustainable .
The fact is , drift net fishing in Italy now represents an excessive proportion of licences - some 690 boats are geared up to this type of fishing - and it is having a major impact on the environment .
This consideration was the starting point for introducing a conversion plan which respects the UN directives and the legal approach taken by the European Union in its own regulation setting the maximum length for drift nets at 2.5 kilometres , but also takes account of the very logical debate , conducted in this Parliament and elsewhere , on the danger of these nets to certain species , particularly sperm whales and dolphins .
So there has been sensitivity going beyond the mere regulatory aspect and we must respond to that , even if we are convinced that the central issue is not so much the elimination of this kind of fishing - which has a long historical tradition - as the link with sustainability .
The number of licences must be reduced , part of the fleet withdrawn and part of it converted .
But the fishermen must be closely involved and above all the plan must be voluntary .
That is the line Parliament 's committee has taken , considering , amongst other things , the agreement sealed between the professional organizations , the trade unions and the ministry in Italy , providing precisely for voluntary application of this plan , which makes use of Community resources earmarked for Italy - hence not extra resources - and naturally gives fishermen as well as shipowners the opportunity to respond .
We have amended the Commission 's proposal to the effect that the financial framework does not relate just to shipowners but also to fishermen , and not just to fishermen of Union nationalities , but also to fishermen from third countries . In fact there are many fishermen from third countries engaged in this type of activity , especially Tunisians and Algerians .
We think parity of treatment of individual workers is a very important principle .
Having said that , we do recognize certain incongruities in the plan : one significant incongruity is that the financial position is very much better for Objective 1 areas than for other areas .

Incongruities like this need to be remedied when the plan is implemented inside Italy , and Italy needs to make the necessary arrangements .
We also think it is important politically to stop criminalizing this type of fishing .
Proposing a research programme to identify the real impact and take account of the comments which have been made by the environmental associations and the fishermen 's organizations themselves , will be an important signal to fishermen .
These measures will damp down a certain radicalism developing in this sector which is adding to the unacceptable social tension .
Mr President , much of the debate on this point has been highly controversial , emotional and personal .
That has not exactly helped us to find a solution .
Anyone who has belonged to the Committee on Fisheries for a long time knows how concerned we are with the worries and troubles of fishermen in all Member States , which includes Italy .
Protecting jobs always was and is our central concern .
The Italian fisheries plan we are now due to vote on was negotiated between Italian producer organizations , ship-owners , unions , the Italian government and the European Commission .
It concerns the conversion to new fisheries practices .
The fleet consists of no more than 500 vessels using drift nets up to 2.5 km long for catching tuna and swordfish in the Mediterranean .
But the use of these drift nets is economically unviable and therefore no longer acceptable .
Longer nets have been banned in the EU since the end of 1991 , under Regulation 345 / 92 .
The plan restricts the issue of licences for drift nets and provides for their withdrawal and destruction .
The costs and means of financing this plan have been worked out in detail .
This measure guarantees the fishermen concerned financial support for restructuring their fisheries practices .
That is why the Committee on Fisheries accepted the proposed plan by a large majority .
Five draft amendments are included , on the principle of voluntary action , control and discipline in relation to all vessels in the Mediterranean and on support for non-European fishermen on Italian vessels .
The EPP endorses the consensus that was eventually reached on the plan for Italy and , after careful consideration , firmly rejects the new amendments that have been put before us .
Mr President , the Greeks and Spaniards talk of a labyrinth of nets .
In the Mediterranean drift nets are sometimes as much as 25 kilometres long .
The 690 Italian fishing vessels have an average drift net length of some 12 kilometres .
All together that is the distance from Gibraltar to Izmir and back .
You cannot imagine the destructive effect of all this , including by-catches which are not deliberate but which kill the fish .
It seems clear to me that the conversion plan is necessary ; it is just a pity that the Commission does not make it clear in its proposal whether and how the nets are to be destroyed .
Moreover , the Commission 's proposal offers few guarantees that European money will be responsibly spent .
And I see from my good friend Baldarelli 's report that he favours a voluntary plan .
I hope that Commissioner Bonino will not agree to a voluntary basis but will leave it as compulsory .
Mr President , I find it unfortunate that Mr Baldarelli 's report shows little commitment to really getting rid of drift net fishing .
It is not good to be constantly saying that counties such as Algeria use drift nets too .
I think that Italy must face up to her responsibilities .
We can help in this and it is thus very important that financial compensation should be given only when efficient supervisory mechanisms are in place and the nets really are destroyed .
To this end I put down three amendments to A , B and C on behalf of the Liberal Group , and I hope and am confident that Commissioner Bonino as representative of the European Commission will accept these amendments .
Mr President , on behalf of the Greens , I would first like to put on record that many studies have demonstrated that drift nets constitute a non-selective fishing method . So we believe , and this has been upheld many times in this Parliament , that the only solution to the current situation is to prohibit the use of these nets , whatever their length , inside the Mediterranean .
To achieve this objective we think an agreement needs to be reached with all the countries surrounding the Mediterranean , especially as the 2.5 kilometres currently in force is not usually respected .
At this very moment - so I am told - fishing vessels can be sighted in the Mediterranean using nets about 8 kilometres long .
Under the circumstances , I believe the existing fleet using drift nets which are a danger to the balance of the Mediterranean must be converted .
We think the Commission 's conversion proposal is correct and we entirely agree with the Parliamentary committee 's amendments except for one : we do not understand why a European standards agreement should contain a reference to the agreement with the unions .
But apart from that , I simply support what Mr Eisma has already said : to receive these payments , the nets must be withdrawn and they must not be sold to anyone else or they will still be circulating inside the Mediterranean , and we will be paying for not solving the problem .
Mr President , I welcome Mr Baldarelli 's report in its present form with the compromise amendments accepted by the Committee on Fisheries .
It acknowledges that the Commission proposal provides a good basis , lays emphasis on the legal framework of the proposal and accepts socio-economic responsibility for all fishermen who find themselves on the Italian vessels concerned .
But however explosive the question of driftnet fishing is , we must emphasize that we are not concerned today with a general ban on drift-net fishing in the Mediterranean .
The proposal before us simply does not concern that .
We have to keep to the existing legal framework here , which still allows drift nets up to 2.5 km in length to be used .
It is up to the Council to change the existing legal framework , after the European Parliament decided in favour of immediately abolishing drift nets in September 1994 , following a legislative proposal by the Commission .
In that sense , the measures proposed here do not mean we cannot adhere consistently to decisions that have already been taken and we can continue urging a ban on the environmentally incompatible practice of drift-net fishing .
Yet this proposal can still be regarded as a step towards generally abolishing drift-net fishing because the restructuring plan provides for financial incentives for the fishermen concerned to encourage them to give up this kind of fishing entirely and for ever and therefore voluntarily move beyond the existing legislative framework .
We owe thanks to the rapporteur for not forgetting the situation of the people concerned when discussing environmental questions .
Let me just remind you that the regions in question are almost all Objective 1 regions , where there are few alternatives to fishing .
It is also worth noting that he has accepted responsibility for fishermen from third countries who work on Italian vessels .
We welcome the idea of restructuring the FIFG resources earmarked for Italy in order to implement the plan , but believe that the proposed timetable should be adhered to strictly .
Finally , and this is where we return to the environmental issue , let me place special emphasis on the Committee on Fisheries ' request that third countries that fish in the Mediterranean should also be included , so that we can agree rules with them which at least respect the 2.5 km length of drift nets .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that at this point in the debate it is appropriate to stress - the rapporteur has done so but I want to re-emphasize it - that we are not talking about just any sector .
We are talking about a sector which still provides work and a living to a great many families , especially in the south of Italy . The south is deeply ravaged by unemployment .
We are talking about a sector , Mr President , which has ancient traditions , and we are talking about an occupation which unites work , traditions and culture .
And yet it goes without saying - it is indubitable - that intensive fishing by fleets linked to economic powers with interests often external to Italy itself , has caused depletion of marine mammals in the Mediterranean , undermining the ecosystem itself .
That is why the various national and international institutions are usually determined to limit certain fishing activities .
The conversion programme for the Italian spadare fleet that we are debating today responds to the environmental demands for protection and conservation of the Mediterranean but , with the improvements contributed above all by the rapporteur , I think there is also an opportunity to meet certain social and economic demands relevant to southern Italy .
In fact the programme is not about authoritarian and arrogant closure , or about assisted development . Instead its purpose is protection and at the same time prevention of social tension .
I think Amendments Nos 15 and 16 could improve this approach by making the proposals more flexible and more acceptable to the operators themselves .
Mr President , there is often a fine line between aggressive environmentalism and secret deals .
Time will tell whether the commitment is to save the dolphin or to serve interests linked to other sectors in competition with spadare fishing .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fishing with drift nets is now turning into a real test for the credibility of Community institutions as a whole .
In particular of the European Parliament .
In any case , of our Committee on Fisheries where a lot of hot air has been spoken about responsible fishing and selective methods .
We have condemned these methods on various occasions and have called for their permanent eradication .
Now we are examining a Commission proposal on the Italian Government 's plan for restructuring fisheries which , albeit voluntary for the aids which have been provided for , justly and necessarily , we hope will help to encourage fishermen to reconvert and finally , once and for all , give up the use of drift nets , as can be deduced from the recent line taken by the Italian Government at the latest Council of Ministers , in response to the Spanish proposal .
Commissioner , we agree with the main thrust of the Commission 's proposal , and with the compromise reached in the second report by Mr Baldarelli .
It is our hope , founded we believe , that following this new and recent line taken by the Italian Government in the Council of Ministers , we can very soon reach a majority so that we can put a stop to the use of these nets , which are known to be harmful , and so we hope that there will be no more conflicts between fishermen and ecologists or pressure exerted against our exports or criticism of the costly control measures , so that we can carry out what the European Parliament has already called for , which is nothing other than a ban on and permanent elimination of the use of these drift nets .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to clarify why I and six other Italian Members of the European People 's Party have not thought it right to sign up to two of the amendments which will be put to the vote in this House tomorrow .
These two amendments do not form part of the compromise laboriously reached inside the groups and the Committee on Fisheries .
And we prefer not to jeopardize agreements , especially when they have been difficult to reach .
We do not want to recreate that climate of mistrust , quite unwarranted moreover , which has already cost us one postponement of the debate in Strasbourg and we do not think we should risk a repeat , because our fishermen 's priority today is to get the Council decision implemented as soon as possible and at last have some certainty , with the fishing season now so close .
In addition , while we broadly support these amendments , they change little of substance .
What is important from the human side is to accept the amendment which extends the benefits provided for Italian fishermen , to fishermen - properly signed on , obviously - from third countries , generally Maghreb countries .
In conclusion , I want to appeal to the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , to take every possible initiative to find a forum - perhaps the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean - where agreement can be reached between the Union and third countries so that regulations and bans the European Union imposes on itself are also valid for others .
It is intolerable for Italian fishermen and European Union fishermen in general to know they cannot fish with the spadare while the Japanese , Korean or Maghreb fleets continue to do so on their doorstep , with more space and more advantages than before .
In that connection , I expect the Union to protect its own fisheries policy consistently and coherently , in this sector too , in Euro-Mediterranean association agreements .
Mr President , this report is a result of an agreement between the Italian Government and the European Commission to restructure the Italian fleet which uses drift nets .
Violations due to the low profitability of methods using nets less than 2.5 km have given rise to persistent protests and even a threat of trade sanctions from the United States , as a consequence of a judgment of the International Court of Trade .
This plan emphasises the fact that drift nets are not profitable .
These are methods which must be brought to an end once and for all in these waters which means that we must plan for their withdrawal and restructuring the industry .
These are appropriate measures and I can only call on the Commission to enforce controls to make sure that these nets really do disappear , are withdrawn , and are not simply transferred to other non-Community fleets .
However , this withdrawal will give rise to a major social problem in southern Italy , an area which is particularly badly affected by unemployment and low economic activity .
The plan of assistance which has been drawn up is also important because it should be possible to restructure the industry and encourage people to convert to other types of fishery .
We really must show European Union solidarity with the Italian fishing fleet .
That is why I wish to congratulate the Commission and the Commissioner in particular .
Commissioner , this plan should make it possible to head towards a final solution of the problem of drift nets in the European Union as a whole .
The Italian situation is a very difficult one , with 677 boats involved .
Application of this plan should make it possible to find a solution in the Council of Ministers which also includes reconverting the Atlantic fleet - which comes to less than 60 boats including the British , Irish and French ones .
The European Commission is responsible for presenting a new proposal to the Council in order to reach an agreement on this .
Commissioner , if you exclude the Baltic Sea from a proposal for a total ban , given the special nature of those fisheries , if we exclude twelve territorial miles and apply a plan to the 60 Atlantic boats which employ some 300 people , with an aid plan which is similar to the one applied to the Italian case , the cost would be around 8 million ECU for Community coffers .
This should achieve a majority in the Council for this set of measures aimed at introducing a once and for all ban on these fishing methods .
Commissioner , I am convinced that , with your usual political courage , you will make progress and bring forward a proposal which would ensure that future resources are preserved while ensuring the necessary solidarity with Italian , French , British and Irish fleets , all of which would be affected by this restructuring .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will concentrate in this reply on some of the points you have raised and on explaining the reasons why the Commission cannot accept certain amendments .
First of all the problem of effective withdrawal and destruction of the nets has been raised .
I want to assure Mr Eisma and also Mr Tamino that this point is expressly made several times in the Italian plan , in terms of both incentive and method .
I repeat , it is affirmed very vigorously several times in the government 's text .
The problem of third countries has also been raised : it is a concern I share .
It is psychologically difficult to accept that third countries - Japan , Korea and so on - can fish with these nets , but I have to confess to Honourable Members that we have no legal instruments for intervening with these vessels .
As many of you know , we have opened a dialogue to establish codes of conduct , at the Venice Conference especially , because the legal instrument does not allow us to intervene with third countries in international waters .
The Commission 's text makes no reference to the issues in some of the amendments because there is no reference to them in the plan presented by the Italian government . This applies in particular to Amendment No 5 on the possibility of compensation for non-Community fishermen .
However , the Commission is ready to state that if the Italian government wants to take up this option there is no reason to oppose it ; but nor was there any reason to impose it .
This is clearly a possibility , but we were not in a position to impose it .
Another amendment the Commission does not intend to accept is No 19 , because it relates to a matter which has no bearing on this type of proposal .
In fact it refers to a research project , which is probably very laudable but which really has nothing to do with this proposal .
I would remind Honourable Members that this is a proposal from the Commission to accept a spadare conversion plan , presented by the Italian government .
So obviously the Commission cannot deal with other issues .
I now come to the basic problem which many of you have put to the Commission and which relates to the eradication of these nets .
For the nth time I want to repeat to this Parliament , which is perfectly aware of it , that a Commission proposal for eradicating these nets has been lying on the Council 's table since 1994 .
As yet the Council has not found a sufficient majority to approve it .
That is the simple truth !
So if Honourable Members can exert any pressure , I think they could usefully target it on the other Community institution .
The fact remains that at the last Council , on the proposal of the Spanish government , which has also sent the Commission a working hypothesis for achieving this ultimate objective , there was a debate which gives the Commission hope that matters are maturing and that certain Member States , so far very much opposed , really are developing a more open position now .
The Commission is therefore committed to looking into the feasibility of a new proposal and , as long as it is confirmed that this will not turn out to be a sterile exercise , the Commission will rapidly present it because it will be another step in the right direction .
Ladies and gentlemen , I repeat : if you have any means of pressure , the Commission would be very grateful if you would be kind enough to apply it effectively to other Community institutions which have blocked this dossier up to now .
Mr President , I want to thank the Commissioner for explaining some of the Commission 's wishes , and also for addressing them to the Italian government .
I want to ask the Commissioner if the amendments unanimously approved by Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries could appear as a Commission statement of intent when seeking approval in the the Council .
I refer in particular to the concept of voluntary plan and to the provisions affecting third countries .
If the Commission could make such a statement that would be very significant and would respect the will of the Committee on Fisheries .
In addition to thanking the Commissioner for her explanation , I should like to put a very specific question to her : does what she said mean that the European Commission is going to change its proposal at the next Council , because it has received a signal from the Council itself , in order to try to achieve a majority in order to bring in a total ban on these methods ?
Mr President , about two months ago we held a debate in Strasbourg with the Council President and the Council President said that the Commission should put forward an amended proposal on the banning of drift nets , because the current situation was deadlocked .
It was impossible to get a majority .
My question to the Commissioner is this : now she has told us that she will be putting forward an amended proposal , when will she be doing that ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I am hoping the spadare plan will be rapidly approved by whichever Council , without waiting for 17 June , I do not know whether it will be procedurally possible to put a Commission statement .
But I will check this procedure and whatever happens I can say here and now that the voluntary plan is explicitly provided for and explicit in the Italian government 's plan , and in particular in the second sentence of the fifth consideration of the Commission 's proposal .
As regards third countries - I imagine the reference is to fishermen from third countries - the Commission maintains the exclusion of this possibility from its proposal because it does not exist in the Italian government 's plan , though it has no objection to extensions of this kind if the Italian authorities want to consider it .
As regards the new proposal , I repeat that there has been a Commission proposal on the Council table since 1994 .
The Council could never approve it because some Member States were opposed .
But at the last Fisheries Council there was an orientation debate , where some Member States , including Italy and others , seemed to show more openness . The Fisheries Council was only held five days ago and the Commission undertook to evaluate the political feasibility of a new proposal .
The Commission does not intend to give anyone an alibi by presenting another proposal if the same conditions of political deadlock exist .
That would simply be another two years of research , study and analysis , which would not lead anywhere .
The Commission will only do it if it is sure the conditions for another , equivalent political deadlock are no longer there .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Euratom-US cooperation agreement
The next item is the report ( A4-0074 / 97 ) by Mrs Ahern , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation between the European Atomic Energy Community and the United States of America ( C4-0264 / 96 ) .
Madam President , this report about the agreement on nuclear cooperation between Euratom and the US deals with two issues which have been , and I hope and trust will remain , very important to everybody in this House .
One is the scandalous lack of the democratic rights of this Parliament of control over Euratom , especially when the latter is concluding agreements with third countries .
This is a fundamental issue for this Parliament .
The United States Congress had to assent to this agreement , whereas Parliament did not even legally have the right to be informed .
We cannot continue in this manner in the European Union .
This is the second time that the plenary has dealt with this agreement with the US .
I would remind the House of the resolution in March 1995 which was passed with a large majority .
At that time negotiations with the USA were ongoing and the Committee on Energy , Research and Technology , with some effort , succeeded in obtaining information from , and starting a dialogue with , the Commission on this agreement .
It was in that spirit that this Parliament demanded that it should continue to be informed and involved in this and similar international agreements on nuclear cooperation , including consultation before the conclusion of the final agreement with the USA .
In my report I elaborate that after the resolution was adopted , the performance of Commission and Council was entirely unsatisfactory .
The Commission and the Council apparently decided once more to go it alone as they had done most of the time before our committee enforced its initial , but short-lived , involvement .
I am therefore calling on the House as a whole to remain as firm on its demand for democratic control on this level of EU decisionmaking as in March of 1995 and on other occasions when dealing with similar agreements .
I am confident that you will endorse my draft resolution in this respect , and I call for your support for several amendments which will give the resolution more clarity and make it more specific on democratic control of nuclear agreements .
Concerning the substance of the agreement with the US , the main issue is nuclear cooperation .
The resolution adopted by this House which I referred to earlier established very clearly its criteria of judgment and debate with the Commission and Council , and I quote : ' It wishes to enhance rigorous and effective control mechanisms restricting production , isolation , stock-piling , trade and trafficking of plutonium and weapons-grade uranium and other nuclear material .
It wishes , in particular , to respect the situation regarding the environment and health with regard to nuclear safety and to take part in foreign and security policy with the highest priority to nuclear nonproliferation . '
Non-proliferation has come before this House as a high priority on many occasions and in the resolution we were specific that the highest priority was to be given to nuclear non-proliferation .
Taking these earlier positions of Parliament as a starting point , we have serious doubts about many current developments .
Implementation of this agreement with the US and its predecessor is not the root cause of these worrying developments but they have certainly facilitated rather than mitigated them .
To mention just a few of the relevant issues : who will not be concerned about the plutonium economy with its excessive costs and hazards to our health and environment ?
Why maintain and facilitate the manufacturing of MOX fuel and the reprocessing in La Hague and Sellafield which are part and parcel of this plutonium economy ?
Are we doing enough to ensure that non-proliferation is not endangered by the continued production of weaponsgrade nuclear materials ?
Should we not limit rather than increase the transport of nuclear materials in the light of the decision of many countries , including the USA , to deny transport through their air space or coastal waters and what lessons do we draw from the insufficiency of current safeguards to prevent losses of significant amounts of plutonium ?
What I am proposing in the report and my amendments is to seek parliamentary consensus on the explicit issue of democratic control of nuclear agreements .
Without denying the differences there may be between us , a shared commitment would help to bridge the huge democratic deficit we are facing in all Euratom matters and would contribute to a more sensible EU energy policy by addressing at least the most hazardous aspects of nuclear energy production .
I welcome the cooperation on nuclear safety with reservations regarding nuclear proliferation and nuclear transports and plutonium stockpiling already outlined .
The dangers of plutonium cannot be underestimated .
Madam President , in my view today 's debate is a theatre of the absurd .
We signed the agreement on 7 November 1995 as the European Union ; it is valid , and yet we are debating it today .
The stage directions for this theatre of the absurd were , of course , set out in the Euratom Treaty .
I think if we want our citizens to accept us , we can no longer allow agreements to be negotiated behind their backs , to which all we can do is nod or shake our heads , which has no effect on the final decision !
That is not the citizens ' Europe !
Nor am I sure that in terms of content this agreement is the best we can achieve .
First we admit that an American law is valid in the European Union .
That is a curious procedure .
Secondly , this agreement sets out a line of development for energy supplies that at least 8 out of our 15 countries do not want .
The UK and France are also engaged in a heated debate about whether to continue using nuclear energy and I am not sure whether the decision will be that we continue using it .
On the question of reprocessing and the plutonium industry , the people of Europe have expressed serious concern .
This agreement provides for these activities to continue .
Thirdly , continuing along this road naturally implies serious safety risks if plutonium , MOX and other fuels are to be transported across Europe , by sea , land or air .
I do not believe we should allow this kind of nuclear tourism in Europe .
In that respect , not only do I not consider the procedure right but I do not consider the substance entirely convincing either .
I am not very euphoric about the results of the reform conference that is meeting now and will be concluded in Amsterdam , but this policy area , which concerns matters that are quite central to our social future , the question of energy supplies , of the Euratom Treaty , must be integrated in the European Treaties and must be subject to democratic control , to co-decision with Parliament .
Otherwise the citizens of Europe will certainly not accept it .
That is why I say : we need democracy now !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are giving our opinion on an agreement that has already entered into force .
We may regret that , and it has indeed been regretted , as we do in our resolution .
Yet we have to take note of it .
We are not the signatories or negotiators of that agreement but have to work within its framework .
Today we are not just discussing nuclear energy .
I am saying that quite openly .
We will have ample opportunity to do so next month when we consider the Soulier report .
Today we have to examine whether we endorse this agreement between Euratom and the USA or not .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has decided to endorse the agreement , on the initiative of the EPP .
Of course what we want is for the European Parliament to be better informed , for us to be able to express our concerns , our interests , especially during the course of the negotiations .
We have reflected that concern too in our resolution .
Let me now express our surprise at the fact that there have been very differing discussions on the subject of the context of the report .
On the question of the transport of radioactive material , the Greens in particular quoted America as a shining example of safety standards .
Suddenly , now that we are discussing the Euratom / USA agreement , people say : the standards are poor , we cannot take them over .
Here it is becoming a question of the credibility of our arguments , which cannot be altered just to suit ourselves , which is why I have a simple request to make at this point .
After all we should not pretend that this agreement with the USA is simply opening the door to the international transport of plutonium .
Nowhere in the world are there such strict standards and requirements as in the USA and Europe .
We have our problems , namely with the Central and Eastern European countries , but that has nothing to do with this agreement and we should make that quite clear here .
The EPP Group basically endorses the resolution adopted by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Apart from Amendment No 1 , we cannot accept the amendments .
I am saying that quite openly too .
These are all points that were deleted on our initiative .
You cannot now expect us to endorse these points in plenary .
So we should make a clear statement now .
But we should also do our utmost - and I think there we agree for once with Mr Lange - in regard to the Euratom Treaty to ensure that it is integrated in Community legislation , so that we have a more honest , democratic basis for such agreements in the long term .
Madam President , I welcome the cooperation at least on democratic control which I hear around this House and I welcome the support for the amendments proposed .
We cannot underestimate the dangers of Europe becoming a plutonium economy if this agreement is implemented .
It actively encourages reprocessing at Sellafield and La Hague and increases plutonium production .
Transports of nuclear material will become more common by sea , land and air with all the attendant risks .
Ireland is already at considerable risk from reprocessing at Sellafield and by the year 2010 Sellafield will have reprocessed 545 , 000 kilos from waste nuclear fuel .
Under this agreement , more nuclear waste will travel to Sellafield , not only through the Irish Sea but also by air .
This will be reprocessed , creating 160 times the amount of radioactive waste it started with .
We are also very concerned about recent health studies on leukaemia clusters surrounding La Hague .
We have had such studies in Sellafield and it is becoming clearer that reprocessing poses a particular danger to the health and environment of people in Europe .
With huge amounts of radioactive materials proliferating and travelling all over the continent , how can safeguards possibly cope with the dangers ?
Accidents happen , such as the one where a US aircraft lost an atomic bomb over Spain many years ago .
It did not explode but it contaminated a large area .
It must also be considered that when you have large amounts of plutonium around , there are grave security risks .
It only takes 3 to 5 kilograms of nuclear plutonium to make a nuclear bomb .
There are thousands of tonnes available now and we are increasing the stockpiles .
I want to return to the matter of democratic control of other nuclear agreements .
At this particular time the Commission has informed us about the agreement with Korea .
That is a particularly sensitive area for democracy and we do not think the solution is to conclude nuclear agreements with these countries .
At least we must have Parliament involved in these nuclear agreements in future .
Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to wish Nuala Ahern luck with her report which , on significant points , tightens up on the agreement which must now be considered .
As rightly pointed out , it is beneath contempt that the European Parliament is not involved in the Euratom agreements .
There is broad unanimity about democratization and opening up of the negotiations taking place in the EU , so it is difficult to understand why the European Parliament was not formally involved in this decision-making process .
The European population just cannot be served by preventing a full public discussion of such an important issue as the use of atomic energy and by having it discussed behind closed doors by officers of the Commission .
The need for the European Parliament 's involvement is particularly important in view of the imminent agreements between Euratom and third-world countries .
As things stand , there is practically no information about these countries ' nuclear activities .
I also subscribe to the argument that the new agreement between Euratom and the USA does not seem to contribute to reducing the so-called plutonium economy .
On the contrary , the Euratom-USA agreement seems to allow for expansion of the plutonium processing industry , which is wholly unsatisfactory .
If anything this will lead to a greater overall spreading of the risk , and I note that this is also contrary to Parliament 's decision to extend the non-proliferation agreement in the context of developing alternative , sustainable energy sources .
Only by voting in favour of the report today can we ensure that future international discussions of nuclear matters will be dealt with in a democratically responsible way .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when reading our colleague 's report I had the feeling of attending a play of the Absurd school , possibly written by Dürenmatt or Berthold Brecht .
We are told that the context of the agreement is totally unbalanced .
Here I am referring to points e ) and f ) which insist on the unilateral approach taken by the United States , at least since 1978 , on the lack of reciprocity which exists and the fact that , in nuclear matters , there is still an imbalance between the United States and Europe in terms of forces and the diplomatic relationship .
Secondly , we are told that this agreement was not negotiated democratically , that the Parliament was completely sidelined and that points 4 , 5 and 6 of the Resolution demonstrate very well to what extent information obtained by the European Parliament is really completely insufficient for us to be able to judge the conditions in which this agreement is to be applied .
Thirdly , we are told that this agreement is going to develop the plutonium economy , something which is also feared , and that safety standards , in many areas , are lacking , in particular when it comes to air transport .
Our conclusion , after this avalanche of criticism which can be found in the explanatory memorandum and also in the opinion of the Rex Committee , in point 9 , is that we welcome this agreement , without the slightest reservation .
This really is quite extraordinary , I must say - we reach that conclusion after developing arguments which are completely contradictory .
That is why , as far as we are concerned , we shall not be voting for this text , and we shall take this opportunity to express our astonishment that , when it is a matter of agreements between the United States of America and Europe , first of all we are nearly always told that these agreements are unbalanced and that , despite that , we should nonetheless vote for them .
This is quite revealing of Europe 's subordinate position in trans-Atlantic dialogue .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , permit me first of all to thank Mrs Ahern for the report that she has presented to us today .
As you know , this agreement came into force on 12 April 1996 .
Mrs Ahern 's report deals with many issues relating to the agreement to which I wish to respond .
I wish also to reply to the comments of those who have spoken before me in the debate .
The report deals first with the involvement of the European Parliament on the basis of the Euratom Treaty .
You will be aware that the Commission has submitted a number of proposals to the intergovernmental conference .
In one of our reports we recommend amalgamation of the three communities into a unity for reasons of greater clarity .
In another of its reports the Commission recommends the inclusion of an energy chapter in the Treaty .
On the subject of the provision of information to Parliament , the Commission provided the Committee on Energy with information on the progress of the negotiations with the United States administration during the course of those negotiations at the meetings in December of 1994 and January and March of 1995 , while the negotiations were still in progress , that is to say .
In addition , on 19 May 1995 it informed Parliament when the Commission drew up a proposal for a decision for approval of the agreement by the Council .
Furthermore , some time after that , in November of 1995 , the Commission 's Secretary General for Energy laid a copy of the signed agreement before Parliament 's Committee on Energy in person .
The resolution also refers to the repercussions of the use of nuclear energy , and of its use leading to what has been described as a plutonium economy .
The capability to make balanced use of a range of energy resources , with each resource being utilized appropriately , is obviously an important factor for all countries in the pursuit of viable economic growth .
Not all of countries of the European Union utilize the nuclear resource , but it accounts for about a third of all electricity generated in the Union and is , therefore , an important element in energy supply .
Madam President , the draft resolution ascribes to the agreement the purpose of boosting this plutonium economy .
However , the Euratom Treaty imposes no obligation or pressure on the Member States to reprocess their spent nuclear fuel .
As you must certainly know , each Member State decides for itself , just as it decides whether or not to manufacture MOX fuel .
Some countries have opted for reprocessing .
However , the reprocessing of nuclear fuel has been going on in the European Union for about 25 years already , and naturally very great care is taken to ensure that the left-over plutonium is safely managed .
The Euratom Treaty does not impinge on the right of any Member State to choose whether or not to use nuclear energy , or to choose whether or not to reprocess spent nuclear fuel .
Therefore an agreement on nuclear reprocessing concluded with a third country in implementation of the Treaty cannot possibly impinge on the policies of any Member State of the European Union .
I must emphasize that that is explicitly acknowledged by the two parties - the European Union and the United States - in the new agreement that we have concluded .
So it is not correct to say that the agreement encourages reprocessing .
Rather , I would say , it establishes an appropriate framework for making reprocessing involving the use of nuclear material of American origin politically and legally achievable if a Member State wishes to engage in such work , while at the same time providing adequate safeguards in regard to the non-proliferation of nuclear materials in the context of the prevailing multilateral agreements .
In connection with this latter factor the contracting parties have decided that certain rights and obligations should remain in force after the agreement 's formal period of validity .
Specifically , it has been agreed that the obligations relating to safeguards , use for peaceful purposes and the physical protection of nuclear materials should apply indefinitely .
The reasoning was that the nuclear materials will still be suitable for weapons purposes , with the attendant potential or hypothetical risk , of course , of proliferation , after the agreement lapses .
These three general obligations will therefore help to obviate the risk of the proliferation of nuclear material after the legal framework which has served as the basis for their supply no longer exists .
The safeguards imposed by the agreement are those provided for in the Euratom Treaty and imposed by the International Atomic Energy Authority in the framework of the agreements concluded between the Authority , Euratom and the Member States of the Euratom .
These measures , which we have already taken , and the cooperation framework mean that the European Union has the most stringent safeguards in the world , a fact which is widely acknowledged by the international community .
The Euratom safeguards ensure , above all , that no nuclear materials - including plutonium - are omitted from the audit when installations are inspected .
The Safeguards Directorate of the Euratom now actually has the technical and administrative means to perform this task .
I would like also to remind you that the Commission participates in and supports initiatives taken anywhere in the world aimed at ending the production of weapons-grade plutonium and at promoting the monitoring of the existing stockpiles .
In addition , in the framework of the Geneva disarmament conference , we are working to get negotiations started on a treaty to ban the production of fissile material for weapons use , and we hope that these negotiations will not take too long to complete once they start .
We are also participating , Madam President , in the work of plutonium stocks management group under the auspices of the IAEA in Vienna .
Madam President , in finishing I would like to say that the Commission believes that this agreement will guarantee security of supply for the European nuclear industry when it handles materials that involve obligations to the United States , and that it will ensure stability and the capacity for long-term projection with regard to the European Union 's energy policy as set out in the White Paper .
Furthermore , the agreement helps to strengthen the policy on non-proliferation .
The Commission welcomes the position taken by Parliament 's two committees , the Committee on Energy and the Committee on External Economic Relations .
I wish to congratulate Mrs Ahern on her work and , of course , to thank all of the Members who have spoken here this morning .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
EC-Chile framework cooperation agreement
The next item is the report ( A4-0023 / 97 ) by Mrs Miranda de Lage , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision on conclusion of the framework cooperation Agreement in preparation for the eventual establishment of a political and economic association between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Chile , of the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 0259 - C4-0450 / 96-96 / 0149 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , over the last ten years the European Union has reached a whole set of agreements with the Latin American sub-continent in order to boost , at first , and strengthen , now , trade co-operation with that group of countries .
The third generation agreements - that with Chile , still in force , dates back to 1990 - put emphasis on political support to the processes of democratisation , stability and regional integration .
This was the European response to countries which , by dint of their stage of institutional and economic development , are now trading partners as well as political allies .
Of this group of countries , Chile stands out because of its dynamism , its economic openness and its political will .
Chile has been able to overcome many of the difficulties of a political nature which every country must tackle in recovering liberty following a long and terrible dictatorship .
The limits on making democracy even more complete imposed by the current Constitution in the country are nonetheless an impediment to the full development of the Rule of Law , with a clear definition of the functions which each authority should wield in a full democracy .
The European Parliament is aware of the current difficulties of an institutional order in Chile but 1998 is going to be a key year , and it is going to be a time for showing the confidence of the Member States , the Commission and the European Parliament in Chile 's future ; now we are holding this debate on the new framework of relations whose final objective will be the liberalisation of all commercial links .
This text sets that ambitious objective and opens the preparatory phase for a future association .
The agreement keeps open essential questions : the timing and method for switching to the final phase .
However , I should point out that this lack of determination by no means undermines the political , commercial and economic importance of the first phase , just because this text emphasises the contractual framework and the political will of the final stage .
The European Parliament welcomes the fact that there is a clear reference in the more complete version of the democratic clause with its treatment of human and social rights and the environment .
This compromise , Madam President , will enable us to insist on the need for agreement on the right to unconditional justice and I regret that , once again , I must ask the Chilean authorities , always sensitive to the opinions of the European Parliament , to find a solution to the case of our fellow-citizen , Carmelo Soria , so that we can close for good this case which has been kept going by his family and on which the European Parliament has made declarations on many occasions .
Furthermore , this agreement sets up a regular political dialogue and includes a declaration on parliamentary dialogue which should make it possible to tackle and debate , in an appropriate arena , all of the questions of mutual interest which exist between us .
Economic and trade dialogue is another basic pillar which will be extended to the Parties ' relations with third parties .
On this score , I should like to congratulate the Commission for providing for a ' bridge ' to make it possible to coordinate the liberalisation machinery with the arrangements provided for in the Mercosur Agreement , and to study the possible participation by Chile in Union-Mercosur cooperation programmes .
We should not forget the Cooperation Agreement on social development , state modernisation - a very important question , training , education , the environment and research and development concerning new technology .
To conclude , this agreement is an excellent instrument , opening up huge economic possibilities for sustainable development and which , as far as the Union is concerned , is also an instrument for lending considerable political support , something that undoubtedly will help Chile achieve full democracy and fully develop the rule of law .
As the rapporteur of the Committee on External Economic Relations , I should finally like to welcome the opinions of the three Committees which have sent their reports to us , which complement certain aspects of the ones which I have been presenting to you and which have been considerably taken into account when drafting the explanatory memorandum of my report .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate my colleague Mrs Miranda de Lage on her excellent report .
She has most adequately sketched out the background to this framework cooperation agreement .
When we debated this in committee , many of us had mixed feelings about the present situation in Chile because of our historical knowledge of that situation .
While we want to support the democratic forces in Chile as best we can , nevertheless we are aware that there is still some way to go in Chile 's transition to full democracy .
There is the continued role the armed forces play , the need for a guarantee of independence for the judiciary etc .
Against that background Mrs Miranda has drawn up an excellent report , being aware of these particular circumstances .
That is the general background but specifically I should like to ask the Commissioner to respond to some points about the discriminatory tax regime in Chile on alcohol .
As a supporter of Scotch whisky , I want to focus on that .
I have some questions for the Commission .
This discrimination has existed since 1985 .
We are aware that the Chilean Government has procrastinated for too long in bringing forward proposals to remove the discrimination .
We understand that during Sir Leon Brittan 's visit , he made it clear that unless GATT-compatible legislation is submitted to Congress by the end of this month , the European Union will request the WTO consultations .
Can the Commission give a categorical assurance that it will stick to this deadline for requesting WTO consultations ?
We would like the Commission to keep up the pressure on Chile and I should be grateful if the Commissioner would give me a categorical response to that question .
Madam President , before further ado I should like to express the satisfaction of my Group at the certain approval of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Chile , by this Assembly .
This agreement , a mixed one , has a lot in common with the Inter-regional Framework Agreement between the European Union and Mercosur - they are agreements with the same purpose .
The new Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Chile is unlike any of the previous models .
It is a new-style preparatory agreement and does not include any clauses for a positive compromise in order to open commercial negotiations and the step to the final stage , which keeps open essential questions for future association between the European Union and Chile : how and when to proceed to the later progressive liberalisation which will involve reciprocity in terms of all commercial trade links .
In both the European Union-Mercosur Agreement and this one there are certain areas which are not defined which does nothing to take away the importance of the political significance but which , in my opinion , does nothing to clarify the agreement either .
There is no explicit provision for the possibility of extending this agreement to other southern South American countries , and on the contrary , it is a major step that in the Inter-Regional Framework Agreement between the European Union and Mercosur there was no attempt to deal with the need to cooperate in terms of public contracts and Chile has agreed to the inclusion of this in the agreement .
In any case , there is still a lack of more open economic dialogue , and dialogue for coordinating strategy in international fora .
Economic and trade dialogue is limited and circumscribed to bilateral only .
Just as is the case with the European agreement with Mercosur , both parties decided that commercial cooperation should come into effect as quickly as possible , a decision which has been taken without the prior consultation with the European Parliament , which should have been consulted over the content of the trade provisions , and once again there is the same lack of definition concerning the institutional applications and the budgetary consequences .
In any case , the European Parliament should in particular highlight the fact that the said democratic clause or human rights clause has been introduced into this agreement .
At the Rex Committee we made sure that one of the basic pillars of the agreement would be economic and trade dialogue , to be held periodically , and insisted that the agreement should include a very elaborate working plan , including all of the necessary elements for negotiating the creation of a genuine free trade area .
Finally , I should like to express my disgust at the ambiguity of the financial agreements and the lack of care taken by the Commission in this area , both in terms of content and planning , as was pointed out by the Committee on Budgets .
This really does show how weak parliamentary political dialogue is , given that there is not even any mention of the European Parliament in the agreement .
Finally , I must congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
Madam President , the Liberal Group will be endorsing the framework agreement with Chile today .
We shall do this not because everything is fine and we have seen in Mrs Miranda de Lage 's excellent report that everything has come together properly , but because we want to support positive developments .
The transition to full democracy is not complete and as Mr Smith said just now , the armed forces continue to play a significant role .
This agreement looks forward to a political and economic association .
Our economic relations with Chile look hopeful .
There is much still to be sorted out but the commitment to reciprocal liberalization is there .
This agreement is consistent with the development of our relations with Latin America which allow for diversity between the various countries but nevertheless form a single whole .
Rather more overall consistency would have been desirable in this agreement .
We now have yet another new model , yet another different model , and once again a serious parliamentary dialogue has been dealt with only indirectly .
Lastly , concerning the ties between MERCOSUR and Chile , it is most important , when we implement this agreement , that we should also bear in mind the implementation of the agreement between the Union and MERCOSUR .
Madam President , our Group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , attaches extraordinary importance to this dialogue with Chile and this decision by the Council to sign a cooperation agreement with Chile , which will very shortly be converted into an agreement for political and economic association .
However , faced with this report which has been very well drafted by Mrs Ana Miranda de Lage , we are in two minds .
On one hand , we agree that a step must be taken - and we are going to lend our supportto it . We are also going to call on the Commission to continue dialogue and taking action , but we feel that many requisites have not been met .
In many cases , we are dealing with rhetoric and not political reality .
When we say that we share common values and democracy , support for human rights , pluralist democracy , we must also recognise that Chile is not a full democracy .
We know that the same is true of other parts of the world , in other nations which are demographically more important with which we have agreements .
We do not want to be hypocritical , we do not want to be sectarian , but we must say aloud that Chile is not a full democracy .
When I had the privilege , along with other members of the European Parliament , of attending the referendum which brought an end to General Pinochet 's presidency , that bloody dictator , as president of the republic , we thought that , within a few years , Chile would become a full democracy again . But this has not been the case .
General Pinochet , whose hands are stained with blood , who is politically and morally condemned by all of the international community , who is persona non grata in many countries in the world , because democrats refuse to accept him in their country , still has an important position in Chile - not dominant but important - which means that he is able directly to appoint some of the senators and is able to influence judicial authority to a great extent .
In other words , he has a certain amount of control over Chilean democracy .
I know that Chilean democrats have made efforts to change things and that Chilean institutions are trying to overcome the situation but we have to recognise the state of the country as it is .
This appeal for shared values comes up against the real fact which means that the Chileans are unable to exercise democratic values , and people who have committed crimes in the past are not being brought to justice by any means in the near future .
There are many examples of this , most important of which is the Carmelo Soria case .
Out-of-court damages have been offered to his family but the Chilean Supreme Court has applied the law of amnesty to the authors of his murder , even though he was an international civil servant murdered by the state security services , led ultimately by the man who is the leader of the Chilean armed forces and who really is in control of most of what goes on in the country .
Out-of-court damages are not enough and we are calling on the Commission to continue to make the demands which we know it has already made in the past .
There are other subjects which are no doubt slightly less important but they are still of importance nonehteless , such as the confiscation of assets of European citizens .
In the reports , in particular in the opinions voiced by the different Committees , reference is made to the Clarín newspaper which has not been handed back to its rightful owner .
We know the name of the owner of the newspaper , he is Mr Víctor Pey , but he was unable to get the Chilean courts to restore to him a newspaper in which he holds 100 % of the shares , robbed from his office in a military raid .
These are small examples - and a very big example in the case of Carmelo Soria - concerning human rights abuses .
As for the type of report , we think that an opinion would have been the right form and we are convinced that this will have less of an effect in terms of political and economic consequences .
Madam President , when I went to Chile in September 1995 with the South America delegation , I was almost bombarded by human rights and environmental groups . They all feared that the new agreement between the EU and Chile would not help resolve the most urgent problems .
They pointed to the limited degree of democracy , to the fact that the perpetrators of human rights crimes went unpunished , to the lack of power-sharing and the continuing power of Pinochet .
' The comparison with the Asian Tigers is inappropriate ! ' , they said , ' for the country is a tiger without a jungle ! ' In macroeconomic terms , Chile may be doing well , but the forests are being cut down regardless , the seas overfished , and the mining of copper and export-oriented farming are bringing the country to the verge of environmental disaster .
In the continent as a whole , the gap between rich and poor is only greater in Brazil .
The Chileans therefore asked whether we could not stand up for full democracy in Chile , for an economic development in which people and not just multinationals have a share , for ecological development .
But when you look at this agreement , you find that it contains none of that .
Chile is simply to become a more attractive investment target for companies and investors .
They are offered more trade liberalization measures , trade and tax legislation is to be geared to the European system .
Does that mean the 91 % dependence on raw materials exports is to become 100 % in future ?
The agreement merely contains the usual , lyrical phrases about human rights clauses , environmental protection and aid for the poorest groups , Commissioner .
If this were not the case , Pinochet would have to resign before the agreement could have any validity at all .
The Chile-Mercosur-EU triangle is to be the largest free trade area in the world , but who is actually going to monitor the free trading of the free traders ?
The trade policy aspects of the agreement have already been put into force in advance simply by an exchange of letters .
We Greens will therefore abstain because this agreement is not consistent with the wishes of the Chilean people and , Mr Commissioner , it would be better if you could be rather less lyrical and more clear and realistic for a change !
Madam President , following the agreement with MERCOSUR it is also important that our political and economic links with Chile should be maintained .
As we implement the framework agreement we must give priority to combating poverty and underdevelopment in Chile .
Despite economic growth a sizeable section of the Chilean population still lives below the poverty line .
The framework agreement can also have a positive influence on the process of transition toward parliamentary democracy .
An important section of the agreement is the accommodations reached on the future liberalization of trade .
Although there will be no question of a free trade zone between the European Union and Chile in the immediate future , the rapporteur indicates in her report that agriculture will play a key part in future negotiations on free trade .
The Commission recently published a communication on the WTO aspects of the European Union 's preferential agreements with third countries .
This rightly states the principle that inconsistencies with the common agricultural policy must be avoided .
We must thus be careful to see that an accumulation of free trade agreements does not lead to major undesirable side effects in the Member States .
Any future free trade zone with Chile will require fundamental consistency with the WTO criteria and will have to be preceded by a thorough analysis of the advantages and disadvantages .
Mrs Miranda has presented a clear report .
We shall be voting for the agreement .
Madam President , I would like to declare my support for Mrs Miranda 's report and make just one comment .
It seems to me that , even with all its limitations , this agreement contains a significant point : the inclusion of the democracy clause , actually responding to the requirements - which Mr Puerta has also mentioned in this House - for full transition to a democratic system , consolidation of the supremacy of civil and political power over the armed forces , independence of the judiciary , and abolition of immunity from prosecution for human rights violations committed in the past : and that means General Pinochet and his followers .

The second point I would like to emphasize is the significance of signing this agreement on the eve of the meeting with the Parlatino , the parliament of Latin America .
I also think we should increasingly develop and rationalize our relations with the whole of Latin America .
This agreement may help , but we have one objective : a comprehensive agreement between the European Union and Latin America , between the European Parliament and the Parlatino .
Madam President , it is not my intention to repeat the ideas which have already been expressed here but I shall just point out whether I agree or disagree with what has already been said .
First of all , it is important to have this agreement with Chile in a framework which is characterised by the loss of competitiveness of European industry , reflected in the loss of market quotas in industrialised countries .
Against this background , relations with Latin America in general and Chile in particular are of particular significance .
Within Latin America relations with Chile are of special importance .
Three important aspects have been underlined in this report : the political aspects , the economic and trade aspects and the social aspect .
I wholeheartedly agree with the speech by my fellow citizen , Alonso Puerto .
I hope that we also agree on demanding full respect of a full democratic model , when we speak about other countries in the Latin American continent .
Secondly , I agree with the rapporteur over the special significance of disagreement just as Chile seems to be abandoning its model of variable geometry in terms of relations with other countries in order step up its relationship with Mercosur .
The reference to the ' bridge ' seems to me a particularly intelligent one , a bridge has been built in order to set the final model for relations with Chile in the context of relations with Mercosur .
Thirdly , I fully agree with those speakers who have expressed their concern about the possible social inequalities which the current economic model in Chile could give rise to .
Finally , Madam President , I think that as has already been emphasised by all of the other speakers , it is now time to come to the heart of the matter .
If we want to do that we really must involve the European Parliament and most significantly we must put figures to the aspirations in an explicit amount in budgetary terms , something which I hope we shall have an opportunity to discuss very shortly .
Mr President , the development of closer relations between the European Union and Latin America is of great importance .
I therefore welcome this agreement with Chile and congratulate the rapporteur .
Although the present government wishes to respect human rights , there are still many unresolved cases left over from the military dictatorship of General Pinochet which was responsible for over 3 , 000 officially recognized extrajudicial killings .
More than 1 , 000 cases are still open .
General Pinochet is to become a life senator after retiring as Commander-in-Chief in 1998 , although the Senate is already controlled by the right as the result of previous Pinochet appointees .
It can thus thwart reforms without a two-thirds majority in the Lower House .
Certain military leaders are still anxious to end legal action against those responsible for human rights violations and to uphold the rights of victims .
We need to stand very firm on this .
We also need to recognize the need to fight poverty and not merely give unrestricted approval to a neo-liberal model .
Nonetheless , we should support this report and I once again congratulate Ana Miranda on all she has done .
Mr President , in a few days ' time we will be celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the Chilean conservatives , who are close to our European People 's Party .
The fact that this anniversary can be celebrated shows that democracy is alive in Chile .
The reform process in Chile is by far the most advanced and stable in Latin America .
The framework agreement is an important pillar of these democratic reforms .
Under it , Chile has based its relations with the EU Member States on the protection of human rights and the principles of democracy .
Yet the transition to an entirely democratic system is not yet complete .
But when we call for democratic values to be fully applied we must not forget that the basis of democracy is popular participation .
In future the Council should take greater care to ensure that Parliament is duly involved .
Despite this criticism of the Council 's approach , I fully endorse Mrs Miranda de Lage 's report and the content of the agreement .
In particular I welcome the following points : the call for cooperation to develop the structures of the information society can lead to better understanding between the EU states and Chile , especially if we build our dialogue on the foundations of common values .
The agreement also contains practical aspects that can directly benefit the local people .
During my last visit to Chile people described the problems connected with primary schooling to me .
So I am very glad that this problem has been recognized and included in the agreement .
Speaking from a national point of view , let me also say that Germany is likely to conclude the implementing procedures for the agreement in the near future and is trying to ensure that Chile-EU relations continue to develop in a positive direction on the basis of this agreement .
Mr President , Chile is undoubtedly the Latin American country geographically most distant but closest to the heart of the European Parliament in political terms , something we found out at the time of the referendum and which we also experienced when we were fighting for democracy in the country .
Today , Chile is a mature country , a country which looks towards three continents from an economic point of view , and therefore it is very important that we should strengthen our economic ties with Chile .
However , I should like to refer , Mr President , to something which I had the honour to say on behalf of the European Parliament at the Chilean Congress meeting in Valparaíso , which is that we lend our clear support to the setting up of full democracy in Chile , in which civil law would be a fundamental element .
On this score , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy of the European Parliament supported the work carried out by the Truth and Reconciliation Committee and the setting up of the National Cooperation for Reparations and Reconciliation , and it is also very important that affairs such as the already mentioned Soria case and that of the Clarín newspaper be solved , and in particular that we should put an end to all of the impediments which are standing in the way of Chilean democracy today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome with great satisfaction the Miranda report whose analyses and conclusions on the new agreement between the European Union and Chile recognises and strengthens the work which has already been carried out by the European Commission .
The signing of this agreement will bring about a substantial change in our relations with Chile , in the framework of the European Union 's new strategy orientated towards the redefinition of all of our relations with Latin America as a whole .
Chile has stood out in recent years , both in the regional and international context , for the good results of its economy , the dynamism of its diplomacy and its active presence in world markets .
Chile has already signed a number of agreements on free trade with most of the LAIA countries , bilateral agreements with Mexico and Canada , has joined the Pacific Association and signed an agreement with Mercosur .
The new agreement with the European Union is based on this practical reality and recognises the special role of Chile in the southern region of Latin America .
It also sets a final objective which is a very ambitious one : the establishment of political and economic association between the parties .
The mechanism provided for is the same as that which was included in the European Union-Mercosur Agreement .
In the context of the application of the first stage , the parties - the European Union and Chile - held a first meeting of the Joint Committee , on 16 December 1996 , in order to work out precisely the institutional mechanisms needed for the agreement to function and the first meeting of the Trade Sub-committee is scheduled to be held later in the first half of this year .
In her report , Mrs Miranda offers an exhaustive explanation of the structure and the potentials of this agreement .
For my part , I shall only reiterate very briefly some of the innovative elements of this agreement .
With the experience which has already been accumulated and dealing with the challenges thrown up by the constant development of technology and industry , cooperation is extending its horizons , in order to include key-sectors such as services , investment , intellectual property , telecommunications and the information society .
Thanks to the system of ' bridges ' - so much condemned at one time , now adopted by the Commission - the agreement also provides for the possibility of carrying out joint projects with Mercosur and this is something of particular interest to us .
In respect of some of the actions to be taken , I should like to point out that this agreement , like the majority of agreements which we are signing with Latin American countries , pays very particular attention to correcting social imbalances .
From this point of view , fighting poverty , support for SMEs , action in favour of the weakest sectors of society - young people and women , are perfectly integrated into the cooperation programmes which we are implementing with Chile .
I cannot accept that the problem of the environment is not dealt with in this agreement since the problem of the environment is seen as a vital element of the concepts of cooperation in terms of sustainable development which we are working on with the Chilean Republic .
As for political relations , a great boost has been given to these including the new forum of parliamentary relations .
Some of you have asked how this is going to proceed in the future .
There is news on this and relations have been established , in terms of negotiations , on the basis of the agreement reached with the Chilean delegation at the latest meeting of the Rio Group and - within the Rio Group - the first institutionalised relationship with Chile in Noordwijk .
We have basically agreed on the timetable for the future liberalisation of exchanges and this will be done the following way : in 1997 and until the first half of 1998 the bodies provided for in the agreement - mixed committee , trade sub-committee and various working parties - will focus all of their attention on working out what we have called the ' radiography of exchanges ' , in other words working out all of the relevant technical analyses which will make it possible for us to make progress towards the ambitious objectives which have been set out in our strategy .
At same time , in the second half of 1998 or first half of l999 , there will be a high level meeting , as provided for in the agreement , in order to carry out the final arbitration and , as of that date , begin final negotiations for the progressive and reciprocal liberalisation of all trade .
This is basically the overview which it was possible to sketch out with the Chilean delegation , last month , in Noordwijk , under the Dutch presidency of the Council of Ministers .
Finally , I should like to make a few remarks concerning some of the speeches which have been delivered here today .
First of all , we think that this agreement , regardless of its content , which obviously can always be judged in one way or another , is also looking for other effects which are not a result the agreement itself but which are very important nonetheless .
First of all , the operation which the European Union is carrying out with Chile , and via the system of ' bridges ' with Mercosur , is a strengthening of the model of open regionalism , particularly in the very important area of Latin America , that of the southern tip ( Cono Sur ) .
Yes , the European Union 's strategic objective is to develop in Latin America , and in particular in the southern tip , a strong , solid , creative , open economy which is able to have a special relationship with the European Union .
I do not conceal the fact that we are also carrying out this operation because this is one of the rare cases of the world - Mercosur plus Chile - where the European Union is a major economic and trade partner and the main investor , even ahead of the United States and Japan .
In other words , there is a mutual interest in continuing to protect , within this area , a European presence in the political and economic spheres .
Secondly , this is undoubtedly going to strengthen the process of consolidating democracy .
Yes , Mr Puerto , I did say the process of consolidating democracy , because I am not going to deny the fact that there are nonetheless certain grey areas in the Chilean political model .
Obviously we must , along with the European Parliament , continue to put pressure while others can work within the agreement to try to clear up this type of grey area which no doubt still does exist in Chile .
Finally , and because I can see the consternation growing on the face of my friend Mr Smith , I must say that we are very sensitive to the quality of whisky and in particular that of Scotch whisky .
You made a particular request to me .
Indeed , following the dialogue held by Sir Leon Brittan and ourselves we have told the Chilean authorities that the arrangements for protecting ' pisco ' , the Chilean national drink , are contrary to WTO rules .
The Chilean government bill , due to be presented to the Chilean parliament , in our opinion breaks WTO rules .
The President of Chile promised , in talks with Sir Leon Brittan , that he would correct the government bill to bring it in line with WTO regulations .
This will be done in April , something else I can confirm to you .
Should we not receive a response from the Chilean authorities , automatically the European Union will ask for the WTO panel to be opened on this subject .
We have explained to the Chilean authorities that the fact of opening a panel does not necessarily create a political problem or create a problem of diplomatic or other understanding .
This is an institution which exists in the WTO and it was invented specifically to resolve amicably and peacefully this type of conflict .
However , I hope that the Chilean Bill is going to be revised so that we do not have to go to the WTO to discuss the problem of Scotch whisky .
And I must not forget Irish whiskey in case there are any Irishmen among us today .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Impact assessment system for firms
The next item is the report ( A4-0413 / 97 ) by Mr Mather , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the strengthening of the business impact assessment system .
Mr President , at the heart of the work of any Parliament is the duty to scrutinize , revise and improve draft legislation .
This House can be proud of the time it commits and the seriousness which it gives to that task .
The report now before the Chamber aims to strengthen our ability to improve legislation and it seeks to give the Commission incentives to research new laws more thoroughly , to consult more widely and to test options more extensively .
In particular , small and medium-sized enterprises and especially ' micro ' firms of 10 employees or less are those most at risk from inadvertent or unplanned legislative burdens .
Our measure gives those businesses particular protection .
At one level this report is neutral and technical .
Insisting that the costs and benefits of legislation should be identified more clearly does not prejudge the desirability of the legislation itself ; it simply gives us better tools against which to measure what we plan to do .
The report encourages all those involved in launching and developing significant directives to have their eyes more widely open about the consequences .
We are urging the use of a standard format , of distributing impact assessments very widely to citizens , businesses and governments across the European Union and we hope that will promote transparency and a more informed debate .
I hope Commissioner Papoutsis will agree that tightening the internal procedures of the Commission will help it to do its own job better as well and that our report will contribute to the studies which he has set in motion in this area .
In particular , we urge the Commission to ensure that no piece of legislation reaches the College of Commissioners without a double lock , a double protection .
First there must be an approved impact assessment , approved by the Secretariat-General , attached to the proposal and secondly , and very importantly , that there should be a personal signature by a Commissioner , testifying that this impact assessment has been properly completed .
Therefore , for the first time , Commissioners would have to sign personally to confirm that a proper impact assessment has been carried out .
This measure I believe would help to put Europe at the world class level of best practice in drawing up legislation .
Around the world , the United States , the United Kingdom , throughout the OECD , we see an increasing preoccupation with the quality of governance , the quality of legislation .
Europe ought to be at the front end of that process .
We ought to set a lead and I believe that this report , if adopted by the Commission , will help us achieve that position .
In this House too , better-prepared impact assessments should help our own rapporteurs in highlighting the most significant parts of new measures and prioritizing those for debate amongst our colleagues .
It is very important that in building on the fiche d 'impact system we must not either add to bureaucracy or make our systems cumbersome or unresponsive .
The report recognizes that our colleagues ' in the Commission need proper funding levels to make the extra investment in quality and that use of this system should not add unecessary procedures .
It is important to keep these under review and the report also gives an opportunity for those affected by legislation to review it several years down the line , not to assume that legislation is something once and forever .
If it has unplanned significant changes in its costs or benefits we in the European Union ought to be able to come back to it and to review that in a structured way .
I look forward to hearing colleagues contributions and to hearing Commissioner Papoutsis ' response to the House .
We have drafted this report precisely to help the Commission 's work in this field .
I would like to thank all those colleagues who helped with this report , especially in the Environment and the Social Affairs Committees who have contributed views specifically to it , but I would also like to single out the work of Lyndon Harrison who has helped me enormously with this report and in whose footsteps I am treading in this line of work .
May I commend the report to the House .
Mr President , many thanks to Mr Mather for his work on this report .
It has been a long time coming and we welcome it , and if you will excuse the pun we hope it will have some legislative impact of its own .
As you rightly say , many small businesses have been confused and bewildered by the impact of legislation .
It has not come their way before or had much impact on their lives until suddenly a civil servant tells them it is going to happen .
Clearly it is unfair if those are the cirumstances and within the Employment and Social Affairs Committee we have paid special regard to that , especially the health and safety aspects .
Under Article 118a , for example , there is protection for small to medium-sized enterprizes and I am pleased to see in this particular report mention is made of protection against the unnecessary financial and administrative burdens of any legislation which is introduced .
I could perhaps mention the fact that within the Employment and Social Affairs Committee we have also been seeking to include small to medium-sized businesses within the Safe Report . We have sought to make sure that any legislation that has been brought in has been easily explained .
I was the rapporteur on that particular report .
Unfortunately it is still blocked by the Coucil of Ministers but we hope that small businesses will be able to benefit from that some time in the future if it becomes unblocked .
If jobs are to be created , as they hopefully will be by many small businesses , it will be because we nurture innovation and entreprenurial activity .
It is important that such activity is developed with social policy in mind and for that we need true partnership .
We need partnership between the employer , the employee and the legislators .
Jobs , sustaining good business and political good sense are a recipe for growth .
The assessment of impact occurs throughout the world and the way ahead is to allow the kind of flexibility which brings about competitive strengths for business and fairness in the workplace .
Mr President , the Committee on the Environment is in favour of strengthening the system of business impact assessment .
The Committee 's opinion focuses on four points .
We think first of all that unambiguous and simple Community legislation is easier for firms to comply with and easy to monitor .
Secondly , we think that careful business impact assessment has a threefold role , namely to justify the measure proposed , to spread awareness and information and to help in policy planning .
Thirdly , the Committee on the Environment also welcomes the Commission 's plan to pay particular attention to economic assessments of the environment .
Fourthly , business impact assessment must henceforth be regarded during debates in the European Parliament as an integral part of the legislative proposal .
The Liberal Group compliments Mr Mather on his report which advocates a tightening up of the existing system of business impact assessment .
The object of this is to evaluate the consequences and costs of European legislation to business and industry .
But if impact assessment looks at effects on the environment , social factors and society as a whole the original purpose of the report will be totally lost .
Environment , safety , health and consumer protection are a matter for the proposed measures to be tested .
If the report is amended the Liberal Group will not be able to support it .
We regard business impact assessment as a necessary quality control which the law carries out on business and industry .
From our first beginnings in 1958 to January 1994 a total of no fewer than 48 000 European regulations , directives and instructions were enacted .
It is obvious that we have quietly reached saturation point .
This House is constantly talking about a European policy on employment .
But it is not a Treaty chapter on employment which will create jobs but a better business climate , and that means among other things better laws .
In short , we wholeheartedly endorse the original report but cannot go along with the compromises reached which water down the force of the report .
Mr President , I thank the rapporteur for bringing forward this challenging and interesting report .
It is a report which can be welcomed and supported by my Group .
It is important that we are always aware of the impact of our work , especially as it affects the ability of small and medium-sized enterprises to grow , to become more competitive and profitable and , for the most important reason of all , to employ more people .
Mr Mather 's report fits in quite nicely with the ongoing strategy that has been supported by this House through the work of the flawed Molitor Group onto the SLIM initiative for simpler legislation in the internal market , encompasing initiatives like the benchmarking of industry and the sector-by-sector approach to competitiveness in industry .
This report fits in with what we have been trying to achieve in all those areas and meets something that President Santer himself has said , which is to do less , but to do it better .
We can surely all agree on that .
With all these initiatives , partnership is key , and I am very pleased that the rapporteur has accepted a number of important amendments from the Social Affairs Committee .
These amendments quite clearly demonstrate that this report is about more than just business and consequently has a huge potential for the actual way we frame and introduce legislation as a Parliament .
I hope that this potential will be accepted and taken on board by the Commission and I look forward to hearing what the Commissioner has to say about Mr Mather 's report .
Small businesses in towns like Dudley , Halesowen , Stourbridge , Smethwick and Wolverhampton , in my constituency are all the time aware of the legislative requirements that are made of them .
They do not mind redtape as long as it is fair , sensible and necessary .
Civil servants and politicians must always be aware that we have an impact on the ability of our companies to be profitable and to grow .
This report can be welcomed in the sense that it will create better conditions for companies in areas such as the industrial West Midlands to be competitive , to be profitable and to employ more people .
Mr President , first I want to thank Mr Mather very warmly for his extremely important report .
When we consider that 99.8 % of European businesses employ fewer than 250 people we come to realise that the avalanche of European legislation that engulfs these businesses is enormous and that basically most of them have neither the time nor the inclination to look at these provisions .
It may be possible for some large firms but it is not for many of the small ones .
Many billions of ecus are wasted and many man / years used unproductively .
The consumer has to pay for that and in the final analysis this is a major obstacle to competition .
But a poor competitive position means the loss of jobs .
The small businesses do not concern themselves overmuch with these provisions .
And they have thus shown that they are in a position to create new jobs .
Impact assessment absolutely must be given an official legal status .
It should therefore be carried out by external advisers .
Secondly , the European Parliament should consider which provisions are really important or urgent and evaluate which provisions should enter into force at all .
We really should see to it that with our 314 votes we manage more frequently to prevent the entry into force of provisions that do not seem useful .
Thirdly , in future the Economic and Social Committee should be take much more intensive action to evaluate the effects on undertakings once provisions have entered into force .
Furthermore , that committee should also be able to propose initiatives in this area with a view to annulling some provisions .
Fourthly , the costs to the public authorities must be estimated and we should seize this opportunity to show that the EU is a model service-provider .
Service is our success .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report .
It is short but its brevity belies its significance .
It is a powerfully significant report for the work of this House because it is about legislative quality control .
In the era of doing less and doing it better we need instruments to help us to be better at doing our work .
This report will enhance our role as legislators .
It is important that Mr Mather focused in his Economic Committee report on the role of enterprise in particular .
While I accept that one could broaden the focus , I think the way he drilled it down in his first draft is the way it ought to stay because the greatest problem inside this Union is unemployment .
Throughout this decade we have never had unemployment less than 10 % of the labour force .
It is an abysmal record , compared to the United States and Japan .
We have not allowed enterprise in Europe to unlock itself and to deliver the goods .
Part of the problem is the burden of excessive legislation and bureaucracy .
The key to unlocking enterprise is by putting in the double lock procedure that has been suggested of a greater fiche d 'impact assessment which should begin with our legislative review and secondly personal Commission responsibility .
The Liberal Group will support the core of this proposal because it is the real issue .
Mr President , it is quite clear that the current fiche d 'impact system is totally unsatisfactory .
The report on the strengthening of this system is therefore a welcome and useful attempt to introduce a method for assessing the impact of EU legislation .
It is important and indeed necessary for the interest groups concerned to be consulted even during the preparatory stage .
It is true that the assessments in this report concern the impact on undertakings and the economy , but the planned strengthening of the system will automatically also have an indirect effect on the social and environmental sectors .
Priority must be attached to providing a more solid basis for the many small and medium-sized businesses , which account for the majority of jobs and help shape the environment , by giving them information on the costs and benefits of European legislation .
Under the current system , there is no need for a detailed cost-benefit analysis when assessing the impact on businesses .
But it is in fact most important to have that analysis .
A careful impact assessment is a most welcome and valuable tool in the search for improved legislation .
If this system is to be implemented successful , the directorate-general responsible will need adequate resources , to ensure that the impact assessment sheets come into wide use .
After all , we are seeking to ensure that the proposed legal provisions are comprehensible and clear to those concerned , that the policy-makers become more aware and more informed and , above all , that politics becomes more accountable .
Mr President , I regret that I am not able to join in the chorous of congratulations for Mr Mather .
I start by arguing that previously his national domestic party said that there was no such thing as society , merely individuals and their families .
It seems to me that Mr Mather is further qualifying that concept by saying also there are just businesses .
We are here to legislate on behalf of the European Union , on behalf of what I believe there is , namely society .
It seems to me that defining a fiche d 'impact purely in business terms is extremely dangerous and totally irresponsible .
I speak as the rapporteur on the Water Framework Directive .
One of the arguments that we are making constantly in the Environment Committee is that if we legislate and fail to take into account the cost of not protecting the environment , then the long-term cost of that failure will have to be taken into account by European Union citizens .
I accept that we should take into account the cost upon business , but we need also to take into account the other aspects of legislation .
That is why there was Amendment No 26 by Mr Donnelly , which has now been compromised .
That amendment says that we also need to take into account health , safety , environment and employment , not merely the effect upon small business .
Mr Mather , there is such a thing as society , we are here to legislate on its behalf .
Mr President , I would like first of all to thank and commend Mr Mather for his report .
The Commission 's business impact assessment system and examination of the repercussions of legislative draft proposals on businesses is an important element of Community policy with regard to businesses .
It has as its objective the improvement and simplification of the business environment .
The business impact assessment system was introduced in 1986 and at first was made applicable to every legislative draft proposal .
Later on , for reasons of efficiency , the Commission decided that it should be limited to proposals which carry the likelihood of having a significant impact on business and , in particular , on SMEs .
In 1997 , out of 16 draft legislative proposals , the Commission decided , on the basis of the selective approach , that only 10 could possibly have a significant impact on businesses and therefore required assessment .
I have very little argument with the general tone of the report and with Parliament 's motion for a resolution .
However , I think that the criticism of the business impact assessment system currently used by the Commission is excessive .
I do acknowledge , of course , that there is criticism of the quality of the business impact assessments not only from this Parliament but also in some of the Member States .
I also accept that not all of the assessments are of the highest quality or as good as they could be .
Even so , I believe that the quality has improved over the past two years , and I can assure you that we are constantly striving to achieve even greater improvement of the system .
Our objective is to include cost and benefit analysis as necessary , especially for complex legislative proposals which relate to a wide range of business activities .
This analysis will also need to encompass the impact on the environment , the impact on health and safety and the impact on employment and the interests of consumers .
I agree with your observations on these points .
The Commission 's proposal for a Council regulation on the protection of the industrial plan is a good example of a case where business impact assessment reveals the frequently conflicting interests of various business activities .
Allow me to mention one example . The Commission believed that its most recent proposal struck a sensible balance between the need to protect the motor industry and ensuring competitive access to the market for independent parts manufacturers .
Some of the information included in that specific business impact assessment led Parliament to table amendments to the proposal .
The Commission was able , generally , to accept them . Unfortunately , however , it turned out to be more difficult for the Council to agree either with the initial proposal of the Commission or with the version amended by Parliament .
Mr President , I can also agree with the demands that have been expressed for businesses and business associations to be able to participate in the consultation procedure with the directorates general which are responsible for the drafting of legislative proposals .
Such consultation is very important as a means to gaining a good understanding of the likely impact of legislative proposals .
The extension and improvement of the consultation procedures have been the subject of much work at the Commission . The increase in the numbers of Green Papers and White Papers on various matters in recent years bears that out .
Because what is a Green paper , when we really think about it ?
It is a process for open constructive dialogue directed towards all interested parties at the pan-European level .
It is , therefore , a consultation procedure on the drafting of better proposals .
These consultations must include discussions with environmental groups - with groups that have a particular concern for environmental protection - and with consumer groups , because it is equally important that their views are listened to and given consideration .
As I have said , it is very important that account is taken of all aspects of the impact . Not just of aspects which may affect businesses , but also of aspects which can affect health , safety , the environment , consumer interests and , of course , employment itself , which is now the number one priority of the European Union and of all of the European policies .
I am particularly pleased that the European Parliament considers that the Directorate General for Enterprise Policy should continue to coordinate development of the business impact assessment system .
I agree also that the consultation procedures for the completion of a business impact assessment should be carried out as early as possible during the scrutiny of a draft legislative proposal .
I have made a note of some of the other proposals that have been expressed , including the idea of reviewing all existing legislation .
As you know , the Commission is examining the impact of particular aspects of legislation in the framework of the SLIM initiative with a view to achieving simplification and cost reduction and , also , in order to reduce the administrative burdens on specific economic activities .
Allow me to point out also that the internal functioning and procedures at the Commission are , as I am sure you are aware , exclusively the Commission 's responsibility .
Nevertheless , your ideas , proposals and constructive criticism are always welcome , and we do , of course , give them serious consideration .
I can assure you that I am determined to contribute personally to the improvement of the Commission 's business impact assessment system .
We shall do our utmost to improve the level of consultation with all interested parties in keeping with the spirit of the proposals tabled in Parliament 's report .
I hope to be able very soon to set out proposals for improvement of the Commission 's internal procedures as a means to optimizing the achievement of that objective .
This report of Parliament has come before the House at a good time . I wish to maintain close contact with Parliament on these important matters in the context of the Commission 's twofold commitment on the establishment of open transparency procedures and support for SMEs and the promotion of growth and job generation .
Mr President , allow me once more to congratulate Mr Mather on his splendid report and to thank him .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11 a.m.
Aid to shipyards
The next item is the debate on the proposal for a Council Regulation on aid to certain shipyards under restructuring and amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 3094 / 95 on aid to shipbuilding ( COM ( 97 ) 0132 - C40153 / 97-97 / 0113 ( ACC ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me say first of all that I personally am very dissatisfied that the regulation is being presented as an urgency .
As the proposed rapporteur I could have guaranteed that I and my colleagues would finish our report in the course of the next month .
Nevertheless , in the interest of those concerned , I voted for urgency yesterday .
Let me at this point also give special thanks to those Members with whom we have recently done such good and practical work , and in particular Alan Donnelly .

I think that in this proposal the Commission has given a very detailed and accurate picture of the background and the relevant facts .
In the whole legislative section we are dealing with the different , specific situations in three of our Member States , which we must also evaluate differently .
We must also look at the international aspects of the question of aid to shipyards , and here I am thinking particularly of the problems with the OECD directive .
As an East German Member , I want to emphasize that the blame for the misery of East German shipyards lies not with the shipyards themselves but with the mismanagement by the Bremer Vulkan mother company and the lack of control by the supervisory bodies in the Federal Republic of Germany , especially the Treuhand and its successor the BVS .
As a result only a fraction of the resources needed for restructuring have reached the recipients .
Let me briefly discuss the three amendments , for which I was originally responsible .
On Amendment ll : I would like to withdraw it so that a compromise can be reached on the regulation as a whole .
Amendment 12 is designed to make it clear that this state aid is the last aid that can be granted to the shipyards concerned .
Amendment 13 calls for stronger controls , for EU monitoring ; it involves our Parliament in this process and guarantees its continuing participation in it and I hope that urgency will not be agreed again on this subject !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal is designed to cushion the effects of the far-reaching and necessary structural adjustment measures .
We must ensure the continuity and completion of this necessary adjustment process .
We are concerned with structural problems in Greece and Spain , and in particular in Germany , in the Land of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern .
I briefly described the dramatic background to this question when I advocated urgency yesterday , and the radical structural changes and adjustment processes that are taking place in the span of just a few years .
What is important about the present situation , however , is that the current difficulties cannot be blamed on those they affect , the shipyard workers .
They have not received any of the aid .
This shameful situation is currently being fully investigated by several committees of inquiry and by the public prosecutors in Bremen , Bonn and Schwerin .
The fact that funds were misused has been known for months and the Commission has also given a very precise and responsible account of this .
The Commission proposal contains all the important facts and it is hardly likely that any more information will come to light as a result of further intensive investigations by the European Parliament , e.g. by setting up a committee of inquiry as suggested by Mr Donnelly yesterday .
All that would do is to delay the necessary structural adjustments .
But any delay would only increase the existing uncertainty .
Any delay will make the envisaged privatization more difficult .
Any delay will be bad for business and any delay will jeopardize jobs .
Instead , those concerned should be given a chance to complete their on-going structural adjustments as quickly as possible .
We cannot allow those who have been robbed then to be punished too .
What kind of logic is that ?
Are those who have been harmed already to suffer even more disadvantages ?
Just imagine a similar situation in your own private life and you will soon realise how absurd this proposal is , how absurd it would be for the Commission proposal to be rejected !
If we do not grant rapid aid , then in my view we will be penalizing those concerned even further , and that is bound to meet with incomprehension outside Parliament and to discredit our Parliament .
So I warmly ask you to approve the Commission 's very responsible proposal .
Mr President , the Liberal Group is deeply unhappy at the fact that we have been rail-roaded into an urgency .
Having listened to Mr Gomolka 's contribution I am even more disturbed that we are not going to give due reflection to this dossier .
A serious question mark hangs over the principle of applying state aids in such contexts but my Group would retain an open mind to a fair-minded review and reflection on the facts .
Can I recall to the House that yesterday 's annual guidelines issued by the Commission urge Member States to avoid using state aids to postpone essential restructuring .
The previous speaker is right , jobs may be jeopardized , including jobs in other shipyards if we do not give due reflection to the knock-on implications .
That is precisely why we believe in principle what we are doing today is a virtual abdication of parliamentary rights of review .
We are abdicating our duty as legislators to stand back and to pause and reflect .
In principle the Liberal Group believes this is wrong and in practice we will not be a rubber stamp .
Mr President , I would like to follow on from the point that Mr Cox has made .
The Economic Committee had worked out a timetable that would have taken two or three weeks to give proper consideration to this matter .
I have to say that the decision taken in principle yesterday , particularly by the Christian Democrats , to rubber-stamp this decision , brings this House into disrepute .
I want to ask Commissioner Papoutsis , who I guess is responding on behalf of the Commission , to answer a series of specific questions , and I hope he answers them very clearly .
The first point is : will he guarantee that not one penny of this subsidy will be given as an employment subsidy in any of the three countries mentioned ?
This of course would mean a competitive disadvantage for other countries in the European Union .
Can the Commissioner tell us whether he feels this subsidy will help or will hinder the agreement of an OECD deal with the United States and our other partners ?
Many of us believe it brings that agreement into disrepute and that it is now null and void .
Will he tell us whether there has been any dialogue with the other shipbuilders in the rest of the European Union about this deal .
Has he consulted Finnish , Danish , British or French shipbuilders to see what the implications of this deal will be ?
If he has not , then why has the Commission not consulted ?
What are the implications for the Seventh Shipbuilding Aids Directive ?
Is the Commission going to propose an extension of the directive to coincide with this particular regulation and is it prepared to review the ceiling for the Seventh Shipbuilding Aids Directive ?
Would the Commissioner agree with me that given the sensitivity of this sector of the economy this is a disgraceful way for the Council and the Commission to try to steamroller through a piece of legislation that should have been given proper and transparent consideration ?
I think this House brings itself into disrepute by working in this way and I deeply regret it .
Mr President , it is my view that the European Parliament took a very wrong decision yesterday .
A majority of the House 's members voted in favour of the urgent handling of the Commission 's proposal for new state aid to a number of shipyards in Germany , Spain and Greece .
I find it quite incredible that our Parliament should , of its own free will , isolate itself from a thorough discussion of a proposal which has farreaching consequences for the shipping industry in Europe .
We have no opportunity for discussing the proposal , let alone for proposing amendments .
I believe the proposal will have enormously harmful effects if it is adopted .
Firstly , the proposal goes against all logic .
The Commission has brought and won legal actions against Member States which have paid out unlawful state aid to shipyards .
It is therefore quite illogical that the same Commission should now seek to legalize aid in the sum of over ECU 1 billion .
Secondly , the Commission has not made up its mind about the harm the proposal will do to healthy shipyards in Member States which are not entitled to this aid .
Denmark is one of those countries in which healthy , competent shipyards will be hard hit .
Thirdly , the Commission 's proposal does not provide sufficient guarantees that the capacity of shipyards receiving aid will actually be reduced , and the control of payments of aid is also too limited .
Fourthly , the proposal will have unforeseeable consequences for the EU 's cooperation with the OECD .
The European Union is obliged to do without new rules for its shipyard policy , until an international OECD agreement is produced .
This agreement has now been broken , and already the USA has protested to the EU .
The proposal submitted will damage the EU 's credibility with our people because they will see it as unjust , and it will harm the EU 's international reputation .
I therefore urge that we vote against the proposal .
Mr President , this proposal is being handled on the basis of the wrong principles .
A vote yesterday could just as easily have resulted in a different point of view .
126 votes to 133 means that the split is very even .
This also illustrates the fact that we are not properly fulfilling our role as legislators .
Parliament has in a sense sold its birthright , and the consequence is that everything is now ' up for grabs ' .
Should the Fincantieri shipyards in Italy , the Le Havre shipyard in France and the Svendborg shipyard in Denmark now come forward with a request to the Commission to obtain aid for their survival ?
Should they now attempt to undermine the good cooperation we are on the way towards establishing in Europe ?
Should they now spoil the OECD agreements ?
I can only say that Gomolka 's speech was rather nonsensical .
It is pure selfishness .
We in Denmark can look 100 km across the Baltic Sea where the shipyards are thriving , while our own are closing down .
This is not European cooperation .
It is just that some are profiting from others .
I cannot vote in favour of the proposal , but hope that our amendments will be accepted .
Mr President , allow me first of all to thank Parliament and , in particular , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the rapporteur Mr Glante for examining so expeditiously the Commission 's proposal for the amendment of Community rules on aid to shipyards for the purpose of facilitating the disbursement of grant aid to certain shipyards in Germany , Spain and Greece which are undergoing reconstruction .
It was necessary to deal with this matter urgently because decisions have to be taken quickly to prevent the future of the yards in question falling into jeopardy .
In view of that requirement , the Industry Council will discuss the Commission 's proposals at its meeting later today .
The Commission feels justified in hoping that the Council will at least arrive at a political agreement at that meeting .
Our proposal relates to aid that is required to assist the completion of restructuring programmes commenced some time ago and which are necessary for legal and technical reasons . For example , in the cases of Greece and Spain , the disbursement of aid previously approved has been held back .
In the case of Germany , there have been exceptional circumstances involving the misuse of aid previously approved for Bremmer Vulkan which is now under a bankruptcy order .
This aid will not have much effect on the competitive positions of the yards in question . Any distortion of competition will be largely offset by a substantial reduction of the yards ' productive capacity .
In the view of the Commission , the measures are totally compatible with the standstill provisions of the OECD agreement , which because its ratification has been delayed - not by the European Union but by the United States - has yet to come into force .
One of the main factors which has led the Commission to adopt a positive position in the cases in question has been an undertaking from the respective governments not to provide any further aid for the yards for either rescue or restructuring and not to provide guarantees against future losses .
We can expect the Council to reiterate the principle of once and only once .
The Commission is also proposing close monitoring in order to ensure compliance with the terms under which the aid is being approved , specifically as regards the disbursement and use of the aid , the execution of the restructuring plans and the restrictions on productive capacity .
The Commission is grateful to the European Parliament for its positive and constructive stance which , when viewed overall , is supportive of our proposals .
As regards the three questions put by Mr Donnelly , I would like to say that this action does not , in actual fact , strengthen employment .
The categories of assistance are specified in detail in the proposal , and there will , certainly , be control during implementation .
There will be no repercussions as far as the OECD agreement is concerned , and we hope that the United States will concur , precisely because of the great importance of the agreement - because of its overall importance , that is to say .
And let me say , also , that many of the Member States have indeed consulted with the Commission and the competent Commissioner .
Mr President , Parliament has tabled 12 amendments .
Amendments Nos 1 to 10 relate to general policy , such as the Commission 's position in regard to the OECD agreement and policy on future aid to the shipyards of the Union .
These matters are outside the scope of the regulation which , in the nature of things , is very specific and confined to establishing derogations from the applicable rules on aid for just three national cases .
It is not feasible to allow reference to these matters in this regulation . Moreover , to take decisions today about wider policy would be premature .
All of these possibilities remain open .
The Commission will be presenting proposals later this year in order that decisions can be taken before the directive lapses at the end of the year . And those proposals will provide a basis for wide-ranging debate .
For those reasons the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 to 10 .
Your other two amendments relate to the derogation .
Amendment No 12 seeks to amend Article 1 ( 4 ) of the proposal with regard to Spain and explicitly states that no more tax reliefs and capital inputs shall be permitted .
The amendment is unnecessary , in our opinion , because its content is implicit in the Commission proposals , which make clear that measures of this type that are not approved by the derogation in question are incompatible with the directive and thus impermissible .
That is to say , it follows from the Commission 's proposals that the yards will not be able to receive aid of this type in the future .
The last amendment , Amendment No 13 , introduces a new article , namely Article 2 ( 1 ) ( A ) , which goes into detail on the method of monitoring .
The Commission appreciates the anxieties which have given rise to this amendment .
However , I can assure you that the Commission , assisted by technical experts , will monitor closely all of the aspects referred to in the amendment . In any case , in its present form , as a new article , the amendment cannot be accepted .
If we were to accept it we would have to submit a new , revised proposal to the Council , and that would cause a delay that cannot really be entertained , bearing in mind the urgency of the matter that I mentioned at the beginning .
Mr President , I have heard the Commissioner thank Parliament for its positive approach , so I would also like to make it clear to the Commissioner that the positive approach was that 133 of the 626 members were for the motion , and that it was only one of the group rapporteurs who spoke in favour of it today .
That speech may have been written yesterday , I do not know ; but it seems to me as if we are being treated as a rubber stamp .
Mr President , I asked the Commissioner whether or not there had been consultation with the shipbuilders in the other Member States which will be affected by this .
I understand that there has been no consultation at all on the employment effects that these subsidies will have .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to answer as to whether or not his services have talked to the other shipbuilders and what effect he feels the subsidy will have on jobs in the other Member States ?
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to add further clarification to the reply that I gave to Mr Donnelly a short while ago .
As I have said , the Commission and , specifically , Mr Van Miert , consulted formally with all of the Member States concerning the shape of this proposal and , of course , there were informal consultations with a number of shipyard concerns .
That is the fact of the situation .
As you know , we at the Commission , all of the commissioners , and , in this particular case , Mr Van Miert , take pains in every case to look at all of the possible repercussions in our efforts to find the approach that will be most acceptable to the Council .
And I can assure you that that was done in this case too .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11 a.m.
Welcome
It gives me great pleasure to welcome to the House a delegation from the Chamber of Deputies of the Czech Republic led by its chairman , Mr Daniel Kroupa who is also the co-chairman of the European UnionCzech Republic Joint Parliamentary Committee .
Mr Kroupa and his colleagues are here to make preparations for the next meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Committee which will be held in June .
It is an honour and privilege to have you with us at this plenary session .
We are aware of the importance of your visit , given the need to ensure that all the necessary preparations are made for the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union .
We look forward to working together with you to ensure that the proper democratic control is exercised at all stages of the accession negotiations , which it is hoped will begin next year .
We wish you a pleasant and very successful visit .
( Loud applause )
Votes
Mr President , I have been informed by Mr Apolinário , one of the Socialist Group members on the list for the temporary committee , that he is not available to sit on this committee .
The Socialist Group will be informing the President of its candidate when our bureau decides .
( The proposals were ratified )
Mr President , we are voting on the conciliation report of what was successfully concluded to create the single market in pressure vessels .
It has been brought to my attention that the Council has adopted a statement in its own Minutes in respect of this Directive .
Parliament has consistently opposed this practice of attempted legislation in secret .
I would remind the House of the position we took on Resolution 12 in October 1995 and also remind the Council that statements made in their Minutes have no legal force .
I would endorse that and point out that the Court has also taken that view .
( Parliament approved the joint text )
Mr President , the following problem has arisen in the document before us : we reached an agreement with the Council about the budgetary procedure .
The President of the Council did not confirm that agreement until 6.30 p.m. last night .
So it was too late to move the text from the explanatory statement to the motion for a resolution .
But it is available to all Members in all the languages in the explanatory statement .
During the debate last night Mr Liikanen pointed out that the Commission and the Council had thereby agreed to this text .
I would ask for it to be pointed out specifically in the Minutes that this text is no longer part of the explanatory statement but is now part of the motion for a resolution .
I will read out the joint declaration .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , forgive me for interrupting this sitting on a point of order .
I don 't know if it is deliberate , but I find it most strange that I cannot understand you at all unless I put on my headset .
I appreciate your voice so much that I would like to hear what you say in English directly .
It is strange that Parliament sits and we cannot understand you .
My feeling is that the volume needs to be a bit higher if we are to hear you .
At the moment we simply cannot .
Perhaps nobody can hear me either .
Unless it is deliberate I suppose we must soldier on like this .
But perhaps you can do something about it .
The Portuguese members of the Partido Popular , in the UPE Group of the European Parliament , declare that their vote for the report on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union on the adjustment of the financial perspective to take account of the conditions of implementation , by Mr Tillich , is cast in the conviction that the amount of 1 , 062 , 000 , 000 ECU , resulting from the failure to execute budgeted expenditure in 1995 and 1996 , will be inscribed in the 1999 budget and earmarked , in particular , for the ' cohesion countries ' , including Portugal , in accordance with the commitment formally made by both the Council and the Commission .
In accordance with this and as a consequence , the UPE , in particular the Portuguese delegation , in the knowledge that the process for negotiating the next budget will begin shortly , will not fail to present relevant proposals , in order to safeguard the position which has now been taken , even though the word given by the Council and the Commission is sufficient for us .
Following examination of the conditions of the 1996 budgetary year , and in accordance with the Inter-institutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 , the Commission has asked the Council and the European Parliament to authorise the transfer to 1999 of appropriations not executed in 1996 and not carried over to 1997 to the headings of the Structural and Cohesion Funds , i.e. respectively 545 and 17 million ECU .
A transfer of 562 million ECU which poses no problem to any of the parties .
On the other hand , where there was disagreement was the fact of knowing how to transfer the 1 billion ECU which , following the decision to adapt 1996 , had already been re-budgeted to 1998 .
Having proposed the transfer of the full amount of 1 billion ECU to the 1998 budgetary year ( which would have led to an 8 % increase in structural actions ! ) , the Commission has finally realised that the structural actions were already sufficiently endowed in 1998 .
It has , therefore , finally proposed a share-out of the increase in the Structural Funds and Cohesion Funds over two budgetary years : 500 million carried over to 1998 and 500 million carried over to 1999 .
A ' compromise proposal ' which nonetheless enables an approximate 6 % increase in the Structural Funds whereas the CAP ( with a 0.5 % ) and the budget as a whole ( 3 % ) have been subjected to austerity , just like the finances of the Member States .
The Council , for its part , rightly thought that it was impossible to commit or spend 500 million ECU in 1998 and therefore asked for the whole amount of 1 billion ECU to be carried over in one go from 1996 to 1999 .
Making it possible for it not to execute this amount for another two years would help the Member States to slash their public deficits in readiness for the switch-over to the single currency .
This is a completely irrational position which the European Parliament , in principle , should not have been able to accept ...
Waiting for the final position of the Council , the Committee on Budgets , through the Tillich report , has proposed that we should accept the Commission proposal by a vote with qualified majority .
In the absence of an agreement in plenary session between the European Parliament and the Commission , the transfer could not have been carried out and should have remained where it was : the one billion ECU should have been carried over to 1998 and the re-budgeting on 1999 of the 562 million ECU earmarked for structural activities and not used in 1996 would not have been possible .
This leads the Committee on Budgets to say that these 562 million ECU will be ' lost ' , since they will be handed back to the Member States .
Our Group tabled an amendment taking up the Council 's proposal , an amendment which was judged to be inadmissible when in fact , quite obviously , it was a qualification of the annex mentioned in Article 1 of the proposal for a resolution .
This refusal to examine a proposal enabling the Member States to make real economies in 1998 illustrates perfectly the scant interest which the European Parliament takes in States ' interests and those of taxpayers in our different countries .
It should come as no surprise , therefore , that we refuse to vote for the proposal put by the Committee on Budgets which is so remote from the public opinion of the nations of Europe .
Second Bandarelli report ( A4-141 / 97 )
While expressing a certain satisfaction at the adoption of a programme of support to the Italian conversion plan for drift net fishing , I must still , on behalf of myself and Mr Tajani , emphasize our disappointment at the fact that certain fundamental principles which appear in the Italian plan have not been understood or accepted by this House .
In the text adopted today the abolition of drift nets is mentioned several times . This is inopportune to say the least , because so far the Council has not taken any such decision , and nor does it seem to have the necessary majority to do so .
So even if the conversion measures progressively lead to total abandonment of this fishing technique , without a Community decision along those lines it does not seem right to us that Italian fishermen should feel guilty about an activity which is still absolutely legal .
Furthermore , joining the conversion plan is voluntary - and it could not be otherwise since , I repeat , no European law prohibits the use of drift nets - and this principle is contradicted the moment abolition is insisted on .
So it comes down to unacceptable and ridiculous demonization of drift net fishing , almost as if this technique was at the origin of the worst biological imbalances to hit the Mediterranean and as if the salvation of that sea therefore depended on total and immediate destruction of the spadare .
Certainly , no-one claims that drift nets are harmless and without impact on resources - no fishing technique is - but it is also clear that this insistence on eliminating the spadare gives the impression that Italian fishermen are being made the scapegoat for a wider crisis , which they are certainly not the most responsible for .
There has also been an unwillingness to take account of another point , but a point which is of fundamental importance for Italy . The extraordinary nature of the proposed measure , which impacts on a socio-economic situation of grave difficulty and would have justified not only recourse to the FIFG , but also access to other Community funds - the ESF and the ERDF - where the quotas intended for Italy were not fully used .
In fact , while the FIFG funds are used to ' reimburse ' fishermen who give up fishing , the possibility of using other Community funds as well would represent consistent support for initiatives promoting re-employment and re-training of fishermen who , remember , almost all come from Objective 1 regions .

Aid to shipyards ( A4-153 / 97 )
I have always defended European shipbuilding which is still an industry with a future despite the blows which have been dealt to it by unbridled ' world-wide dumping ' .
Today , while regretting an emergency debate which has prevented us from having the necessary far-ranging debate , I tabled amendments to call for an extension of the seventh directive , to reiterate the importance of shipbuilding , to demand the principle of parity between the Member States , to declare the OECD agreement on this matter out-dated and to increase the rates of possible aids in all Member States of the European Union to bring them in line with the reality of the market .
Most of my amendments have been voted for but , unfortunately , that which asked for our withdrawal from the OECD agreement , was defeated by a right wing which is slavishly devoted to the United States ( which has not ratified it in any case ) .
However , the proposals made by the European Parliament are an improvement on the initial text .
I hope that the Commission will keep them on board .
That said , everything indicates , following this vote , that we must continue to fight for European shipbuilding . The hidden message is that this is another concept in favour of an offensive European industrial policy .
Pradier report ( A4-98 / 97 )
We welcome the report and agree with the rapporteur that it is extremely important to find a solution to the problems which have arisen in connection with the development and use of the Internet .
But we cannot agree with the rapporteur that the best way to achieve the right level of protection in this area is through supranational legislation .
As this is an international problem the route to protection against incorrect use of the net must be through cooperation and coordination of national legislation .
We advocate close inter state cooperation within the framework of the Third Pillar , where democratic control is executed , and indeed should be executed , by the National Parliaments .
It is our view that the report deals with an important topic and is worth supporting .
We must acknowledge the great opportunities in communication created by the Internet while striving to prevent the Internet becoming a means of spreading illegal material .
The report contains a limited number of points which refer to certain fairly insignificant regulations covering the flow of information on the Internet . In the report , these regulations are clearly placed in the context of the use of the Internet to spread illegal material such a child pornography .
In view of this , the aim to regulate the flow of illegal material cannot be considered as anything other than extremely desirable .
But we would like to point out that the aim does not necessarily coincide with available technical capability for achieving regulation .
In tackling the question of technical solutions for regulation we ought to consider carefully the balance between potential infringements on freedom of speech , for example , which such regulation could involve , and the important aim of preventing the spread of material such as child pornography .
I have today voted in favour of the Pradier report on unlawful and harmful material on the Internet .
I am glad that an EU initiative is now being proposed which would oppose the expansion of unlawful and harmful material on the Internet .
It is important , however , that we now convert words into action .
The report gives two possible solutions .
Firstly we could attempt to improve people 's ability to decide for themselves what was rubbish on the Internet .
Secondly we could use legislation to ban that rubbish .
In principle I am against restricting freedom of expression .
I would therefore support any initiative aimed at improving people 's ability to decide for themselves what was rubbish .
But such an approach is not enough .
As responsible politicians we cannot stand by in silence and watch the Internet develop into a dustbin for all kinds of rubbish .
Speaking personally , for example , I am unable to come to terms with such areas as the rapid spread of child pornography .
I also find it difficult to accept that , just by clicking on a button , one can access the recipe for a powerful bomb .
Finally it seems to me reprehensible , as has been the case in Denmark for instance , that the Internet can be used to corrupt others .
In summary it is necessary to use law to ban any rubbish of this type .
I know full well that the possibility of punishing people who violate Internet law is very limited .
This is particularly the case because the Internet crosses frontiers .
Once again we have here an example of an area requiring greater legislative cooperation , internationally and in the EU , if we are to solve any of the current problems .
In this connection I would once again urge that Denmark give up its reservations on EU cooperation in the area of legislation .
Everyone agrees that the Internet network has led to considerable progress in communications and information and more generally people 's knowledge of the world surrounding them .
Everyone recognises the rapidity of these upheavals and the dissemination of knowledge brought about by this set of relations and information systems .
However , the framework for this progress unfortunately has not been well prepared and we collectively bear responsibility for that .
However , this new means of communication cannot not be dealt with by our conventional means of examinations and controls .
In other words , we are completely helpless if we are to deal with the spread of illegal or harmful information on the Internet , something we are virtually unable to prevent .
Of course , deviant practices were predictable and it took no time for bandits of all kinds to arm themselves with this very effective tool .
The risk is great !
Both in terms of moral and intellectual crime .
The European Union must tackle this problem and the Commission 's proposal , in partnership with the Council , to set up structures which should make it possible to issue common rules , even possibly a coding , seems to me to be the bare minimum response .
We are all aware of the difficulty of controlling the Internet .
However , we must , while guaranteeing public liberties , ensure that the content carried on the Internet complies with the law and morality .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm and Schörling ( V ) , in writing .
( SV ) The signatories to this explanation of voting have abstained from voting on Mr Pradier 's report .
We think that the report contains both positive and negative points .
Naturally we agree with the view that damaging and illegal material on the Internet must be restricted and that we must find a way of banning the occurrence of such material legally , but we also need to find a way to implement this in practice .
Of course we are against the occurrence of child pornography , racist features and recipes for bombs and drugs .
We think that this problem must be resolved internationally and we welcome existing proposals for an international solution .
On the other hand we do not think that Europol should have authority in this area , because Interpol is the only suitable body .
Nor do we think that this report should be used as a pretext for the argument that the Third Pillar be incorporated into the Community sphere of authority .
There is no reason either , as we see it , for this issue to be raised at Community level as it is an issue which must be resolved internationally .
Peijs report ( A4-34 / 97 )
We must make an objection to point 7 of the report .
We , in Sweden , find it incomprehensible that the burden of VAT on small and medium sized companies can be lessened in the long term by adopting a ' principle of origin ' .
We are also totally opposed to the adoption of a common system of VAT which is referred to in point 7 .
Garosci report ( A4-100 / 97 )
In the proposal for the report , observation F recommends a quick deregulation to help companies to develop and enter the market .
But we do not share the view on this approach at all .
Such a deregulation will only lead to increased insecurity in society and it will be the weaker members of society who will pay the price .
Torres Marques , Peijs and Garosci reports
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for the three reports on small and medium-sized companies .
It is our general view that initiatives which benefit small and medium-sized companies also promote employment .
In addition these initiatives can also promote a healthy development of the economy .
We would point out , however , that we cannot subscribe to the report 's section on the advantages of lowering VAT for small and medium-sized companies .
The latest information has confirmed the gradual increase in the importance of SMEs , which have shown themselves to be especially able to attract investment and create jobs in competitive industries .
There are some 18 million small and medium sized enterprises in the European Union , employing 70 million people ( 70 % of the working population ) , and they account for two out of every three new jobs which have been created .
That is why the Commission document and the reports drafted by our colleagues , Torres Marques , Peijs and Grosci , which propose practical measures as part of the promotion of SMEs , should be welcomed .
It is difficult to distinguish between them , as they are all necessary if we are to compensate for the limits which are imposed by the small size of these companies : we should give support to the management of technological information at appropriate levels and effectively cutting red tape which hinders their activities .
Furthermore , we must always also remember that we are now preparing to adopt the single currency .
The SMEs are going to be the main beneficiaries of its introduction , since they are most harmed by the cost of transactions , uncertainty and calculations resulting from the existence of different currencies in the European Union .
But we must make an effort to adapt and this is something which must be done well ahead , with the vital support of the European Commission .
Danesin report
We are of the opinion that the report deals with an important topic and think for the most part that it is a good report .
But we think that the text of point 36 is somewhat vague and could lead to misinterpretation so we find it difficult to support it .
Point 36 refers to state aid for the maritime industry which could be interpreted to mean that the report says that the shipbuilding industry is to be promoted through State aid .
With an interpretation such as this we cannot support point 36 in the report at the vote .
The shipbuilding industry sank into a deep crisis during the 1970s and , as a result of this , was in need of extensive restructuring .
Before the restructuring , extensive national aid was channelled into the industry to strengthen national competitiveness against the shipbuilding industry in other countries .
As a result of this unfortunate aid policy the industry 's capacity for development was hampered and the shipbuilding industry in several countries went under completely .
If European shipbuilding is to develop global competitiveness for the 21st century , it is extremely important that the previous unsuccessful aid policy is not repeated .
Today we are examining the Commission communication on the maritime industry and the many difficulties which it faces .
The policies implemented to date have not been able to give this sector the necessary competitiveness so that it can face up to competition and the opening of markets .
Today , the fleet flying European Community flags is declining , in terms of the number of people employed , as jobs are being lost in the sector , all of which has harshly affected certain Member States .
The Commission is therefore proposing to focus its new strategy on four areas : maritime safety , free competition and free access to the markets , training and research & development , and surveillance of state aid .
These prospects are not very encouraging and the Commission ought to have done better although , it must be acknowledged , the Council does not really seem to be rising fully to this challenge .
I therefore regret the lack of ambition in terms of competitiveness , the reconquest of markets and improvements in employment levels .
Whereas the development of technological research and the promotion of maritime careers are vital points , we must also reduce distorted competition resulting from situations where certain operators are not submitted to the strict but necessary safety rules or related costs .
The standards in the maritime industry must be raised but we must also make an effort to increase competitiveness by lowering the financial burden on our operators .
The European Union must tackle the promotion of its maritime industry and it is vital for it to put an end to the switching of activities towards other countries .
It seems to me that we really must step up Community action in this area and the Council really should be aware of this .
The collapse of the maritime transport sector in recent decades throughout Europe has been notorious . This decline has brought with it the disappearance of technology acquired over centuries and has weakened industry 's links to it at all levels , in particular shipyards .
The recent crisis of roadblocks in transport which for weeks paralysed European roads and , consequently , the economic activities of various countries , highlighted the urgent need for alternative means of transport , mainly rail and maritime transport .
It seems to me that particularly in the intra-Community markets , in an ever widening Europe , maritime transport can be competitive and offers considerable advantages in comparison with road transport for transporting large quantities of goods ; it also has a smaller environmental impact .
Therefore , I think that the Commission communication and the report are two positive documents for the European Union .
Now we must await the implementation of the policies which have been announced .
McCarthy report ( A4-126 / 97 )
Mr President , I would just like to thank those Members who voted for my report .
I would also like to object in very strong terms to the personal attacks on me by the Conservative Party last night .
It is sad they resorted to personal attacks when my report very much reflects the views of people in the regions .
I would ask the Conservative Party to address those issues rather than resort to the wrecking tactics which they employed in committee .
I have not been guilty of manipulation of the parliamentary process .
I asked if the Conservatives would call in to the Regional Committee now and again so that we could have this report on the agenda nine months ago .
The Conservatives should accept the verdict of this report and address the issues .
It is not a partisan report . It is not civil servants who are to blame for the problems , but their political masters .
In the General Election in a week 's time people in the regions will judge the government on their inability to deal with regional policy issues .
As a whole we think that the report is a good one but we would still like to comment on a few points .
Without questioning the rapporteur 's objectivity in any way , we think that it is questionable , in principle , that the parliamentary rapporteur should come from the same country for which aid is being evaluated .
For reasons of principle , Parliament should always aim to select a rapporteur who cannot , in any way , be regarded as having an interest in the issue under discussion .
It is also inappropriate that some of the text of the report has been used in National political debate in Britain .
It is not our task to write for National political debates in Britain but to carry out an objective evaluation of structural actions .
British Conservatives are voting against the McCarthy report on three points of principle .
First , we believe that reports about individual Member States should not be made by MEPs from the Member State concerned .
Second , we deplore the way in which the Parliament 's timetable has been manipulated to bring this report before the House at this time during a General Election campaign in the UK .
Third , we condemn the manner in which the Socialist rapporteur has used this report for national party political point-scoring .
This conduct by British Labour MEPs does no good for the standing of this Parliament and they should realize that Socialists in the European Parliament attacking the Conservative Government in the UK can only strengthen support for the Conservative cause among British electors who are resistant to any extension of European powers - A British Labour own-goal , in effect .
Ms McCarthy 's report is a well researched , clear and thorough evaluation of EU regional policy in the United Kingdom .
Because it is such a report , it is essential that careful note is taken of its hard-hitting comments .
There can be no avoiding the fact that from beginning to end the report is a powerful indictment of the Conservative Government .
Time and again the government has failed to uphold the principle of partnership ; subsidiarity has been treated with contempt ; additionality has been ignored or evaded .
Nowhere is all of this more so than in industrial South Wales .
Here we have seen the deadhand of the Welsh Office failing to make anything like an effective use of the structural funds .
Moreover , the Welsh Office has even been prepared to see millions of pounds of grants , allocated to South Wales , remaining in Brussels .
This is because the government is , of course , preventing local authorities from having sufficient funds to provide ' match funding ' .
The additionality rule can be met in various ways and yet the government has done nothing .
This scandal must be brought to an end and I am confident that it will be brought to an end in the very near future .
May I express my grateful thanks to Ms McCarthy for the work of her report .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has drawn up a letter of opinion which shares many of the concerns of this report .
Between 1994 and 1996 ECU 910m was committed from the European Social Fund ( ECU 3m over - which came from additional appropriations under Objective 1 ) .
Although on the face of it we find this satisfactory , we agree with the rapporteur that problems have arisen ; this is demonstrated particularly in Northern Ireland with the ' new areas ' of employment and transparency in selection .
Further execution problems came with PEACE initiative and the absorption of extra funds via that route .
Nevertheless , there were delays here and in agreement between Member States on Objective 2 , which meant that execution rates drew close to 95 % for 1994-95 later .
It is appalling that the UK did not take up the Objective 4 funding opportunities between 1994 and 1996 , but I welcome the fact that this has now changed .
We are well aware of the issue of late payments and have brought the matter to the attention of the Commission .
We are convinced that this problem is one for each respective Member State to resolve .
The principle of partnership , which we consider a welcome innovation of the 1993 reforms , is adequately developed , especially in the area of monitoring committees .
The absence of the social partners is alarming and incongruous with the idea of involvement of the people of Europe .
In Kent people have complained about this in the Objective 2 area of Thanet and for INTERREG II and other programmes !
Fernández Martin report ( A4-128 / 97 )
We agree with the spirit of the report that there are problems in many of the EU 's fringe regions .
For this reason special aid is required for these areas .
But we do not agree that the solution to this problem is to allow these regions a special legal basis in the Treaty .
There are after all many other regions in the EU in similar situations .
For example , the distance between Madeira and Brussels is not much further than between Kiruna ( Northern Sweden ) and Brussels .
But the situation in Kiruna is due to the fact that Kiruna lies within the Arctic circle which obviously creates additional problems .
In order to give the EU fringe regions a real chance of survival large sections of EU policy must be changed instead .
Instead of centralising decisions , the regions must be given the opportunity to make their own decisions and create conditions appropriate to them .
Centralised decision making cannot possibly suit all the regions of the EU .
We also see the introduction of EMU as a great risk because the economic policy will make the situation in many of fringe regions of the EU worse .
In view of the above we have decided to abstain in the final vote .
I voted for the Fernández Martín report because it sets out extremely well the problems related to ultra-peripheral regions .
Reaffirming concepts and principles which have already been debated and recognised , it puts forward proposals to solve this problem which seems to me to be completely right and fair , if we are to apply the principle of economic and social cohesion to our ultra-peripheral regions .
The Fernández Martín report shows that the declaration appended to the Treaty on European Union while recognising the structural features of certain regions of the Union , an essential condition for forming the concept of ultra-peripheral regions , is insufficient as a legal base in order to adapt Community law to the specific reality of the ultra-peripheral regions .
That is why we shall be giving our unconditional support to the report in that it calls on the Intergovernmental Conference , in its revision of the Treaty , to incorporate a specific article relating to ultra-peripheral regions .
Another aspect which deserved our favourable vote , is the proposal presented in the report for a protocol to be appended to the Treaty , which , among other measures and actions , makes explicit the commitment by Member States to step up and strengthen the actions already undertaken in the framework of the POSEI programmes .
Ahern report ( A4-74 / 97 )
Although the new agreements for peaceful nuclear cooperation , signed in November 1995 between Euratom and the United States , is recognised as an important stage in trans-Atlantic cooperation on questions relating to nuclear safety , nonetheless it is true that this text includes certain ambiguities , in particular concerning the reasons why certain parts of the agreement may remain in force following the expiry of its formal duration .
Reservations also apply to the discretionary power which the American administration has granted itself on information about installations to store sensitive materials and on the list of sites , before any signature of the agreement .
The European Parliament should remain vigilant concerning the sensitive points of the agreement , in particular the generic consent which may only be suspended by the Americans in specific cases , or the non-interference by the United States in international monitoring arrangements .
The same goes for supply restrictions , in particular in enriched uranium and American installations , which the United States imposes and which are to the detriment of our industries .
Threats to nuclear safety will become greater and greater as our planet evolves economically , politically and technologically and this Euratom-USA agreement could improve the surveillance of risks yet to come . The European Parliament must , however , react quickly to each new development and be properly involved in all future Euratom agreements and other international nuclear accords .
After all , the European Parliament is the sole guarantor of transparency and democracy in this area , the nuclear issue , which is so vital for the European Union .
The agreement between Euratom and the USA brings with it a great danger of creating a global plutonium society with an increased risk of the spread of plutonium , MOX fuel , waste products and other radioactive material .
The agreement will also promote increased processing at Sellafield and The Hague which I oppose .
The agreement will lead to an increase in the number of shipments with enormous amounts of radioactive material in circulation .
From a democratic point of view , the agreement has come about in an unacceptable manner , behind closed doors and without an open and democratic discussion .
It is extremely doubtful whether an American law would be valid on Swedish ( or other