Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 18 January 2007 .
Statement by the President

Ladies and gentlemen , the ability to speak openly is not something to be taken for granted .
I am sure that you have all heard about the terrible murder , on 19 January , of the Armenian-Turkish journalist Hrant Dink , who had , over recent years , frequently drawn attention to himself with his calls for engagement with the history of the Armenians under Ottoman rule , attracting the hostility of many nationalists and being repeatedly prosecuted by the Turkish justice system on account of what he wrote and said .
I wish , on behalf of this House , to express our outrage at this crime .
We acknowledge , and are glad , that the Turkish Government as a whole has expressed similar sentiments and that its determination has already resulted in the arrest of one who has admitted perpetrating the deed .
The alleged murderer - who is only 17 years of age - is evidently motivated by , among other things , nationalist sentiments and complete contempt for the opinions of others .
According to media reports , Hrant Dink 's funeral was attended by thousands of people , and these included Mr Joost Lagendijk , representing me in his capacity as chairman of the delegation to the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee , and Mrs Hélène Flautre , the chairman of our human rights sub-committee .
The overwhelming sympathy of the Turkish people and media give cause for hope that this sad event will prompt the Turkish Government to delay no longer in introducing further reforms in the area of criminal law aimed at protecting the free expression of opinion .
I will now ask you to do as we did when the great Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya was murdered and rise from your seats to honour Hrant Dink in silent remembrance .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Appointments to committees ( proposal by the Conference of Presidents ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes
Welcome
I am pleased to welcome the Chairman of the Mexican Senate 's Committee on External Relations , who is in the official guests ' gallery .
Welcome , Senator .
We wish you a happy and fruitful stay with us .
Moratorium on the death penalty ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the moratorium on the death penalty .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what I have to talk to you about today is one of the most fundamental components of the European Union 's policy on human rights , and the many motions for a resolution tabled by the various groups in your House indicate just how live an issue this is .
Taking as its basis the guidelines for the EU 's policy in respect of third states and the death penalty as adopted in 1998 by its Council of Ministers , the European Union is campaigning worldwide for the abolition of the death penalty under all circumstances , and the declaration of moratoria has for some years been a consistent feature of that campaign - albeit not as its main objective , but as an intermediate stage on the way to the practice 's abolition once and for all .
The European Union will continue its policy of protection for human rights under German Presidency and will therefore be arguing forcefully for moratoria on the death penalty and for its permanent abolition .
That means that we will , on the one hand , continue to pursue the debate on the issue of principle - not only on bilateral contact but also in multilateral fora , the United Nations in particular - whilst also , on the other hand , continuing to be pro-active in approaching those countries that are at a turning point - that is to say , those in which either positive or negative trends are perceptible as regards the death penalty - and to bring influence to bear on them by means , that is , of very definite demarches in many urgent individual cases .
I am aware that your House has been a constant advocate for this policy and am glad to be able to say that we have already , together , achieved a great deal .
The fact that , in something like two-thirds of the world 's countries , the death penalty has been legally abolished or is in practice a dead letter is attributable to the sustained efforts of all active campaigners against the practice , and I am happy to be able to stress that active involvement in the Council Europe has played its part .
Thirty-three states have now ratified the 13th additional protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights , the effect of which is to outlaw capital punishment even in time of war .
I would also like to mention , however , that there are still too many states - numbering 66 - that continue to carry out executions , along with some regrettably retrograde trends when it comes to the observance of moratoria .
This is why it is so important that we should be unstinting in our efforts and should aim our arguments for the abolition of the death penalty at international fora and elsewhere .
The European Union submitted resolutions to this end to the Human Rights Commission from 1999 until the Commission 's dissolution in 2005 , and , over that period , it proved possible to secure stable majorities in favour of them .

Since that body was dissolved , we have had to seek new ways of moving the debate on the abolition of capital punishment forward , although it has to be said that , since there are no easy answers to this , our actions have to be very well thought-out if - and this is a priority - we are to avoid being obliged to retreat from positions already secured .
On this line there has , up to now , been firm agreement in the European Union , but we have , up to now , refrained from putting a resolution to this effect to the UN General Assembly in view of the continued high risk of it not being supported .
Instead , on 19 December , at the European Union 's initiative , and for the first time ever , a unilateral declaration against the death penalty was put to the General Assembly , and it is important to note that it was supported by 85 states from all parts of the globe .
Encouraging though this result is , it does also confirm that the chances of a resolution from the EU meeting with success in the General Assembly cannot as yet be seen as 100 % certain .
What , then , is to happen next ?
It is clear to all partners in the European Union that we want to continue to actively promote the cause of the campaign against capital punishment , at the United Nations and elsewhere , but I would , at the same time , like to make it clear that this is still a very difficult area , and so any campaign against the death penalty will only meet with success if the European Union 's actions are step by step and well thought-out .
Our watchword should continue to be that the possibility of a new EU initiative 's failure should be excluded as far as possible , for a defeat for the European Union would be a victory for the advocates of the death penalty and hence a reversal in the fight against this inhumane mode of punishment , something that we do not want and must not allow to happen .
I believe that we will also find supporters .
It is for that reason that some of the principal players among the non-governmental organisations , Amnesty International being one of them , advise against precipitate action and are reminding us that insisting again on this subject being debated in the General Assembly of the United Nations could turn out to be counter-productive for the European Union .
Agreement was therefore reached at the General Affairs Council of 22 January that we would first devise a well thought-out approach that would progressively enable us to present our concerns more effectively to the United Nations .
The ambassadors in New York and Geneva were therefore mandated to do everything possible , and without delay , to bring forward a debate at United Nations level .
It will also be necessary to draw on the experience and current estimates of the relevant NGOs as to what further steps to take in combating the death penalty at UN level .
This will then enable the Presidency of the Council to make proposals in February to the EU partners as to further action .
This I regard as a first and important step , and I hope that we will find others willing to support us in this course of action .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I also welcome this opportunity to exchange views on the issue of the death penalty and on the means to promote the universal abolition of this odious practice .
As you know , the abolition of the death penalty worldwide represents a key objective of the external human rights policy of the European Union , and I am personally committed to seeing the EU continue to play a lead role , as we have just heard , in this global effort .
Since all of us here agree on the ultimate goal of our action in this field , namely universal abolition , I wish to provide some thoughts on this process of abolition and on the means to reach our common goal .
Firstly , let us not forget that the experience of abolition on the European continent has been a slow , often tortuous and protracted process , which has been , for most of our Member States , driven by a combination of strong political leadership and a mature level of development of human rights protection , the rule of law and democratic institutions .
With some notable exceptions , including the United States of America and Japan , the global map of abolitionist countries also closely follows that of democratic pluralism .
Visionary leadership and political courage are key to abolishing the death penalty .
These efforts often need to be bolstered by a dynamic and open nationwide debate to ensure that the ultimate political decision to abolish the death penalty in a country is also a permanent one .
In the Philippines , and to some extent Kyrgyzstan , the recent abolition of the death penalty was precisely the result both of remarkable courage on the part of the political leadership and a profound nationwide debate , which witnessed wide participation from civil society actors - which has been mentioned - and institutions .
In the United States of America , there are also some encouraging trends in some states , like New Jersey and Maryland .
On the other hand , it is not excluded that a country falls back into the practice of death penalty as we , unfortunately , have witnessed in Bahrain and need to fear in Peru .
And in many other countries our appeals to abolish the death penalty have fallen on deaf ears until now .
The execution of Saddam Hussein and his henchmen has now sparked a renewed debate on the death penalty .
The horrific videos of his undignified end upset even some supporters of the death penalty .
But let us not forget that every year thousands are executed , most of whom are certainly somewhat better people than Saddam and many are even innocent .
Their deaths should outrage us even more !
While evidently the abolition of the death penalty in any country is , to quote Robert Badinter , ' a victory of humanity over itself ' , one must remain realistic as to the influence of external actors , such as the European Union , in this process , because this process remains first and foremost a domestic one .
This is not to say that the European Union will sit on the fence .
On the contrary , the EU has been and will remain at the very forefront of international efforts , notably at the United Nations , as was mentioned , to fight the death penalty .
Last December , the EU presented a Declaration on the Death Penalty at the UN General Assembly , which received the support of a record 85 states .
In line with our guidelines on the death penalty , the European Union has carried out numerous demarches on individual death penalty cases , including in countries such as the United States of America , Iran and Indonesia , and will continue to do so in the future .
The EU is also the leading source of funding for abolitionist projects run by civil society , and over the past ten years , we have spent over EUR 15 million supporting such projects around the world .
The European Parliament and civil society actors have traditionally played a crucial role in both supporting the abolitionist efforts of the European Union and in stimulating the debate on the means to enhance our policy .
It is of prime importance to listen carefully to those voices when discussing possible initiatives in various international forums , as the Council is currently doing .
This has certainly been illustrated most recently by the Italian proposal for a universal moratorium on the death penalty at the UN General Assembly .
Without prejudging the final outcome of this process of reflection , I wish to share three observations made by abolitionist actors on the moratorium which have struck me as relevant for feeding today 's discussion .
While representing a key element in the EU 's strategy towards universal abolition , leading NGOs have stressed that a moratorium is not a panacea .
They claim it is by essence fragile , reversible and must be followed by abolition in law .
They refer to the example of Kyrgyzstan , where the regularly extended moratorium on executions has not prevented the number of prisoners on death row from increasing .
I think we need moratoria that hold firm .
Secondly , some NGOs underline the fact that the moratorium is one abolitionist tool among others .
I agree that , in this context , the promotion of the Second Optional Protocol providing for abolition , the support for legal counselling for death row convicts and other efforts have to be included in our toolbox .
Hence , we should avoid the current discussion on the moratorium to eclipse the fact that abolition is a multi-faceted process .
Lastly , when bringing the issue back to the UN General Assembly , we need to be cautious as to the possible outcome .
It is paramount to secure a positive result .
We need to be alive , however , to the risk of an ambiguous or even a counterproductive outcome - and the Council Presidency has alluded to it - given international divisions on this subject .
Failing in such an effort could have negative consequences which will be difficult to repair .
Therefore , we need to assess the situation and possible scenarios thoroughly before moving .
In conclusion , I wish to underline the importance of maintaining a common EU approach towards the universal abolition of the death penalty .
The Commission will spare no efforts to work with the Presidency and Parliament to this end .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) I believe that Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 's words clearly indicate the model of Europe we want to see : a Europe of values .
If I had briefly to paint a picture illustrating what the European dream has been over the years , I would have no hesitation in stating at this sitting , Madam President , that the idea of Europe represents a permanent call for peace , understanding , harmony and solidarity ; and that , in addition to a legitimate vision of Europe , such as the Europe of financial perspectives , the Europe of the tangible , the Europe of net balance and net contributor , I believe that there is a higher vision of Europe , which is the Europe of values .
It is precisely within this context and in accordance with this vision of a Europe of values that this initiative is seeking a universal moratorium on the application of the death penalty .
It must be of a universal nature , because fundamental rights , and the right to life in particular , must not be preached for one region , one country or one continent , but they must clearly be of a universal global nature .
We must therefore celebrate the fact that , in 2005 and 2006 , a whole series of countries , such as Liberia , Mexico , the Philippines and Moldova , have decided formally to abolish the death penalty .
I believe that we must continue to work tirelessly to ensure that the seventy countries that still apply the death penalty join the 128 countries that no longer apply it .
Madam President , I would like to say that , if the European Union is to preserve that moral and ethical leadership that it has been exercising , it is essential that we fight to ensure that democracy , the rule of law and respect for fundamental rights , and in particular the right to life , prevail in all regions of the world , this year and over the years to come .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution on which we will vote tomorrow and this evening 's debate situate the European Parliament in that international movement that is appealing to the United Nations General Assembly to adopt a resolution for a universal moratorium , which is a first step towards the general abolition of the death penalty from the statute books of every country .
As has been said , we would like the Council of Ministers to actively commit itself to achieving this objective ; the Presidency is very committed , and we hope that this point remains one of the priorities of its term of office .
The same commitment has been made by the Council of Europe and the European Commission .
From what she has said , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner does not actually seem to me to be very convinced of the fact that , as a first step , we need to go through a moratorium .
I , on the other hand , would emphasise this point , and I would ask Mrs Ferrero-Waldner : Would not going through a moratorium bring abolition any closer ?
I do not think so : this could therefore be a first step , not least because the European Union , in its international relations , could bring to bear the extensive relations it enjoys in the context of the neighbourhood policy , the association agreements and the strategic partnership , and , in my opinion , Europe 's political parties could also do their best within international forums to ensure that their organisations put pressure on the participating countries .
I believe that the aim is to banish the death penalty from the statute books of every State , an act that would , among other things , help to ensure that the United Nations enjoys a reputation for being an institution that safeguards universally recognised rights .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall confine my speech to a statement and a note issued this morning by the German Presidency .
Word for word , the note reads : ' the German Presidency calls on the governments concerned to introduce a moratorium on the death penalty with immediate effect ' .
I am reading the note from the German Presidency .
This is precisely our position .
I think I am right in saying that Mr Barroso also issued a statement fully supporting the Italian initiative , the aim of which is to have a proposal for a moratorium drafted within the current UN General Assembly .
This proposal will undoubtedly win through : as far back as 1999 there was an absolute majority in favour of a resolution , which was not tabled .
Faced with the enthusiasm that we are seeing throughout the world right now for our initiative - that of the European Parliament , of the chairmen of our groups , the initiative that was pre-announced very specifically in Strasbourg by Mr Watson and other Members - I therefore do not understand - or , rather , I understand only too well - how it is possible to stall , at a time when France is taking the incredible step of highlighting the abolition of the death penalty with a change to its Constitution ; when Rwanda is also doing so ; and when , just yesterday , Kyrgyzstan did so .
Statements are coming in from everywhere - from Syria , from Lebanon - in support of our position .
I believe that , in the future , the European Parliament , like the Council of Europe before it , will lead this movement .
To conclude my speech , Madam President , I should like to point out that , 60 years ago , there was a Rome-Berlin axis .
I was 10 years old , and I remember it well .
It happens today that , with the coming-together of the German Presidency , the Italian initiative and the very recent French initiatives , a new situation is emerging : I believe that it is historically important that in a certain way Berlin and Rome are now taking a definite stand , with no hypocrisy or fear of winning , because there are too many people here who are scared of winning , not losing .
Madam President , last week , during the debate on the Benghazi case , we stated our total opposition to the death penalty under any circumstances .
It is now important to reaffirm this principle , which is enshrined in Article 2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Union has always advocated the abolition of the death penalty , and has even gone so far as to make it a condition of accession and a key principle of its foreign policy .
Moreover , guidelines were adopted in 1998 , and civil society projects are regularly funded under the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights .
This effort has been rewarded : the number of executions in the United States has gone down , and in countries like Mexico , Liberia , the Philippines and Moldova , the death penalty has been abolished .
The same is not true everywhere , however .
Some US States have extended the scope of the death penalty to other crimes apart from murder ; in Singapore , a person is still automatically sentenced to death for carrying 15 grams of heroin , and China still executes more people than any other country .
In addition , there are countries like Iraq and Afghanistan , which have reinstated the death penalty .
Peru almost did likewise in the name of combating terrorism , but fortunately this did not happen .
Against this backdrop and ahead of the developing world congress [ against the death penalty ] , the EU must be extra vigilant .
The international groundswell of opinion in favour of a universal moratorium on the death penalty should be addressed within the framework of a pro-abolition policy .
Ensuring the ratification of the second protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aimed at abolishing the death penalty should therefore be one of the Union 's priorities .
It is crucial that France , Latvia and Poland , which have yet to ratify the protocol , do so at the earliest opportunity .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , ' No one shall be condemned to the death penalty , or executed .
No one may be removed , expelled or extradited to a State where there is a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to the death penalty , torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment . '
This is what is laid down by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and this is what makes me - indeed , I believe , makes us - proud to be part of the European Union .
It is the upholding of human dignity ; it is realising that no one can rule another person 's life and that there should be no revenge , only justice .
This should be true for all courts , including military ones .
Too many countries still have the death penalty , and they include not only large countries such as China , but also the most important military and democratic power - the United States - which has still not been able to leave its Wild West culture behind .
I hope that the Congress against the Death Penalty being held in Paris , in which we , as Parliament , will take part , will be a further step on from the moratorium on the way to abolishing the death penalty and eradicating poverty around the world .
I also hope that the people who take to the streets of Paris will be a warning to all those who , even in Europe , are thinking of bringing back the death penalty .
In any event , it is these street protests that will lead to the UN 's approving the moratorium in full .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , countries where capital punishment still exists do not deserve to be part of the civilised world , no matter whether these countries are Islamic , where adulterous women are stoned , the America of Bush , India , the world 's largest democracy , or Communist China .
I will therefore not hesitate to back the plea for a worldwide moratorium .
One judicial error , the life of one innocent , is enough to write capital punishment off as barbaric .
Allow me , though , to add two observations .
Respect for life should not stop a constitutional state from giving serious offenders effective and irreducible penalties of 30 years , or lifelong imprisonment for that matter .
This condition must , and indeed can , underpin the public 's consensus against the death penalty .
This consensus will not come about unless our citizens , who are increasingly faced with the most brutal forms of crime , add their voice to the worldwide abolition of capital punishment .
Secondly , some opponents of capital punishment should display a certain degree of consistency .
For example , on a recent friendly visit to China , which is a single-party state , the French Socialist Presidential candidate sang the praises of the efficiency of the Chinese justice system .
This efficiency involves the families of the thousands of people who have been sentenced to death every year being presented with the bill for the bullets that killed the victims , but Ségolène Royal did not spare a thought for them .
After all , they do not bring in the contracts , because the commercial interests of major enterprises in China must be protected , and that is when some European opponents of capital punishment go all quiet all of a sudden .
If Europe wants to retain its credibility , it should exert pressure on countries such as China , whatever the political or commercial cost .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak on behalf of the new Italian Socialist Party .
The execution of Saddam Hussein has put the spotlight back on the debate on the death penalty , a debate that is absolutely timely , although it must not be used for tactical purposes and , above all , it must not be a subject that is raised on and off .
This is first and foremost a battle of civilisation and progress .
We do not just have here an essential guarantee for individuals , a request for the inviolability of individuals to be further strengthened ; we are also faced with an historic and universal need , a global milestone and focal point for 21st-century civilisation .
It has been said , and I agree , that , after the abolition of slavery in previous centuries and the ban on torture , the right not to be killed following a court ruling should be another common denominator , a new and inalienable dimension of humankind that makes a community of us all .
Today , this Parliament is sending out the first clear message along these lines .
Mr President , I want to support the strong calls from this Parliament today - and the campaign outside Parliament - for a worldwide moratorium on executions to be established unconditionally through a resolution of the UN General Assembly .
For many years , the EU has maintained as a main pillar of foreign affairs and human rights policy the objective of ending the use of the death penalty globally .
We have had some success , particularly as part of our neighbourhood strategy .
Today 's initiative is an ambitious attempt to raise the profile of the debate on the death penalty to a UN level and to have an impact on the 66 countries that have already been referred to that still use the death penalty .
It is important to note that working towards achieving a moratorium on the death penalty should always be linked to achieving an eventual abolition through legislation , as previous speakers have pointed out .
The pragmatic first step is a call for a moratorium , but we must always look at ways to promote abolition where possible .
Looking at what we can do here in the EU from a policy perspective , I would urge the Council to review and update the guidelines on the death penalty , which date back to 1998 , so that new elements and strategies that have developed since then can be taken into consideration .
The Third World Congress on the Death Penalty , which is to be held soon in Paris , may be a good opportunity to do just that .
To date , the EU 's proactive policy on the death penalty has produced some positive results .
For example , recently , the success of strong EU representations in Peru to recent proposals to extend the death penalty to that country , in violation of the Peruvian Constitution and the American Convention on Human Rights , needs to be acknowledged and welcomed .
The EU stance did have an impact on the Peruvian Congress in its rejection of draft legislation .
So the EU has shown that it can be a key influence on national policy towards the death penalty , and we should not be afraid to use that influence .
( ES ) Madam President , yesterday , Robert Wilson , of 24 years of age , was sentenced to death by a jury in New York .
This is the first death sentence to be handed down in that State for 50 years .
This is another tragic example of the current threat to the universal values that we are all defending here today , despite the very significant progress that has been made in countries such as Liberia , Mexico , the Philippines and Moldova .
We must , however , continue to fight to ensure that others , such as China , with around two thousand official executions per year - eight thousand , according to unofficial data - join the global moratorium and suspend their executions .
We must support Iranian civil society , which is rising up against the death penalty .
Iran has one of the highest numbers of executions : 177 in 2006 .
Furthermore , it has broken the moratorium on stonings and it currently has six women sentenced to death by stoning .
Above all , we appeal to the United States , a country whose decisions have an immense impact on global politics , to support the Italian initiative to establish a universal moratorium on the death penalty which will be approved - with this Parliament 's support , I hope - in the United Nations General Assembly .
As other speakers have said here today , the moratorium is a first essential step towards abolition .
This is probably one of the most important challenges facing the human race at the beginning of this century .
Madam President , worldwide , 20 000 people are on death row waiting to be killed by their own governments .
Sadly , over 3000 of these are in the United States .
I do not single the US out because it is the worst - that is China , with 80 % of executions - but because we have hope of the Americans .
The great prize would be for a change of mind in the United States and the signs are there .
The number of executions in the states of the US has dropped dramatically since 1999 : there were 277 in that year , and 128 in 2005 .
Twelve states have now abolished the death penalty , not including Texas , which clocks up an unimpressive one-third of the 1100 executions in the US in the last 30 years .
I think the Commission and the Presidency need to be more proactive and less hesitant in seeking a moratorium and abolition worldwide through a UN General Assembly resolution .
As in some other areas of human rights policy , like extraordinary rendition and war-on-terror abuses , the EU is not always as effective in putting its principles into practice as Parliament would wish .
( EL ) Madam President , as we speak , all the Member States of the Union have ratified the sixth protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights concerning the abolition of the death penalty .
We also nourish the hope that it will be abolished both by law and in practice in all the countries of the world - be it in times of peace or in times of war - with the result that there will be an improvement in respect for human rights and human dignity will be reinforced , as the Council and the Commission emphasised today .
Allow me , however , to ask you if you were concerned about the human rights and dignity of the dictator Saddam Hussein and his fellow detainees , who became food for the entire world 's voyeurs .
Is this the role of the European Union as a global stability factor ?
What can you say about the statements by the British foreign secretary , Mrs Becket , who emphasised that Hussein simply got what he deserved and that justice was done ?
What are European citizens supposed to believe when they read the condemnatory statements by the Council , on the one hand , and hear the derisory comments by the ministers in it , on the other ?
We need to get our act together , because we are ultimately just fooling ourselves .
Madam President , I must say that the arrogance of this EU knows no bounds .
Not satisfied with dictating to Member States that they must not avail of the ultimate deterrent - the death penalty - it now wishes to dictate to the rest of the world .
Awful as the fate of the Bulgarian nurses in Libya is , and while this House should be vigorous in protesting against their situation , it does not justify us demanding a global ban on the death penalty .
Wrongful imprisonment is intolerable , but it does not lead rational people to oppose all imprisonment .
No , I say that if there is a fair , transparent , human rights compliant judicial system , with a reliable appeal process , then a sovereign nation state is perfectly entitled to deploy the death penalty for capital crimes , if that is the democratically expressed wish of its people .
They , not we , have the right to choose what is right for them .
( IT ) Madam President , I am delighted to take the floor because , among other things , I come from Tuscany where , for the first time in history , on 30 November 1786 , capital punishment was abolished .
I am also moved to point out that , in 1987 , I , together with Amnesty International and the Italian Movement for Life , succeeded in having the death penalty of Paula Cooper , a 16-year-old black girl , commuted in the United States .
She later came to thank me .
I am also pleased to point out that , as an Italian Member , I proposed and achieved the legal abolition of the death penalty in the military code of war , which is the reason for my in-depth thoughts on the matter .
I take an optimistic view of human history which , in spite of everything , is a struggle for goodness , a struggle that is spurred on by an ever more obvious and decisive value : the dignity of each and every human being .
So great is this dignity that it cannot be graded , and thus it determines the equal status of everybody , no matter what kind of life they lead .
Dignity is also indestructible : not even the hands of a criminal can wipe away the traces of dignity from the face of the very man who has committed the crime .
No one can take away a person 's life and dignity , not even individual States .
That is the real reason why the death penalty must be abolished .
All the other practical reasons , of which I am only too aware , may meet with objections , but not this one .
A Europe that seeks to base its identity not only on competition and the market , but also on dignity and human rights , cannot keep quiet .
Right now , I do not want to talk about inconsistencies .
The time will come when human dignity and the associated right to life extend their persuasive powers to other areas of human life where they are now sadly being overshadowed , even within our Union : the most symbolic areas of poverty and human alienation , which are to be born and to die .
( ES ) Madam President , rejecting the death penalty is not a question of moral superiority , nor of lecturing anybody , nor of collective pomposity on the part of Europe .
It is consistent with a basic belief in human dignity , many years ' experience of the utter pointlessness of capital punishment and fear of the serious and perfectly well-documented risk of its being applied unjustly , even if in only one specific case ( and there have been many of them , regrettably ) .
Europe must apply itself to what is possible , without forgetting the ultimate objective .
What is possible is to demand a moratorium courageously , throughout the world , beginning with our closest partners , without forgetting - I would insist - the ultimate objective , which would be the global abolition of the death penalty .
We must protest against the death penalty , but that must include the death penalty on Saddam Hussein as well as the death penalty on the person sentenced in the United States , following a trial with practically no defence , for a crime he committed when he was under-age .
Those death sentences , Commissioner , must be condemned just as vigorously as the death sentence on Saddam Hussein ; we must not have double standards , because if what we are advocating is to fight the death penalty , those more or less anonymous prisoners who have had practically no right to defence deserve our support even more than a criminal such as Saddam Hussein .
( PL ) Madam President , the political , religious and legal debate on whether or not to apply the death penalty has been under way for decades and will continue into the future .
The famous writer Albert Camus spoke out against it in his time , and Robert Badinter , a former French Justice Minister , led a legal battle at European level for many years .
As a rule , strong ethical arguments are adduced in heated debates of this nature , and references are made to the inalienable right to life .
Horrifying statistics about the number of sentences carried out in countries such as China or India are also quoted .
The largest democracy in the world , the United States , is placed in the dock .
Catholics opposed to the death penalty and those in favour of it contrive to base entirely contradictory arguments on the same sources , namely the Gospels , the Catechism and Papal encyclicals .
It is very difficult to justify to the families and loved ones of people , often children , who have been cruelly murdered that the death penalty should not be applied to those responsible for the crimes .
At such times , people 's emotions incline them to desire a very different outcome .
I hail from a country that suffered under the iron rule of Hitler 's totalitarian Nazi regime and later under Soviet Communism .
I would like to point out that use of the death penalty is a key feature of each and every dictatorship .
When I look back at events in my country , Poland , during the period to which I previously referred , I see how whole legions of Poland 's finest sons and daughters were murdered , following sentences handed down by Communist kangaroo courts .
Having considered both sides of the argument concerning the death penalty , I am bound to say that its abolition is essential in order to curb the madness of fanatics prepared to use the legal system to eliminate their opponents .
The most the fellow citizens of these murdered heroes can do years later , once freedom has been restored , is to put up monuments in their honour .
This is what I have learnt from the history of my parents ' and grandparents ' generations and also of my own .
Only one of the 1 500 death sentences carried out in Poland during the Stalinist period involved a common criminal .
The price of restricting the actions of dictators of various political hues may well be that , instead of being guillotined , offenders who deserve this ultimate punishment will have to spend the rest of their lives in prison , without the opportunity of parole .
If that is the case , I believe it is a price worth paying , however painful it may be to do so .
( LT ) - ' The death penalty is the most offensive method of killing , because it is done with the approval of the community . '
These words of George Bernard Shaw , pronounced almost a century ago , are being endorsed by an ever-increasing number of people and a majority of countries .
Unfortunately , the natural human right to life is still ignored by 68 countries .
The death penalty is most often implemented not only in Asia , but also in the United States .
The execution of Saddam Hussein , I would say , has become a display of impotence .
We are now presented with an exceptional opportunity to work hand in hand with the Italian Government to seek abolition of the death penalty in every country of the world .
Opposition to the death penalty is one of the values that unites EU countries ; therefore , the Union 's voice carries weight .
The United Nations General Assembly will , I hope , support the proposed moratorium on the implementation of the death penalty , and its abolition should be the ultimate goal .
At the same time , it is essential to condemn the statements of some official representatives of the new EU countries about the possibility of legitimation of the death penalty .
World public opinion needs to be channelled in the European direction .

( PL ) Madam President , Article 1 of Additional Protocol No VI to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms reads : ' The death penalty shall be abolished .
No one shall be condemned to such a penalty or executed ' .
This protocol was laid down back in 1983 , and underpins the thinking and actions of the Member States of the Union .
It is also the stance adopted by most Members of the Council of Europe .
Essentially , these are European standards for the protection of human rights .
The question as to whether the abolition of the death penalty is only relevant to Europe is a rhetorical one . Clearly , the answer is no .
Every individual has but one life and that life deserves to be protected .
We must therefore support a UN moratorium on the death penalty .
We are aware that the death penalty is rooted in a culture of revenge and retribution from which mankind needs to break free .
It is very easy to delete the death penalty from criminal codes .
All that is required is the legislators ' will to do so .
It will be much more difficult for us to detach ourselves from it at an emotional level , to recognise it as an unethical penalty and banish it forever from human consciousness .
However , we must be aware that if we fail to do so , we shall have to go on asking ourselves whether , in the 21st century , man can continue to kill his fellow man in the name of the law .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union has consistently advocated a ban on the application of the death penalty since 1998 .
In October 2003 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the European institutions and Member States of the Union to put pressure on the UN General Assembly to declare a moratorium on the implementation of the death penalty .
The European institutions and Member States of the Union must ensure that the issue of the death penalty is dealt with again at the current UN General Assembly .
Acting on behalf of the European Union , the Member States must aim at tabling a draft resolution on a general moratorium on the implementation of the death penalty , with a view to its abolition .
They should garner maximum support for this resolution amongst the Member States of the UN .
The European institutions and Member States of the Union should do all in their power to secure , as soon as possible , a favourable outcome in a vote at the current UN General Assembly .
( EL ) Madam President , the fact that broad agreement between the political party has prevailed in today 's debate confirms that the European Parliament can act as the guarantor of European democratic civilisation and for the protection of human rights , human dignity and the right to life .
It has been proven that the death penalty not only does not prevent crime , but also feeds hatred and violence .
The civilised world cannot respond to the barbarity of a criminal act with the barbarity of death .
We welcome the initiative by Mr Prodi 's Italian Government and the backing being given to it by the president of the Socialist International , Georgos Papandreou .
All the Member States of the European Union should certainly ratify the voluntary UN protocol , the 13th protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights . I would say , however , that the Member States should incorporate a provision abolishing the death penalty in their internal constitutional order .
To close , I should like to say that we should not overlook the fact that today in European society there is a large percentage of citizens who are still in favour of the death penalty and , as such , we must also work in this direction , together with the European Commission , with programmes working through democratic consultation to convince European society .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , what has become apparent from this debate is how great a consensus exists as regards what is one of the most fundamental objectives of the European Union 's policy on human rights .
Frequent reference was made in it to the Italian initiative , about which there must be no misunderstanding .
When talking about this initiative , we are not talking about the ' whether ' of it , or about what it is intended to achieve , but rather about the ' how ' , ' where ' , and , of course , the ' when ' of it , in other words about the procedure rather than the substance .
You , Commissioner , made that very clear earlier on .
At the General Assembly on 19 December last year , a unilateral declaration was read out , and 85 states endorsed it ; encouraging though that is , we must also , on the other hand , consider and bear in mind the question of whether our objective is capable of being achieved at all in view of the fact that , to date , this declaration has gained the support of only 21 out of 47 members of the new Human Rights Council in Geneva .
To put it bluntly , we do not yet have a majority for it .
The situation in the United Nations ' third committee is similar .
As I said in my statement earlier , there are now various fronts on which we have to take the initiative .
The General Affairs and Foreign Relations Council , too , has come up with a strategy for achieving the goal to which all of you , in your interventions , have referred , and , although we do not at present know when we will be able to implement it , I can assure you that we will support you in your efforts ; that is something on which we , the Commission and the Presidency are agreed , for we too are endeavouring to do away with capital punishment for ever .
Madam President , I endorse what the President-in-Office Council has just said .
I think there is widespread consensus in this House and between all the EU institutions on the substance of today 's debate and where we want to go , but sometimes we have to see what the next tactical step is .
I want to clarify that the Commission is certainly favourable to the introduction of a moratorium as an important intermediate step towards the complete abolition of the death penalty .
We of course support the Italian initiative and Parliament 's motion for a resolution , but we have to see - and this is at stake - the tactical nature .
How can we ensure that the planned UN General Assembly initiative will be successful ?
We need to ensure very good preparation .
We have to reach out to all the UN members , and we need pertinent timing for the launch of the initiative of such a worldwide moratorium .
We are also quite active not only at UN level , but also at bilateral level ; we try to do that be it in China or Peru .
I have , for instance , written to the Peruvian President to express our deep concerns , and hopefully there is still a chance to block it .
I would also like to thank Parliament , because it also has possibilities .
It has used them in the past , and maybe it can use them even more by talking to the different delegations .
Very often , as I said before , it is a domestic issue , and the more Parliament can talk to parliaments , the better we can influence this .
I have received six motions for a resolution in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 p.m.
1 .
Appointments to parliamentary committees ( vote ) : see Minutes
Voting time
Climate change ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the debate on climate change .
Mr President , I will try again .
First of all , I should like to congratulate Commissioner Dimas and the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Gabriel , warmly on their proposals and their inspirational speeches .
It is particularly thanks to the Al Gore campaign and Sir Nicholas Stern 's report that climate change has been in the spotlight so much in recent months .
This means that now is a good time to make some solid headway .
Europe must indeed take the lead in the climate debate and in the measures to be taken .
What matters now is for the Commission 's recent proposals to be taken up not only by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , but also by the Heads of Government of the Member States .
The climate problem is so extensive that it will be necessary to keep it on the agenda for decades to come .
Since climate change , and hence global warming , cannot simply be slowed down , only rigorous steps will have an adequate effect .
These will involve a shift towards carbon-free and low-carbon fuels as a necessary measure .
In specific terms , this means that we need to say goodbye to fossil fuels .
The European Parliament has already indicated that by 2020 , Europe should have achieved a 30 % reduction in CO2 .
The Commission , however , has proposed a 20 % reduction in order to allow room for negotiations in a bid to achieve global agreement , which would then involve a 30 % reduction in emissions in Europe .
I should like Commissioner Dimas to explain to us why he thinks this tactic will work .
Mr President , I should like to ask you for a little more time as I was unable to speak at my normal speed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a fairly common desire in this House , and certainly among the public , to combat climate change .
However , allow me to make a remark , which will be useful in highlighting the intellectual honesty that we owe those citizens who are less acquainted with this subject : namely , when we talk about combating climate change , it is worth specifying that we are referring only to the influence that man and his activities have on the environment , an influence that , as has been scientifically proven , is far less significant than that of geophysical and astronomical determinants .
True , it is useful to have an energy policy that not only is as environmentally friendly as possible but also guarantees the energy supply that is crucial to our development , something that , in Europe , with all our political independence from non-European countries , has so far been a distant prospect .
I obviously agree on the emissions reduction targets , just as I do on the efforts to develop renewable energy sources .
All of that is , of course , right , and the idea of encouraging people to use less-polluting vehicles seems to be a good one .
Is it not the case , though , that the situation will end up as it has in Italy , where the 2007 budget law favours those who are in a position to buy new vehicles and actually condemns precisely those who are least well-off , who cannot afford to change their vehicles , to a lack of mobility and heavy costs ?
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , while I am not being Sinophobic - please believe me when I say that - I would ask once again : is there any sense in all of our unilateral efforts regarding sustainability when , in one year , China and the Asian economic tigers emit as much climate-changing gas into the atmosphere as is produced in ten years by EU countries ?

Mr President , I listened very carefully to what Minister Gabriel said , because the headlines in the Irish papers today state : ' Germany fights EU limits on car emissions ' .
The papers go on to state that ' German Chancellor Angela Merkel pledged to fight " with full vigour ” the plans to introduce across-the-board limits on CO2 emissions from cars ... ' .
My two minutes does not allow me to continue .
You have a big PR exercise , Minister , if what you say is accurate rather than that which the German President of the Council says .
Therefore , please sort out the confusion that exists there at the moment , particularly as Chancellor Merkel 's address at the start of the German Presidency was excellent and most encouraging in this particular area , and she has guaranteed that this issue will take high priority on the summit agenda in March .
We need greater political ownership of this debate .
The real problem is - and I say this through the Chair to our Commissioner as well as to the Minister - that we have left it to our officials and our diplomats .
Yes , Nairobi was ' a step forward ' in preparing the ground .
That is what you said .
But it was a baby 's step forward , a tortuous step forward : hardly an improvement on what had been agreed in Montreal .
It makes no sense for thousands of us from hundreds of countries to meet once a year , use up carbon and fly to all sorts of locations to sit and argue mainly about what should be on the agenda , then leave again after up to two weeks , only to come back 12 months later to pick up the argument about the agenda that we had left 12 months earlier !
If what we say and all the reports from economists , NGOs , environmentalists and eminent scientists are right - and they are right , 99 % of the community agree they right - then we must take the highest political ownership of the resolution of the problem .
That is at summit level : not only at summit meetings , but also at the COPs and the MOPs and in Nairobi and wherever else we meet .
We must drive it upstairs to prime-ministerial and head-of-state level throughout the 12 months of the year , and not just the annual meeting at the United Nations Convention on Climate Change or the Kyoto MOP meeting .
We need political ownership at the highest level .
Drive the agenda , please .

( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Gabriel , I do hope we can agree on the proposal to reduce the CO2 emission of cars to 120 mg and , moreover , on a still greater reduction in the second generation of fuels .
Measures are desperately needed , for very many people have grave concerns about climate change .
Tomorrow , the United Nations will be announcing that the Earth is warming up at a rate quicker than we had previously imagined .
Europe must show leadership in solving the problem .
That is why it is important that we really stand firm with regard to this 30 % and that we do not cave in to accept 20 % if the rest of the world does not join in .
The fact that we rely on other countries in that manner is very disappointing , although I can see why : first of all , we have a moral duty towards the rest of the world .
Since we have caused climate change , we must also resolve it .
Secondly , according to the Stern report , it is far cheaper to adopt solid climate policy than to pay for subsequent costs for adjusting to global warming .
Climate policy offers ample opportunity for innovation and employment .
Mr President , the Presidency has got off to a very good start on this issue .
I do not doubt the commitment of the Minister in any way at all , and was very pleased to hear the strong words from the Chancellor just the other week .
But of course the rhetoric has got to be matched by the reality , and Germany has a problem .
It has the problem of the national allocation plan , first of all .
I realise there is a problem as regards a difference in interpretation between the Presidency and the Commission , but one way or another it does not help with you in the hot seat not having a national allocation plan approved .
So Minister , please get it sorted .
Then of course there is the issue today of the German car industry and the rhetoric in the various papers .
I have just come from and will return to chairing a hearing on reducing CO2 emissions from motor vehicles .
The clear message from many of the experts speaking is that 120 grammes per kilometre is perfectly realisable within the five-year timescale that we are talking about at a cost of a thousand euros : that is the estimate that many of those experts are putting on it .
And that is a thousand euros with a quick return for car-owners because of fuel economy and savings at the petrol pump .
I ask you , how often in environment debates have we heard industry coming along and saying ' this is impossible , this is the end of our industry if you do this , European Union ; this is going to cost an extravagant amount , European Parliament ' ?
And so often we introduce the legislation and somehow the problems are dissipated , industry copes with it and we become more competitive and our position across the world is strengthened .
I suspect the same thing is happening once again .
Industry exaggerates , it always does .
We talk about dealing with this issue of climate change .
If we are looking at the real price of a car , which has come down so significantly over the past 20 or 30 years , and we are saying that to reduce emissions by 25 % would cost an extra thousand euros , still leaving the real price of a car at less than it was thirty years ago , can we not bear that price ?
How can we look at our children and say that we were not prepared to pay just a little bit more to make such a big difference ?
( Applause )

( DE ) Mr President , as I see it , one reason why we should extend this debate on cars is that it highlights the gulf between words and actions .
Mr Gabriel 's proposal for combining the admixture of biofuels and the requirement for the efficiency of motor vehicles obscures the issue , for , even if I sell a car that can run on biofuels , I cannot be certain that the customer will use them in it later on , and so it is the very opposite of clear from the system you propose as to how the output is to be measured , and that gives rise to enormous problems .

Although you talk in terms of a CO2 output of 120 grams per kilometre , what you actually want is the same as the German car manufacturers , namely 130 or 140 grams .
That would be a fatal move not only for Europe but also for the world generally , for , as the target of between 60 and 100 grams must be achieved by 2020 at the latest , the figure of 120 grams can represent only an intermediate stage .

I also want to thank you for your clarifications ; I hope that Mrs Merkel and Mr Glos take the same view , for it has not been clear from the press over the last few days that they do .
I may well not be a German , but , for me , Germany has always been one of the great leaders , for the German public give the highest priority to the protection of the environment and to dealing with climate change , and for a German Presidency , having set itself to do great things on the climate change front , to fall over the first time the economy comes under even minimal pressure is an appalling disgrace .
( EL ) Mr President , scientists have been sounding the alarm for years .
We are talking not about a future danger but about a present threat .
That is why ambitious statements do not suffice .
Specific measures are needed with tangible and quantifiable results .
The example of the car is a typical example .
As soon as general statements move towards specific measures , the lobbies react .
My opinion is that the lives of all of us and of our children weigh and count more than the automobile industry .
We welcome specific measures such as a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions , support for renewable sources of energy , clean fuels and new , cleaner technologies .
The European Parliament is calling on the Commission and the Council to set more ambitions targets and , more importantly , to attain them .
We need to change a great deal about our living and consumption habits . The European Union must take the vanguard in creating a big global alliance .
The Kyoto Protocol , which some still refuse to adopt , no longer suffices .
Mr President , this issue is surrounded by half-truths and misleading statements which cast doubt over the integrity of the issue and raise more questions than answers .
For instance , why , outside this House at any rate , is there continual reference to carbon emissions ?
Carbon is a black solid ; it is soot or graphite or diamonds .
They should be talking about carbon dioxide which is , by the way , not a pollutant but a natural constituent of the atmosphere .
Why did the director of a UK environment agency tell me they could not link global warming to climate change ?
If global warming is due to CO2 and the greenhouse effect , as opposed to a variation in solar activity , why was the same director unable to tell me if the greenhouse affect rises in proportion to the extra amount of CO2 or rises greatly for the same amount of CO2 - an exponential - or a lessening increase , meaning a tapering-off graph and a static effect at some time .
Why does the Stern Report show a hockey stick graph for global warming - a steady rise over 2000 years - when in fact it was warmer in the 14th and 15th centuries than it is now ?
Why does Friends of the Earth say that incineration of waste to generate electricity produces more CO2 than conventional gas-fired generators when effectively much of the waste is bio-fuel and therefore carbon-neutral ?
They ignore the fact that landfill waste will produce methane , which is 12 times more potent a greenhouse gas than CO2 .
Finally , why does the President of the Commission drive a car which produces 1.6 times more CO2 per kilometre than the average sort of car I drive ?
( CS ) Mr President , a number of experts have claimed that , apart from speculation based on short-term warnings , there is no incontrovertible scientific evidence that greenhouse gases from industrial growth lie at the root of climate change .
Climate change takes millions of years and the climate will of course go on changing .
I therefore do not share the view that people can change the history of the planet with their daily routine .
That view is , to my mind , arrogantly anthropocentric .
Caring for the planet has little to do with emissions trading , bringing in stricter standards , enacting new legislation or investing massively in cutting emissions from existing sources of energy .
A far more sensible course of action would be to invest in developing new sources of energy and nuclear energy .
I strongly believe that today 's narrow-minded , anti-nuclear approach to global warming will , under the guise of combating greenhouse gases , lead us down a blind alley where both our incomes and our freedoms will be curtailed .
Such an approach certainly does not amount to caring for the planet in the interests of our children .



( FR ) Mr President , we have a four-fold challenge in front of us : firstly , there is climate change itself and the public desire to tackle it ; secondly , international involvement in the fight against climate change ; thirdly , the innovation required for a change in production methods and the use of energy ; and lastly , our countries ' adaptation to the inevitable effects of climate change .
It is tempting to ask : what is Europe actually waiting for before properly opening up the debate on nuclear power , by which I mean serious , dispassionate debate ?
I would call on you to hold this debate without any further delay .
The option of renewable energy is admittedly a very appealing one , but we have no choice but to look at these things realistically .
Let us take two examples : wind energy and biofuels .
The former accounts for 0.05 % of the world 's energy consumption .
How fast would we have to develop wind energy in order to achieve 2 % annual growth in global consumption of such energy over a period of 30 years ?
It is impossible even to contemplate .
Biofuels , on the other hand , are an interesting , media-friendly way of dealing with a problem of agricultural policy , but the possibilities offered by biofuels are limited by available agricultural space .
Mr Dimas , you will have to convince your fellow Commissioner , Mr Verheugen , not to hinder our ambitions .
Mr Gabriel , there are some battles in which we will have to support certain industries that , faced with this global threat , are leading rearguard actions .
I trust that German car makers will be able to come up with the kind of positive responses that are sorely needed .
What , then , are we to say to third countries ?
Do we tell China , for example , that it has no right to develop its economy ?
Not to mention the hypocrisy of Europe patting itself on the back about emissions trading .
To conclude , those who indulge in alarmism will only end up destabilising public opinion .
We must raise awareness and inform the public , but making people afraid serves no purpose .
It is not constructive .
We should try to propose workable solutions .
This requires everyone to make an effort , and time is our only priority .
( FI ) Mr President , for many people climate change has only become a reality now that its cost has been estimated .
According to one estimate , the cost of doing nothing could be as much as 20 % of GNP globally .
If we take action now , however , and halt climate change at two degrees , the cost will be a fraction of that .
Moreover , investment in the low-emission economy will create a global market for energy-efficient technologies which is forecast to grow to a value of up to EUR 27 billion by 2020 .
For Europe to be part of this technological development , the Union needs to create a viable domestic market for renewable , low-emission forms of energy .
We have to remember that nuclear energy cannot be the answer to this problem , especially if we want Europe to be a self-sufficient energy economy .
( SV ) Mr President , I shall not repeat what has already been said , but I just want to mention one thing .
The European Parliament must embark on a direct dialogue with the newly elected American Congress .
Instead of just following the American debate in the media , it is our responsibility to take action .
The political balance in Congress has changed , and right now the door may be open for the cooperation that must take place if change is to take place .
Congress has now even set up a special committee on climate change .
Strength lies in the EU and the United States acting together .
Only together can we influence countries such as China and India so that they too might be involved in global emissions trading .
They must not firstly be allowed to pollute their own environment and ours at will just because they are developing countries , and only once they have achieved high living standards assume responsibility for the global environment .
I propose that the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety make immediate contact with the corresponding committee in the American Congress .
A joint meeting between the committees concerned should be organised as early as this spring .
The objective of this dialogue must be to get the United States and other countries not included in emissions trading to get involved in it .
As representatives of the peoples of Europe , we must dare to take the bull by the horns .
That is why we were elected .
Mr President , there has been a lot of rhetoric here this afternoon , particularly from the Council , but what is missing is a sense of urgency and a commitment to ambitious action .
It is clear the EU has to do a lot more and to show real leadership .
However , in my one minute I want to ask you , Commissioner Dimas , to do something very specific .
There has been a lot of discussion about what is wrong today but not enough about what we need to be doing - some of the answers .
I want to raise the issue of personal carbon allowances .
It is a scheme that is growing in interest in many Member States whereby emission rights are allocated to all individuals on an equal per capita basis and then surrendered , for example when they are purchasing fossil fuels or electricity for personal use and , of course , over time those emission rights decline .
It is complementary to the emissions trading scheme , but in many ways it is more equitable than much greater taxation , it has the advantage of being subject to an overall and declining cap and , crucially , it engages people on a personal level .
It affects individual choices that they make , because one of the strongest disincentives to individual action is the sense that your neighbour is not doing what you are doing .
Therefore , I would ask your departments to investigate what they can do to encourage the take-up of such schemes across the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the more than 40 deaths caused by the Kyrill storm are a sad portent of what is in store for us in the near future .
Global warming and the associated climate change have not been dreamt up by environmental groups : during the 20th century , the average temperature increased by more than half a degree , and we must look for a cause in the emission of greenhouse gases produced by human activities .
The European Union is responsible for around 14 % of these emissions , the highest per capita quota in the world .
That is why the fight against climate change , which requires the help of all countries , needs none other than the most advanced countries to lead the way .
The EU must therefore continue to work in the spirit of the Kyoto Protocol , which has led us to bank on technological innovation .
In recent years , however , some backwards steps have been taken , particularly in relation to energy , and the recent Commission proposals have not lived up to expectations .
Even though you yourself , Mr Dimas , asked for emissions to be cut by 30 % compared with 1990 levels , a poor compromise was reached to reduce them by 20 % , and there is no strategy in the transport sector , on alternative energy sources or on technologies for green hydrogen .
To say nothing of the ambiguity where nuclear energy is concerned ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Mr President , industry is bound to notice that drastic measures will be taken .
Emission rights will need to be reduced annually and the allocation of emission rights free of charge will need to stop .
Moreover , since more and more sectors will need to fall within the compulsory system of emission trading , it is to be welcomed that the Commission wishes to include the aviation industry in it .
Both producers and consumers must take up their responsibility where the climate is concerned .
So , then , must all of us .
By way of a final remark , we should not attempt to address the climate problem unilaterally , which would mean that measures would lead to other environmental damage .
The production and incineration of biofuels must be environmentally friendly , and that is where the problem was with palm oil .
Environmental clangers of this kind must be prevented in future .
( DE ) Commissioner , Mr Gabriel , I too have only a minute in which to get through to your mind .
The only thing one can say , having heard you , is that the lion has a mighty roar .
We know that President Bush holds the reins of power , and the way you , Minister , roar is reminiscent of the way one of your predecessors - Klaus Töpfer - roared in 1992 , when we were in much the same situation .
It almost seems as if an historic window of opportunity opened up for us somewhere between the fall of the Wall and globalisation , but , as nothing happened that serves as an example of what not to do .
I do , however , want to encourage you to stick with this issue , to sidestep as elegantly as possible the resistance with which you meet on the part of the German motor industry , and to really concentrate on the matter in hand .
You will , of course , have to be aware that this will not happen without some sacrifices .
If you succeed in getting the idea across to the rich Member States that doing without is sexy , your political destiny could be that of the successor to the environment minister whom I have named - and for you , and perhaps for the world , that would be no bad thing .

Mr President , we have two tasks to fulfil : one is to reduce CO2 emissions and the other is to ensure that we can meet the changes that follow climate change .
They both require that we have the resources for investment , that we have the opportunities for growth and the opportunities to take care of the environment .
Limits and goals are important in this , but it is just as important to take action that is compatible with economic growth and resources for investments in order to safeguard what we must do .
Sometimes we can look at the more practical and realistic actions .
I shall mention only two .
Long-truck combinations are one of the more substantial ways of reducing CO2 emissions regarding road transport .
Commissioner , President-in-Office : you can do something about that as a practical action that will have a substantial result .
The second task concerns energy policy .
Phasing out nuclear power in the way and at a pace that is being planned in today 's Europe is a secure way of getting increased CO2 emissions .
If we succeed in launching more renewable energy sources , then the phasing-out of nuclear power will reduce the gains and maybe we will get into minus with increased CO2 emissions .
I should like the German Presidency to take the lead in a new policy .
You should do that not in order to solve the greenhouse effect , as some say , but in order not to make things worse .
We must at least keep the same share of energy coming from nuclear power that we have today in order not to increase CO2 emissions .
We need high-tech , not low-tech ; we need more trade , not less trade ; we need more investments , not less investments and we need more growth , not less growth .
The challenge is to combine those things , and I look forward to your reply on my two certain tasks , however politically uncomfortable it might be for you .
( PT ) As Kofi Annan said in Nairobi , climate change is not science fiction .
It is a global problem requiring a global response from both governments and citizens .
Governments must , as a matter of urgency , take effective measures , but the citizens , too , must change their routines and their lifestyles , for example , by not using their cars and by walking more , which is healthy and protects the environment .
Fighting climate change is a priority for the German and Portuguese Presidencies . I hope that , together , they can provide a major boost to this fight and that the EU will take the opportunity , at the next UN conference to be held in Bali during the Portuguese Presidency , to lead negotiations towards a whole new approach to the climate issue .
Thank you for your excellent address , Mr Gabriel .
( FR ) Mr President , thinking ahead to 2030-2050 , will fossil fuels have run out ?
Will the ITER project have kept its promise on fusion ?
Given the huge growth of China and India , will energy resources be sufficient ?
What will the effects of growth be on the climate ?
We do not necessarily have all the answers to these questions , but what is clear is that we must act within the framework of a European and world strategy , because energy is a fundamental need and the phenomenon of global warming must be stopped .
I welcome the ambitious objectives consisting of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % by 2020 , because the EU must send out a strong message that behaviour and mentalities must be changed so that innovative solutions with global impact might be found .
I also welcome the measures proposed by the Commission , but they must be accompanied by political action .
Accordingly , more must be done to force the Member States to take more proactive measures , for example in connection with the use of biofuels and renewable energies , and to take taxation measures to foster energy saving and to promote the energy efficiency of buildings .
Moreover , without wishing to be alarmist , a European communication campaign should be launched , with the support of the media , in order to present the citizens of Europe with simple things that anyone can do to help protect the climate .
The future we desire will come about through fundamental technological development , as well as through actions that we can all carry out , starting today .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the day after tomorrow the UN will publish a scientific report that says that the earth is most likely to warm up by three degrees this century .
If that happens it will mean that Greenland 's ice sheet will inevitably melt and sea levels will rise by at least seven metres .
It will mean that the map of Europe will be redrawn .
This has to be prevented .
We have to take very urgent practical action to stop the earth from warming up any more than two degrees , which is the EU target .
We need to move from rhetoric to practical deeds , however .
In this context , it is hugely disappointing to see that today the European Commission has once again put off the issue of mandatory limits for carbon dioxide emissions .
We need to understand that the most important factor of all is measures to improve energy and fuel efficiency .
That also applies to transport .
We cannot get round this by substituting biofuel for improved energy efficiency .
If we try and do this , it will only mean that the environmentalists will turn against biofuel .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I would like firstly to thank the Commission and the Council for coming here to debate this issue and the strategy to be pursued in the future .
We all agree with the principle of reducing polluting emissions that underlies the proposals by the Commission and the Member States .
We agree with the diagnosis , though we have certain differences in terms of the remedies to be applied and each person 's responsibilities .
I am delighted to have heard something here that I believe to be essential . That is that there must be an international agreement on emissions reduction that includes everybody .
Unless we achieve that , it will be difficult to find a solution if objectives are set unilaterally .
Amongst other things , because , on its own , the European Union can neither reduce world emissions nor set objectives for maintaining temperatures at global level .
I truly believe that our main objective must be to reach a global agreement through our efforts , of course , and also with the efforts of our industries .
Like you , Commissioner , I would personally prefer a more flexible objective , to which everybody is committed , to an objective of a 30 % reduction with no idea of who will sign up to it .
In addition to that , we must take a series of principles into account .
Firstly , the countries that have historically polluted more must reduce their emissions more , and reasonable emissions limits for the future should be set for the emerging economies .
Secondly , all sectors will have to face their responsibilities in accordance with their emissions , because it makes no sense to talk about electricity but not to talk about transport .
Thirdly , we must also bear in mind the benefits for carbon retention of agriculture and forests , which are natural regulators of the environment .
Finally , I would like to point to the importance of promoting renewable energy sources and clean forms of transport and say that it is urgent that we discuss seriously the issue of nuclear energy once and for all .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner and the Minister for their personal commitment to this crucial issue and remind the House that these are the good guys !
There are plenty of people in the Commission and in the Council who are going to be pushing against these in terms of where we are at .
The proposals that have come forward from the Commission are indeed ambitious .
However , they are not ambitious enough and they do not follow through the science .
The science suggests that if we are to follow through what the ministers have already decided - that is not to go above two degrees - then you have to have a 30 % cut in carbon emissions .
If you follow Stern , you have to take the pain now to save later .
What we want to see is world leadership .
A 20 % cut is not world leadership .
The ministers have to follow through .
If they sign up to this , they have to follow through .
It is disappointing to see that the Member States are not signing up to 20 % binding targets on renewables .
It is disappointing that the Commission has caved in to the German car lobby , but it is good to hear the ministers say that actually we are not going to cave in to the car lobby , as some Commissioners have done - not Mr Dimas .
Please Minister , sort out your national allocation plan .
It is crucial .
It is time for the Council not just to talk the talk , but to walk the walk .
( Applause )
( HU ) I agree that climate change may have catastrophic consequences for the world - and with it for Europe .
If over the next ten years we do not radically turn around our current practice , if we do not change our current way of life , then this may cause enormous economic and ecological damage .
It is precisely for this reason that it is in the interests of each Member State , and their moral obligation , to commit itself to the climate policy announced by the German Presidency - namely , by 2020 reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % , increasing the share of renewables in the total energy mix to 20 % , as well as raising the proportion of biofuel in the fuel consumed to 10 % .
As far as actions are concerned , I call upon the Commission to compare the operating programmes of the Member States , which are currently under assessment , with these targets .
Insofar as the Commission should determine that in a particular Member State there are insufficient EU sources allocated to reaching these targets , it should make use of its powers and refuse to accept in this form the operating programme of the country in question .
It is unacceptable that a few Member States should support energy efficiency and the joint European efforts made in the area of energy savings with words alone .
Hungary and Poland want to devote scarcely more than 1 % of the Union budget to this area , while Lithuania , for instance , is willing to devote 5.4 % .
It is already clear that this will not enable Hungarians and Poles to fulfil even their current EU commitments .
If we think and act responsibly , then in the next six months the third industrial revolution may begin .
The goal of this industrial revolution is to stop climate change , and its result will be the creation of a low-carbon , and then a carbon-free economy .
( ET ) In recent days , a great deal of interesting information has come from Davos about the extent of climate change and its possible catastrophic impact .
I participated in the same event 12 years ago , and I must admit that climate change was not mentioned on that occasion .
Talk , however , is not enough .
The melting of Greenland 's ice sheet , the Arctic ice and the Siberian permafrost have noticeably reduced the amount of ice on the Earth , which will lead to a dangerous increase in the sea level around the globe .
It appears that this has helped us to understand better the dangers that we face .
It is clear that the Kyoto Treaty itself as a political mechanism is insufficient - we need quicker action .
This was also mentioned at Davos .
We must set binding and ambitious objectives in Europe to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases .
The developing economies of China and India are key countries and must hold an important position in the new political mechanism .
In order for them to follow us , we must first show that Europe is taking this topic seriously , and will not just limit itself to a 20 % reduction .
( SK ) In dealing with such a serious issue as climate change , it is necessary for us at the European Parliament to support better communication and a more standardised procedure for identifying appropriate strategic solutions .
I believe that the initiative of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety could have involved prior consultations with the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , particularly regarding the energy package of the European Commission .
The draft resolution of the Committee on the Environment comes up with new binding objectives that are much more ambitious and yet we are not at all sure whether or how we will meet the goals set out in the existing proposals of the European Commission .
We all know that it is time to act , since the situation in the area of climate change is indeed serious .
I am not going to list those areas of the energy sector where substantial improvements can be achieved as regards CO2 emissions .
Expected growth levels will , however , bring forth new ideas concerning the problem of rising demand for energy .
There can be no doubt that the development of new energy-generating installations should be based on carbon-free technologies .
Renewable sources , which we have so often advocated , and quite justifiably too , will scarcely be able to meet the ever-growing demand .
It is therefore difficult to understand why nuclear energy , which generates virtually no CO2 emissions , still finds little support and is mentioned only vaguely in the strategies of the European Commission and the European Union in general , leaving the decisions to the discretion of Member States .
Mr President , in my one minute of speaking time , I would like to focus on three issues based on my amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety yesterday .
Transport is one of the main sources of climate change ; road transport uses five times more energy than train transport for the same number of passengers .
The same goes for private cars on the one hand and trams and subways on the other hand .
That is why public transport should be a priority for us .
In a market economy , in a capitalist society , most of these fine goals could be reached by using economic and financial tools .
Energy efficiency can be increased only along with a very balanced green tax system .
In the longer term , Europe should have a harmonised ecological tax system , because without such a system , our common environmental policy does not have proper tools .
Our developed Member States have exported their energy and natural-resource-consuming activities to less-developed countries , exporting greenhouse emissions and environmental damage as well .
We must prevent such practices in the future .

( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although a lady Member has just said that political problems such as climate protection must not be talked about for too long if there is no solution to them , the opposite is also the case , in that , in politics , you have to take care that problems are not whipped up into the most important problem full stop and into something that presages the end of the world , without , at the end of the day , any solution being offered that really does amount to a change for the better .
It is also with a certain amount of concern that I see some recent debates being conducted in a way that loses touch with reality , with people talking about storms being caused by changes in climate , even though anyone who reads intelligent meteorology knows that that is not how it works .
There are also certain questions that are simply not being asked , or not being answered , for example , why it is that , despite the worldwide increase in the amount of CO2 being generated over the past 120 years , a temperature increase of only 0.3 degrees is being recorded at most locations , and why it was that it was between 1930 and 1960 that there was the greatest increase in storms of the highest category , with a less marked increase over the last four decades ?
Why is it that we have no explanation for the fact that , even if all the industrialised nations were to reduce their greenhouse gas output by 30 % , we would , by 2100 , have done no more than delay the warming effect by six years ?
I am not questioning the need for us to give this problem our urgent attention ; I am merely asking whether we are giving it thorough enough consideration and whether we are perhaps sometimes acting precipitately without asking the right questions .
We are discussing climate change , security of supply and competitiveness , albeit without weighing up the various points , and instead considering them in terms of what the alternatives are .
Why is no serious thought being given to the possibility of deriving 70 % of the CO2-free electricity from nuclear power , for , if the protection of the climate is so important , surely all the alternatives have to be considered fearlessly and without ideological presuppositions , and one of those alternatives , in the future , will be nuclear energy .
If we are to have this debate at all , it must be conducted on a broad basis , openly , and with the necessary time being set aside for it .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I do not doubt that the topic of climate change will occupy us for a long time to come and there is going to be a long timelag between any action taken and the actual effect of turning climate change round .
That makes it all the more important that we should get Europe , its policies and the legislation that goes along with them adjusted to this fact and should get something practical done about it , which will of course involve - along with the continuation of the Kyoto Protocol after 2012 - strategies for reducing CO2 emissions in individual sectors , for example , from private motor vehicles , in respect of which we must not only express concerns but also discuss opportunities .
Reduced emission of CO2 from motor cars and the associated savings in fuel will have a positive effect on security of energy supply when one bears in mind the fact that road traffic accounts for all of 26.5 % of the European Union 's total energy consumption .


The special measures already mentioned do not involve reinventing the wheel ; other states , Japan among them , have also brought in programmes for reducing the CO2 pumped out by motor cars , which involves vehicles being divided up , in ' top runner ' programmes , into nine different weight classes and binding targets for reductions being laid down .
As the report put before us recently by Mr Stern reminded us , the saying that time is money acquires a new significance in climate policy .
Mr President , first of all I would like to agree with Mrs Doyle that the problem that we are facing is not environmental .
It affects all sectors of society and we have to take a systematic and comprehensive approach .
To Mr Reul I would like to say that I think we have to realise that parallel to climate change , we are also affected by the depletion of fisheries , huge and rapid deforestation , and water scarcity in many parts of the world .
We have to face the fact that the lifestyles that we have developed in a world with 8 to 9 billion people goes beyond the carrying capacity of the globe , and that is why we have to take a systematic approach that brings us back onto a normal , sustainable path .
The reason I asked to speak is primarily that I am very disappointed with one aspect of the energy and climate package from the Commission .
You talk , Commissioner , in that package , about an energy partnership with Africa .
That is good . But why not the same for China and India ?
I know there are technology agreements , but there is very little money to back them up .
In the coming five to ten years , emissions from these countries because of expanding energy systems will totally overwhelm us unless we help them to do the right things now .
Some people say ' let China pay ' .
But then we disregard the historic responsibility we have for all the emissions in the past and we also disregard the fact that the Chinese need skilled people ; they need technology to make it happen ; they need to invest in clean technology .
So my question to you and to the Minister is , why do you not think big ?
Why do you not establish a partnership with China and India and beef it up with financial resources so that we can really do this together aggressively ?
Otherwise I think what we are doing here will be rather marginal in the years to come .
We have to have this dual approach , and I feel the omission of this in your energy package is conspicuous .
( Applause )
Mr President , this is a golden opportunity to overcome Europessimism by showing citizens the added value of our sovereign states sharing power to address the global problem of climate change , about which they are all seriously concerned .
However , decisions must be made transparently and democratically so that we can see who is pressing to have decisions deferred .
Later decisions will be too late on this issue .
We must pool our resources , adopt common rules and regulations and the necessary penalties to guarantee implementation .
Hard political decisions must be made on taxation , renewable energy , fuel efficiency and cleaner technologies that will revolutionise our industries and our consumption .
Indeed , why not benchmark the national infrastructure programmes which in many cases the European Union is funding ?
I would also argue that we must beware false prophets , like the nuclear industry , which claim to be the answer to this problem .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking everyone who took the floor today for their very positive speeches , which illustrate the extent to which the members of the European Parliament are fully aware of the problem of climate change and this is , of course , also a reflection of public opinion , which has also become very aware of the problem .
I should like to thank the German Presidency , especially Minister Sigmar Gabriel , for the cooperation we have enjoyed , for the way in which he spoke and for the way in which he defends environmental issues and I trust that the German Presidency will perform well and meet the expectations of European citizens and respond to the views expressed here this evening .
Climate change is a global challenge and the leading role of the European Union is of decisive importance in addressing it .
Today 's debate has given us the chance to emphasise the importance of the forthcoming decisions due to be taken in the European Union this week and in coming weeks ; these decisions are needed so that international negotiations can commence and so that we can push for an agreement at global level .
We must safeguard the credibility of the European Union in the leading role which it plays at global level in addressing climate change and we must send the strongest possible message to our partners in both the developed and the developing world .
We must also emphasise the importance of the decisions which need to be taken over the next few years as regards the international regime for climate change - I may come back to this matter later - in order to ensure that even greater efforts are made worldwide after the first period of commitments based on the Kyoto Protocol , which expires in 2012 .
The scientific and economic arguments in favour of taking ambitious , global action to address climate change are obvious and incontrovertible .
Even greater political effort is needed in order to bring about broader and more fundamental commitments .
This is precisely the Commission 's objective with the package of measures on climate and energy .
The next few years will be of decisive importance in shaping a global framework with the objective of ensuring that irreversible and possibly catastrophic climate change is avoided .
The active participation of all of us is needed - and I have seen it here tonight with a great deal of satisfaction - in this dialogue .
It is crucial that you support the strong commitment by the European Union for decisive action at both European and international level .
I should like to answer some of the observations that were made tonight .
Firstly , concerning targets , I must repeat that 15 months ago we were not discussing targets .
The word ' target ' was not mentioned .
In the European Council Conclusions , the Council mentioned exploring reduction pathways in the range of 15 to 30 % with developed countries .
It did not occur to anyone to have a unilateral commitment for the European Union .
Somebody mentioned that perhaps there is some confusion .
I have to make it clear that we have a target , which is 30 % , and this is the mandate we are asking the European Council to give to the Commission to negotiate with other developed countries .
However , irrespective of this agreement and until such an agreement is reached , we have a unilateral commitment to reduce by 20 % the emissions in the European Union .
To underline the magnitude of this commitment , I should like to point out that it is more than twice our total obligation .
I heard that there is not enough ambition and that we have not exercised leadership by setting this target .
No other country in the world is so ambitious - not even California .
Governor Schwarzenegger has received much praise .
I have been asked why we do not have a similar target to that of Governor Schwarzenegger - a 25 % target for 2021 , but using 2006 as a basis .
Therefore , if you do your calculations , his ambition is less than half of our 20 % reduction .
Therefore , let me make it clear that we are ambitious , we have to exercise leadership in the world , we have to practice what we preach and our target is really ambitious .
Of course , in order to achieve what science tells us , to limit the average increase in temperature on the planet to 2 ° C , we need a 50 % reduction by all the countries in the world by 2050 .
That goes for the developed countries and the developing countries - a 60-80 % reduction by the developed countries and a 30 % reduction by the developing countries by 2020 .
Someone mentioned flexibility : these targets of 20 % and 30 % are flexible .
They are not for all the countries in the European Union , but they will be adjusted according to the burden-sharing agreement that we had a few years ago regarding the achievement of our total target .
It should be a similar system .
Nairobi was mentioned .
Of course , Montreal was different from Nairobi .
In Montreal we had a big achievement in the Montreal Action Plan .
According to this plan in Nairobi we had certain priorities which were achieved .
Mrs Doyle was right when she said they were not ambitious , but it was a step - a bigger or smaller step , but still a step - and the European Union achieved all the priorities it had set , especially in terms of trying to help the least-developed countries to get some of the investments with the usual cut-off and flexible mechanisms .
Mr Wijkman said that we were not ambitious because we do not have a partnership with China or that we have a partnership that we do not finance .
The truth is that we have a European Union-China partnership and a European Union-India initiative , and both have specific objectives which will be financed by European Union funds and funds from various Member States of the European Union .
Of course they are very important , because , as you said , after 2020 China , India and the other fast developing countries will emit more than all the OECD countries .
Therefore it is absolutely necessary to bring them on board so that we can fight climate change together , but according to the common but differentiated principle of the United Nations Convention .
I said how important it is to have the participation of China and India and the other fast developing countries .
However , it is more important to have the developed countries .
Our first objective should be to consider how to bring on board developed countries , like the United States , which emits 25 % of the emissions in the world and has not ratified Kyoto .
Public opinion in the United States is changing and we are encouraged by the signals we are getting there .
However , more work is necessary .
In particular , we must strengthen our emissions trading system , because a market-based instrument like this could be the best way to bring the United States on board .
Some states in the USA already have an emissions trading system .
In the north-east there is an emissions trading system regarding power generation .
California and some other western states will be introducing them , and we will cooperate with them in order to have a similar system in order to link the systems together .
So the global emissions trading system can be born from the bottom up .
In order to do that we need a strong emissions trading system in the European Union , otherwise we cannot argue with them .
That is why we need to have national allocation plans that really create scarcity in the market .
If I had accepted all the proposed national allocation plans from the Member States , the emissions trading system would have collapsed .
You , the Members of the European Parliament , with whom we had a lot of discussion about the emissions trading system , should help to persuade those Member States that have reservations about the national allocation plans .
I am going to do my job and I shall assess the national allocation plans as is necessary in order to fight climate change .
It is very important to determine what the basic elements are for a future regime .
We have to set goals , the means by which we are going to achieve these goals and establish who will be participating in achieving these targets .
I spoke about the participants - both developed and developing countries .
I must now mention the targets : 2 ° C is the target . It is essential to keep the commitment made by the European Union .
The means are : firstly , the use of the market - a global emissions trading system is necessary ; secondly , we need research , technology , development of technology and deployment of technology , as Minister Gabriel mentioned .
Therefore we need to make it financially interesting for the economic partners to deploy new technologies .
We also need to transfer technology to developing countries and in order to do that we need finance , because without finance it will not be possible .
We have the Kyoto flexible mechanism - the CDMs , the joint implementation - but we also need other funds .
I am grateful to Minister Gabriel , because when I announced the adoption by the European Union of the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund , he immediately came forward with a significant contribution from Germany .
Italy followed , and I hope other countries will do so , because this money is necessary in order to transfer technology to developing countries to enable those countries to be energy efficient and to make efforts in order to fight climate change .
Today I heard much about biofuels and second-generation biofuels .
I said that today the Commission adopted a very important piece of legislation .
However , everybody looked at the cars and not at this piece of legislation .
But it is very important !
I would say that we would save more carbon dioxide with this directive than with the other one , without saying that cars are not important - they are very important , especially for the future .
Having a new car fleet in the European Union is important for fighting climate change .
Today 's adoption by the Commission of the fuel quality directive is encouraging sustainable fuels for transport , biofuels , and especially encouraging second-generation biofuels , which are friendly to the environment .
On cars , my proposal still stands .
My proposal is there , as it was 15 days ago .
I am very happy that today the President said that next week we shall be discussing it in the College .
We need clean , competitive , affordable cars that will contribute to the fight against climate change .
We must protect the consumers , the workers , the public in general and , of course , fight climate change , protect our planet and protect our countries .
Finally , on Davos , it was very interesting because although there were very important issues to be discussed - Iraq , the Middle East and Doha - a poll revealed that a majority of 57 % of the participants who were asked said that the number one issue the world faces today is climate change , which means that the politicians who reflect public opinion have now also had responses from business leaders .
The business leaders have joined politicians and public opinion and showed their determination to fight climate change .
That is why I ask for your help in adopting the resolution , which would be very helpful for carrying on our proposals .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the February part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Climate change is one of the biggest challenges facing humanity , and it is one where isolated and patchy responses by individual countries would be entirely inadequate .
The European Union is a level at which action can be highly effective , both in setting stringent common rules for our common market and in terms of leverage to secure action at world level .
Without the EU , there would have been no Kyoto agreement , but we must now move forward with all the more vigour to secure a successor agreement .
We must also look at strengthening our emissions trading scheme and seeking to extend it to other parts of the world .
Indeed , EU action on the environment must become so effective and visible that our citizens begin to equate the letters EU with ' Environmental Union ' !
( FR ) The fact that we are meeting to debate climate change at exactly the same time as international experts are meeting in Paris to discuss climate change and the consequences thereof sends out a strong message .
Global warming is not a figment of the imagination of a few publicity-seeking scientists and politicians ; it is a reality that we must now come to terms with .
It is up to us as lawmakers to draw up rules aimed at limiting the impact of climate change .
This is what the Commission 's proposal to include aviation in the emissions trading scheme is designed to do , and there are other such cases .
This legislation is necessary if we are to offset the impact of the dramatic rise in air transport .
We must , however , pay careful attention to the way in which we decide to implement this mechanism , because this is not about undermining European airlines or holding back air transport , but about reducing the impact of air transport on climate change .
Furthermore , in order for our efforts to have genuine impact on CO2 emissions , I would like to see the Union also enact laws on other means of transport , not least in the car industry .
( PT ) As we know , the Commission recently proposed a package of measures on energy and a number of targets on greenhouse gas emissions and renewable energy , thereby affirming their desire to combat climate change and to foster energy security and EU competitiveness .
The Commission has now come to this Chamber to restate these objectives and targets , highlighting an international agreement on the post-2012 framework and the target of a 30 % reduction in emissions in developing countries . Accordingly , the EU must immediately undertake to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30 % and to implement practical , energy-specific measures .
However , the possibility remains open - unsurprisingly - of emissions trading , which especially affects the more economically fragile countries that do not have the money to buy emissions rights .
Whilst there are some welcome proposals in the area of emissions reductions and renewable energy , there is another set of proposals that would be difficult to implement given the stringent requirements placed on the different countries , knowing the opposition , that is , the USA .
Most importantly , however , all of this must not be taken as an opportunity for more liberalisation and further concentration in the area of energy , and the further domination of the most powerful countries .
We are speaking as though the debate is over , and the threat of catastrophic global warming is real .
Yet there are many climatologists who take a different view .
They believe that current changes are within the normal historic range , and that predictions of future warming are exaggerated and alarmist .
Nevertheless , whatever our view on climate change , energy security demands that we reduce our dependence on imported fossil fuels .
We can no longer rely on Russia , the Middle East , Nigeria and Venezuela for energy .
While we must develop renewables , and enhance energy conservation , there is only one non-carbon technology which can provide the continuous , reliable base-load power we need to drive economic growth , and that technology is nuclear .
It is bitterly ironic that many of the climate alarmists , who call for dramatic reductions in carbon emissions , also oppose nuclear power .
( IT ) As the German Presidency rightly pointed out , we can no longer put off drafting a proper energy and environmental policy if we want to guarantee our citizens and the EU healthy and sustainable development over time .
I therefore agree with my fellow Members that we should make this subject an absolute priority in our work over the coming months .
It seems strange , but precisely on the 50th anniversary of the European project , and at a time of political deadlock due to the failure of the Constitution , the difficulties in relation to enlargement and the estrangement that a section of the European population is reporting , we have the opportunity , armed as we are with far more adequate economic , technological and political instruments , to relaunch the process with practical proposals , by reviving and adapting to everyday needs the idea behind the European process : that of combining our efforts and aims to achieve a sufficiently independent and sustainable energy supply .
Economic development , as well as the health of our citizens and of our environment , will depend on this , just as it did 50 years ago .
Furthermore , thanks to the role that it now plays at international level , the European Union can also influence the world 's political stability and serve as an example for those fledgling economies that are booming economically but are not yet aware of the consequences that that entails .
New PNR agreement SWIFT ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and Jean-Marie Cavada , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , to the Council , on the new PNR agreement and SWIFT B6-0001 / 2007 ) , and
the oral question by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and Jean-Marie Cavada , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , to the Council , on the new PNR agreement and SWIFT B6-0002 / 2007 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , we now turn from such fundamentally demanding issues as energy and climate change to discuss another very important matter that has , in the past , demanded your attention here in the European Parliament , and also that of the European Union as a whole not merely on one occasion but repeatedly , and the issue to which I refer is that of the sharing of airline passengers ' personal data .
As we all know , following the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 , the United States enacted legislation according to which airlines running flights into and out of the United States must permit the US authorities electronic access to the data in their automatic reservation and processing systems , the material known as ' passenger name records ' , and , should the airlines decline to comply , they are threatened with the withdrawal of their landing rights .
I would now like to briefly remind the House of the state of play .
In May 2006 , the European Court of Justice had , in response to an appeal by your House , declared null and void the Council decision on the agreement between the European Community and the USA relating to the forwarding of passenger data to the US authorities and , likewise , the Commission 's decision on the appropriateness of the data protection measures .
The ECJ 's fundamental justification for its decision was the European Community 's lack of power to conclude any such agreement , since it was not within the sphere of the first pillar .
It had nothing to say about the material question of whether the data was sufficiently protected .
As you will be aware , negotiations with the USA on a successor agreement proved to be highly problematic , but it was nevertheless eventually possible to conclude them with an interim agreement due to expire on 3 July this year , which is on the basis of the third pillar and of the USA 's undertaking given in respect of data protection , which had already been taken as a basis to the earlier agreement between the European Community and the United States .
At the beginning of January 2007 , the Commission made a recommendation to the Council to the effect that it should approve the commencement of negotiations with the USA on a new passenger data agreement that should replace the present interim one .
The EU 's negotiating mandate for the Council Presidency , which the Commission endorses , was today discussed by COREPER , and the prospect is that the Council will adopt a resolution on the subject and lay down negotiating guidelines in February .
It is likely that the negotiations on a new passenger name record agreement will prove to be extremely difficult , since there is no evidence of any interest on the part of the United States in improving data protection .
Indeed , it seems far more likely that they will claim that their undertaking in respect of data protection no longer applies .
The conclusion of an agreement is , however , essential in terms of the standard of data protection that is to be guaranteed and in the interests of the European Union , for , in the absence of an agreement , the airlines would be under great pressure to pass on the passenger data in order not to risk losing their right to land in the USA .
The German Presidency of the Council will , with the Commission 's support , be pressing for a legally watertight arrangement that secures the protection of data , taking the interests of the passengers and of the airlines into account and maintaining a high level of security , and I would like to stress that it is , in this , taking due account of the positions of your House as expressed in the relevant resolutions of September last year on data protection , on the combating of terrorism , and also on the defence of human rights .
This subject also brings me to speak in response to the oral questions put to me by Mrs Berès and Mr Cavada on the subject of SWIFT .
The Council wishes to thank them for their interest in this dossier , in relation to which it has already had the opportunity to answer questions from your House 's Members on various occasions .
As regards my answers to these questions , I would refer the honourable Members to my statement .
In December 2006 , the Council informed the Members that the questions they had raised demanded careful examination ; the Council is still engaged in doing this , and its inquiries have not yet been completed .
In the remainder of this speech , I shall be endeavouring , on behalf of the Council , to answer the various questions put to me by Members of your House , although all the matters to which I can refer are still subject to the Council 's inquiries .
In a speech in July 2006 , the Finnish minister for European affairs , as the then President-in-Office of the Council , announced to the plenary that the Council was not at that time able to confirm press reports of an exchange of information between SWIFT and the American authorities .
She reminded your House that finding out what had actually happened was a matter for the national authorities , and went on to state that the European Union was then , and would in future be , prepared to act if it turned out that events made legislation at the European level necessary .
As I have already mentioned , the Council and the Commission are currently still engaged in examining every aspect and every issue of potential relevance to this dossier , while also taking the outcomes from the data protection group into consideration .
The Presidency is giving thought to how the work on this at Council level might be organised , and will , in so doing , take account of what emerges from the current investigations , but what I can tell you is that no new group has as yet been appointed with this purpose in mind .
Since investigations are still ongoing , the Council is at present unable to answer the question as to whether these matters will impact Regulation 1781 of 15 November 2006 on the information on the payer accompanying transfers of funds .
The Council has no knowledge of whether or not the Commission is considering submitting any proposal for the amendment of this Regulation , but I am sure that we will learn that when the Commission makes its statement .
Under the Treaty , it is the Commission 's function to monitor the implementation of Community law in the Member States and to take appropriate action as and when a Member State fails to discharge its obligations under EC law .
Reference has also been made to the ' automated targeting system ' , an American system affecting the transport of freight and persons within the United States and from and into them .
Whether data obtained from SWIFT have been fed into this system is one of the questions currently being examined .
When it stated that an international framework for combating terrorism was already in place , the data protection group was referring to the working party on fighting money laundering and the funding of terrorism and the recommendations made by it .
The Council believes that good work is being done within this framework , although it has to be said that this group 's recommendations are addressed to banks and financial institutions .
While I am on this subject , I would like to stress - speaking on the Council 's behalf - that SWIFT cannot be regarded as a financial institution for this working party 's purposes and that the Financial Action Task Force framework is therefore not directly applicable , except possibly to certain specific aspects .
That concludes the Presidency 's statement on behalf of the Council .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , I shall begin by addressing PNR .
As you all know , the temporary agreement concluded in October with the United States will expire by the end of July this year , in a few months ' time .
There is therefore the need to negotiate a very solid and stable legal framework which will enable the exchange of PNR data with the United States with full respect of data protection and privacy rights .
As the Presidency of the Council just said , the Commission has recommended to the Council that it authorise the Presidency , assisted by the Commission , to open negotiations on the basis of a set of negotiation directives .
I am confident that these recommendations will be examined very soon .
I personally strongly hope that by mid-February we will get a negotiating mandate to open this very difficult exercise .
The Commission is recommending to the Council to strive for full respect of fundamental rights , notably the right to privacy .
I have said on a number of occasions that the right to privacy is for me non-negotiable .
It has to be respected , fully and completely .
Legal certainty is also an important element for air-carriers .
It must be taken into account , as it has been from the very beginning .
As I have already stressed in this Parliament several times , the Commission is committed to continuing to give due consideration to privacy on the one hand and legal security on the other , as they form key principles of this file , without forgetting the importance of preventing and fighting terrorism and related transnational crimes .
The negotiations for a new agreement with the United States on PNR data are a key priority for the Commission , and for me personally , and I understand from what the Presidency of the Council just said that it shares this view .
I warmly welcome the close cooperation between the Commission and the Council Presidency , which is crucial if we want to succeed , if we want to speak with one voice .
On my side , of course , as usual , I will keep Parliament informed as this work progresses .
You know very well that , as it was in the past , for me it will be a political commitment , though this document - for example , the negotiating recommendations - once approved will be classified as EU-restricted .
The negotiations will present a real challenge for Europe .
It will require imagination ; it will require a lot of common effort from all the EU institutions and from the United States as well in order to reach a very robust , solid solution .
To conclude , I would like to see , for example , this Parliament , together with the United States Congress - following the political phases of this very difficult exercise - making , perhaps for the first time , a joint political commitment which would be particularly useful for the ongoing negotiations .
However , it is up to you to decide .
( IT ) I shall now refer , ladies and gentlemen , to the SWIFT matter , which has also been addressed by the Presidency .
You will recall that a few weeks ago , before the Christmas holidays , I informed the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs that the SWIFT case needed to be addressed from a European perspective , and I said on that occasion that we would begin an exploratory dialogue with the US authorities in order to address both the general issue of data protection and the specific issues raised by the use of SWIFT data by the US Treasury .
You will probably be aware that these informal , yet important , discussions have already begun .
I am in favour of finding a European solution to addressing this issue , a European solution that ought , in my opinion , to include clear rules and precise guarantees , which the US Treasury should endorse and include in its documents .
In other words , the two points at stake are , as ever , legal protection for personal data that are transferred and legal certainty for all parties concerned and , I must say , legal certainty for banks , too , for , as the Presidency has clearly highlighted , SWIFT is not a bank .
It is quite clear , then , that when I talk about guarantees from the US authorities , I intend to specify in which circumstances , for what purpose and by whom these data may be known and used .
I would say right away that it must be made clear that the purpose is restricted solely to terrorism investigations and thus to preventing the funding of terrorism , so that we avoid the , albeit indirect , risk of such data being misused , for example for economic espionage purposes .
It is also clear that there seems to be a need for a further restriction , and that is to link the use of these data to research on specific individuals who are suspected of terrorist activity .
In other words , there should be no non-specific transfers of data without suspects who warrant further investigation having first been identified .
You are aware of the letter that I wrote to all of the Member States in November asking for information about the conditions under which their banks use personal data through SWIFT .
Only seven Member States have so far replied to my request for clarification .
This is unfortunate , and I will obviously be asking for a reason in certain cases : in the specific case of Italy , for example , it has requested more time to respond .
In other cases , there has simply been no response .
From the seven responses that I have actually received - although no general conclusions can be drawn from them because too few Member States have responded - it emerges that banks normally use personal data for the sole purpose of executing payment orders and that they were not informed , in such cases , of the fact that personal data are transferred to the US Treasury by SWIFT .
Therefore , the general response given is simply that they are not aware of the fact that someone , namely SWIFT , transfers data after having received it from them .
However , it has emerged - but you already knew this - that , in many cases , central banks had been informed precisely by the US Treasury of the transfer of data from SWIFT Europe to SWIFT United States and from SWIFT United States to the US Treasury .
You are aware that actions and further investigations are being carried out by the national data protection authorities with the aim of shedding some light on the issue and of finding out whether , apart from the Belgian case , which is now well known , there are other specific cases in which national data protection authorities can open a file and thus start proceedings .
Clearly , as soon as I have some information in this regard , I will pass it on to you , as I have done in the past .
There is a specific question concerning the possibility of applying the Automated Targeting System to SWIFT data .
On the basis of the technical explanations given to me , it would appear impossible or highly unlikely for the system in question to have been used for processing SWIFT data , for the simple reason that it is part of the Department of Homeland Security , which relates to the protection of borders and thus to the movement of people passing through the US .
It was not surprising that the European Parliament asked about the application of this mechanism to PNR data .
SWIFT data are in a totally different category because they come under a different administration , which is the Treasury .
The question submitted also asks whether the Commission is aware of other examples of US authorities requesting data from private parties in this sector .
I have no information on that , and so I cannot answer that question .
There is no doubt , however , that , while the fight against the funding of terrorism is a vital instrument for preventing terrorism , this fight cannot undermine or limit a fundamental right , such as that of customers to have their personal financial data protected .
As you know , one of the violations uncovered by the Belgian authorities and the European Committee for privacy protection is precisely the lack of prior information for customers , which coincides with what the banks said , since they had not been informed of these transfers either .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that there are two reasons why we need to work towards a European instrument .
Firstly , we cannot limit or destroy our Euro-Atlantic collaboration in relation to the fight against terrorism : that would be a serious mistake , which I believe the European Union should avoid making .
Secondly , we must also point out to our American friends that it is in everyone 's interests for fundamental rights and the protection of personal data to be scrupulously adhered to .
If , by virtue of having a European instrument , we succeed in doing the same thing that we are trying to do with the PNR - even though the two issues are very different , the principle is the same - and find a European solution that prevents differences in treatment between one EU Member State and another in relation to the United States , I believe that it will be possible to strengthen the European Union 's negotiating power and to demonstrate at the same time that our aim is to strengthen the Euro-Atlantic link , not to weaken it .
author . - ( FR ) Enriched by the lessons of the case of passenger name records ( PNR ) , we should be able to make quicker progress when it comes to SWIFT .
I should like , if I may , Mr Gloser , to correct you on one point .
I believe that this is the first time we have held a specific debate on SWIFT here in the Chamber , and this is no doubt in the normal course of things , but I do hope this debate will enable us to make progress .
SWIFT is not an undertaking that operates solely in Europe or solely between Europe and the United States .
It operates everywhere .
To put it simply , after September 11 the nature of relations between SWIFT and the US authorities changed beyond all recognition , and we are now seeing the consequences not only in terms of data protection for the EU but also in terms of the balance that should be struck between data protection , the fight against terrorism , the security of payment systems and protection against economic espionage .
The Commission has acknowledged that there is a problem and has begun to put forward proposals .
In a recent letter addressed to Mr Cavada and me , the Central Bank also recognised that the time had come to enter new phases , without going too far in the proposals .
This confirmed what it had said to us at the hearing , which , unfortunately , neither the Council nor the Commission saw fit to attend .
The Central Bank had told us at the hearing that it bore very little responsibility for what had happened in the case , and the letter partly confirms that view .
Reading the memorandum concluded between SWIFT and the US Treasury in April 2004 , it is very clear that there was awareness of the data protection issues involved in the manner in which SWIFT transferred information to the US Treasury .
Just as a train driver bears some responsibility for his train and the post office bears some responsibility for what it carries , SWIFT must bear some responsibility for the data it passes on .
The key point here , following the hearing held jointly by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs last October , is the briefing of the ' Article 29 ' working group which , on 22 November 2006 , clearly confirmed our concerns , namely that , in the SWIFT case , data that should manifestly not have been concealed from the US authorities had in fact been concealed and that , accordingly , the 1995 Directive had not been complied with .
We should like to thank the Commissioner for taking the initiative of calling on the Member States to rectify , without delay , the issue of non-compliance with the 1995 Directive , but , as he himself also said , the results up to now have been quite poor .
The European Central Bank , for its part , has heeded the lesson that it should demand customer consent .
That remains a very prudent thing do .
As regards this last question , there are two points we must raise .
The first is the nature of transatlantic relations and the manner in which data are used in something of a spirit of free , unbridled competition on the US side , and , on the European side - we have experience of this in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - sometimes with a degree of naivety .
One would like to think that these data are used solely for the purposes of combating terrorism . We dare to hope so , but we have no proof .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , if there is a message that , I believe , Parliament would like to convey to you when you hold talks with the Americans on the issue , it is that the purpose of the talks must not be to validate the current state of affairs as regards the transfer of data via SWIFT .
It should be to ensure that the level of data protection and the concept of data protection itself that we have here in the EU are respected and accepted .
Everything leads me to think that the task facing us in this area is a tough one , but you can count on Parliament 's unwavering support .
Just one more minute , Mr President , to address the last aspect , which is the issue of the status of SWIFT .
As SWIFT is a Belgian company , we are always being referred back to the Belgian State .
That being said , the fact that SWIFT is a Belgian company is because we are in a legal vacuum .
It is clear that SWIFT is doing a job that should really be done by a European-level body , overseen by a European supervisory body .
I believe that in this area too , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you need to proceed on the basis of new information .
Parliament is once again ready to discuss this matter , but we cannot accept the current state of the debate .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , there is an expression in French to describe the surreal confusion of an institution when it finds itself faced with an unexpected situation .
We say that it behaves ' comme une poule qui a trouvé un révolver [ like a chicken that has found a revolver ] ' .
Frankly , Mr Gloser , without wishing to underestimate you , the least we can say is that your position on this matter is extremely disappointing .
I therefore feel entitled to remind you that your mandate is to defend European sovereignty , something of which I have seen little sign so far .
As you will have appreciated , we are therefore disappointed and above all worried .
I will talk firstly about PNR data .
In a few month 's time , as we know , as you have said and as Mr Frattini has pointed out , the interim agreement on air passenger data will expire .
We have no clear information on how it is working .
I would also like to point out that when the previous agreement was annulled by the Court , it was based on an assessment of the adequacy of data protection in the United States .
This is not the case with the agreement in force , however , even though this assessment is required by the protocol to Convention 108 of the Council of Europe , which is binding on the Member States and hence directly , or at least indirectly , on the European institutions .
Having a dubious basis , the agreement has not so far been properly implemented , since the data transmission system that should have been in operation since 2004 , the ' push ' system , is not yet operational , and that is despite the announcements made , most notably last September .
In a spirit of cooperation , I would like to ask certain questions publicly .
Firstly , I wonder whether the Commission should have applied more pressure in order to ensure that the ' push ' system was implemented by the airlines and electronic reservation centres that it monitors .
Secondly , I wonder whether effective information for air passengers should have been demanded with regard to the use of their personal data for security purposes , in the same way that information campaigns have been carried out on rights in the event of delays or flight cancellations , for example .
For our part , with regard to this dossier , we are awaiting clarification from the Commission and , above all , from the US authorities on a number of points .
I shall mention two of these .
First of all , we do not understand why , in order to fight terrorism and organised crime , it should be necessary to have all thirty-four pieces of data listed in the PNR and not just the nineteen pieces of data that Parliament and the data protection authorities had deemed sufficient for that purpose .
Secondly , how can it be that European citizens and passengers could have been classified as dangerous for years , unbeknownst to them , without us demanding anything in return ?
I shall now turn to the SWIFT system .
This second issue is even more delicate and it concerns the American authorities ' access to data relating to financial transfers .
My fellow Members have already dealt with a number of points .
I shall therefore just express the views of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
At stake here is the protection of our citizens ' fundamental rights and the credibility of our partnership with the United States .
It is really incomprehensible that no reciprocal arrangements have been proposed in order to negotiate with a partner , even if it is a friend .
Will we one day act in the same way with another partner to the east of our borders , Russia ?
I would therefore like to say that European sovereignty is not being respected .
In agreement with the political groups , therefore , I have taken the initiative to invite the competent committees of the American Congress and I am awaiting a response .
( The President asked the speaker to conclude )
I understand perfectly well that Parliament 's timing is extremely important , and since I am confident that my colleagues will say everything else that needs to be said , I will stop there .
I have said the most important things I wanted to say .
I honestly thought that I had five minutes .
I am of course very sorry , Mr Cavada , but unfortunately , when we organise our parliamentary business , it is essential to abide by speaking times in general so that we can proceed , especially in the case of ' mini-sessions ' , when times are accordingly short .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is working towards consistent compliance with the acquis communitaire and all the documents that uphold the values of European civilisation and protect the freedom and personal integrity of each individual .
We are opposed to any unlawful conduct which restricts such freedoms and works against the individual .
We recognise , however , that protecting peace and security also imposes certain constraints .
For this reason we believe that any intrusion into personal privacy should be kept to a minimum and be conducted on a legal basis .
On the basis of the documents that are available to us , there is a well-founded suspicion that access to the data held in the SWIFT System could represent an illegal intrusion into personal privacy .
So , please allow me to put to you the following questions :
First , I would like a detailed answer as to which data held in the SWIFT System are available to the US authorities and which data are they entitled to access on that basis ?
Second , do the US authorities have access to all the transactions carried out in SWIFT branches in the USA , and can they , through these or other SWIFT branches , also gain access to transactions carried out outside the USA ?
Third , I would like to ask the Commission , the Council and the European Personal Data Ombudsman whether accessing the data held in the SWIFT System represents a violation of the provisions on data protection and , consequently , an illegal intrusion into personal privacy .
Fourth , at the October hearing we did not get any convincing or sufficiently clear answers on the competence of institutions with respect to SWIFT .
So I would like to ask who is actually competent to rule on the SWIFT issue and on what legal basis ?
And fifth , I am interested in the principles underpinning our negotiating platform with the USA on these issues and whether , within that framework , we will also learn how the US authorities make use of the data obtained and what dangers are involved in data leaks and abuses .
Mr Coelho will address the PNR issue .
Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , the controversy surrounding the transmission of personal and banking data by SWIFT to the US law enforcement authorities and the judgment on the EU / US agreement regarding PNR data have demonstrated the urgent need to draw up a global framework for the transmission and protection of personal data within the context of trans-Atlantic relations .
Europe understands the United States ' increased need for security and we want to enhance our cooperation with our American partners with a view to fighting terrorism effectively .
Having said that , it is also essential to deal with the protection of fundamental rights and privacy within the framework of trans-Atlantic dialogue .
We are in favour of reaching a new PNR agreement , but it must be respectful of fundamental rights and provide guarantees on the protection of European citizens ' privacy .
That is why we want the Commission to communicate to us the details of the proposed mandate for the negotiation of this new agreement .
The European Parliament must be fully involved in this process .
Could you also provide us with more information on the work of the high-level working group on the sharing and protection of data ?
We would also like to know about the priority proposals recently put forward by our American partners .
With regard to SWIFT , the Belgian data protection authorities and the ' Article 29 ' Working Group believe that this transmission represents a violation of the Belgian and European rules on the protection of personal data .
So far , no concrete solution has been proposed to put an end to this violation .
All of the actors involved agree that it is urgent that a European solution be found , a solution that is respectful of fundamental rights and which companies can implement properly .
The European institutions must ensure that the payment system in the European Union , provided by SWIFT , complies with the Community legislation on data protection .
We would therefore ask the Council and the Commission what measures have been taken to resolve this problem .
Are there plans to negotiate an international agreement , similar to the PNR agreement ?
You tell us that the Commission has held a dialogue with the American Treasury department with a view to finding a solution .
Can you tell us what solutions have been studied ?
Furthermore , at our last debate on the same subject , you informed us , Mr Frattini , that a questionnaire would be sent to the Member States in order obtain all possible information on this transfer of information .
Have you really received all of the necessary replies and how are you going to follow up on that questionnaire ?
Furthermore , in 2006 , within the codecision procedure , Parliament adopted its Alvaro report on the regulation stipulating the personal data that must accompany transfers of funds and under what conditions .
The transfer to a third country of banking data that does not have a specific link with that country clearly falls outside of the scope of the regulation and may represent a breach of the fundamental principles of data protection .
For the same reason , given that the transfer of the SWIFT data does not just involve data relating to transactions between Europe and the United States , but also data relating to transactions within the European Union , it would appear to be clear that this issue belongs in the first pillar .
An agreement pursuant to Articles 24 and 38 of the European Union Treaty would not be an appropriate solution .
We cannot accept an agreement to legalise current violations on a case by case basis .
SWIFT has no legal obligation to use a mirror site in the United States .
Would it not be possible to find a solution in another country in order to move that mirror site to one that contains European data , as the ' Article 29 ' Working Group suggested ?
Finally , SWIFT , PNR , and also the Automated Targeting System , ATS , and perhaps in the future telephone data , demonstrate that the exchange of information is intensifying and the urgent need to draw up a common framework for protecting the privacy of European citizens .
Do you not believe that the European Union should take a global approach to these issues , in order to establish general principles for the transmission and protection of data with our American partners .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am always very touched when I hear how attached the Council and the Commission are to involving Parliament , because it is indeed true that in the area of counter-terrorism policies , the decision-making is profoundly undemocratic because it totally excludes the European Parliament , and national parliaments are only very partially involved .
Therefore I would have a solution to offer you , and that is not just to make solemn pledges here before the House , but to actually consult Parliament on a voluntary basis on the mandate for negotiations on PNR and SWIFT , because that would not only lend democratic legitimacy to such a mandate : it would also actually strengthen your negotiating position , because frankly , although I have a high appreciation for the officials who do the actual negotiations , I think matters of such importance should have a political mandate .
Secondly , I fully agree with the remarks made by Mrs Roure on the need for global standards on data protection .
People who think that we are anti-American are wrong .
I have actually seen how attached the Americans are to their privacy laws , which are very good , and how critical they are when the public authorities do not respect the rules on privacy .
So I think we should take their critical attitude as an example .
I would like to know if Commission and Council are aware of other categories of data being accessed by the US authorities , not only passenger data and SWIFT data , but also , for example , telecommunications records and insurance company or social security records , and if not by the US authorities , by other countries .
If you are not aware of this , maybe you should start investigating .
With regard to PNR , SWIFT and ATS , I will not repeat here all the expectations that we have of the PNR negotiating mandate .
That has been said already .
But I would like to know why the Commission and the Council did not bother to insist on a second joint evaluation of the implementation of the PNR agreement before agreeing on a new negotiating mandate .
Would it not make sense to first evaluate how this one works and how effective it has been before we start talking about the next one ?
I would also like to know what the state of play is with regard to the switch from push to pull , which was scheduled for December 2005 , then for December 2006 .
It is now January 2007 .
Where are we on this point ?
I would also like to know what the state of play is with regard to information to passengers .
I have been travelling myself lately and I could not get any information on the matter .
I would also like to know on what basis the European Commission will actually be negotiating an agreement on SWIFT .
Finally , with regard to ATS , you get a letter from the Department of Homeland Security saying , ' Do not worry , we comply with the PNR agreement as we understand it ' .
I am not a lawyer , but I think that is rather a funny formulation .
It does not reassure me and I would like further reassurances about profiling and data-mining .
Does it take place ?
I should like to know about the discrepancy with regard to storage periods and about purpose limitation .
What other data are being fed into this and what are the exceptions as regards the privacy act ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this extensive legal-political debate involves the fundamental issue of European sovereignty , as the chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has also rightly pointed out .
Consequently , there is a factor that has not yet been referred to that should not be left out , which is the statements made by the highest US authorities ; I do not think they have been challenged , but they are worth mentioning .
The SWIFT system , which we are analysing in relation to European law , has certainly had the merit of cutting short some atrocious terrorist initiatives ; it has made it possible to uncover or has helped to identify the perpetrators of the London bombings in July 2005 ; and it has at least led to the capture of key players , such as the terrorist Hambali , who seems to have been the brains behind the Bali bombing in October 2002 .
It should certainly also be said that the publicity surrounding this procedure has , in all likelihood , led many terrorists to give up using such methods .
On the other hand , it is undeniable that , when the SWIFT society was faced with a contract involving both European law and US law , it confined itself to negotiating data protection mechanisms with the US Treasury Department without obtaining further safeguards .
This is a problem that must be addressed , as is the problem of the European Central Bank 's role and responsibility .
The ECB had been informed about the issue right from the start , and it played a leading role in this instrument - I shall not go into the matter of its transparency .
Before the Committee on Civil Liberties , the ECB , through its president , Mr Trichet , sheltered behind the confidentiality agreement among the ten banks and also claimed that it had not been able to give SWIFT its blessing because that was not within its power .
What , then , we wonder , are the powers of the ECB if it does not have power in a situation like this one ?
This is a very important point , and I think we will have to thoroughly re-examine the ECB and its transparency .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs in ' t Veld may be unwell physically , she is still in excellent form verbally .
That being so , I should like to carry on where she left off .
I still feel that we are very much running behind the facts .
When it became evident that the United States collected credit card data , as well as other personal data from our passengers , it was a scandal , and we as MEPs wanted a regulation in place , and in most cases , the governments did not want anything , except that if rules were broken , they wanted this to be done quietly ; eventually they were forced into a form of action .
With SWIFT , we saw a repeat of past events : the government mounted a low-level investigation , which will hopefully culminate in some sort of action , and the question is indeed : are we now entirely convinced that this is it ?
The Commission is quite clear-cut when it says that although it is not in any event aware of any developments , it does not rule them out either .
I should like a response from the Council to this .
Do you consider it conceivable and what will you do now to know for certain ?
We are always saying that we are partners with the United States , which is true , for that is what we are , and we have a great deal of work to do .
This also means , though , that you are entitled to know what your friends are getting up to .
I would therefore like to find out from the Council how it intends to address the issue in order to know exactly what data are being collected of our citizens in all kinds of areas .
According to the Council , it is hard to conclude a fresh agreement , because the United States is not so keen on this data protection .
There is , however , a limit to the level of blackmail we are willing to accept .
You cannot say that we have to reach agreement , at any cost , if at a given moment in time , the price we need to pay is too high .
It could , in fact , be quite funny , once we have sunk as low as we can , to draw the line at some point . This may imperil the landing rights , but will , at the same time mobilise quite a bit of opposition , including in the United States , because it is true that although the US administration would very much like to force this through , there is much support for our position among the parliamentarians .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , Mr Frattini , I have to say how astonished I am that , in your remarks about the PNR negotiations , you made no mention of the Automatic Targeting System ( ATS ) .
I , for my part , wonder how it can have come about that a system like ATS , which was originally designed and implemented for freight , could , for years , have been used , in conjunction with PNR data , for passengers , and this without anyone knowing .
While we have been negotiating agreements with the United States in order to guarantee the protection of our citizens ' fundamental rights , a system such as this has , at the same time , been operating behind the scenes .
The USA now assures us that ATS is compatible with the present , as well the previous , PNR agreements .
That being said , I want to state very clearly that assurances of this kind are not enough for me .
For me , it is not obvious how 40 years ' data storage using the ATS system is compatible with the PNR Agreement .
There is also the fact that ATS can apparently be used for any old purpose .
How , then , can this be compatible with the obligations under the PNR Agreement , whereby PNR data is only allowed to be used for the purpose of combating terrorism and other serious crimes ?
We have not so far received any convincing answers to any of these questions , any more than we have to the question of why the ATS system was kept secret at all .
How , during the negotiations for the PNR Agreement , could the United States conceal such essential information from its partner ?
One would probably be justified in asking how it might be guaranteed that there are no further ATS-style systems that we simply know nothing about .
With regard to the new PNR Agreement , I should expressly like to support what my fellow Member , Mr Cavada , said , namely that the number of transferable items of information about airline passengers needs to be significantly reduced .
It must be guaranteed that the US customs and border protection authorities are not just passing on data willy-nilly to any old authority involved in the fight against terrorism .
What is more , we must , as the European Union , insist that European citizens be given the same opportunities for safeguarding their rights as are American citizens .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to take a stand against the black and white terms in which this debate is all too often held .
It also appears , some of the time , that the United States is an enemy instead of an ally in the fight against terrorism .
One may well deny it , but just about every measure that has been taken has come under fire from this House .
It is , of course , the case that the SWIFT case evokes a number of justified questions , which Members from various groups have already asked .
Where , for example , do you draw the line between tracking down terrorists and respecting fundamental rights ?
It is a question , in fact , that has also been put to the American Congress .
In the final analysis , the fight against terror is largely related to risk analysis , the calculation of probability , in other words .
The processing of commercial data on top of personal data pure and simple can make a useful contribution in this respect .
What we must do , though , is to put guarantees in place to prevent misuse .
For example , among other things , this House must monitor the functioning of the system , as well as the algorithms that are used which , moreover , have to be highly confidential ; sanctions must be put in place in the case of misuse ; the information obtained may be used only for the purpose of combating terrorism , and there must be a call centre where complaints from the public can be handled .
It goes without saying that this requires a great deal of consultation with the United States .
A clear legal framework is needed , and , in creating one , all partners must be open to fresh ideas and new techniques .
( PT ) I should like to begin by saying that I see the United States of America not as an enemy but as a friend and partner in shared fights .
Of course , in our shared fights we must pay particular attention to combating terrorism , but it is also important to mention that , in some of these fights , the US Administration has at times gone too far , both at internal and international levels , and I am chairing a European parliamentary committee to look into some of these excesses on the international stage .
It should also be noted that the US Congress has undergone a shift of balance , which has led the US Administration to pull back from implementing some of its more controversial plans at internal level , and I hope that this will have an effect at external level , too .
This , to my mind , means that the USA is clawing back its good record of placing the emphasis on civil liberties , which is a good thing .
Mr Frattini has reminded us that the demands of security must not undermine the values of essential freedoms and in particular data protection , and Mr Cavada rightly pointed out that the amount of data requested is excessive .
Does Parliament want to know what data is involved ?
Who can have access to it ?
How can we ensure that objectives are limited and that data are not used for other purposes ?
With whom can they be shared ?
For what length of time can they be kept ?
Then there is the issue of the push system , as mentioned by previous speakers , and the question of people 's rights to appeal in the event of the misuse of their personal data .
Previous speakers have said that , if we in Europe offer US citizens the same level of personal data protection that we offer European citizens under the principle of reciprocity , we are legitimately entitled to claim the same , namely that European citizens in the USA should enjoy the same level of data protection as that offered to US citizens .
( EL ) Mr President , the debate on the PNR agreement - SWIFT and secret CIA abductions and flights unfortunately highlights a philosophical divide between America and Europe .
The US Government considers that the fight against terrorism warrants any means .
Europe does not .
However , the recent elections in the USA now give the European Union the chance to negotiate a new PNR agreement from a different position of strength , with many more allies among the people of America and Congress itself .
Let us hope it will do so .
In order to achieve the objective of an agreement which protects fundamental rights , it must , inter alia :
Firstly , insist that the USA makes an explicit undertaking to provide full and effective personal data protection , as opposed to the current , unacceptable practice of a non-binding and unsatisfactory protocol .
Secondly , restrict the number of data items currently transmitted to the USA , many of which have little to do with the legitimate objective of identifying terrorist suspects .
Thirdly , ban the use of data for purposes unrelated to the fight against terrorism .
Fourthly , expressly stipulate and limit the US departments which will be entitled to access data .
Fifthly , ban at long last the right of direct access in the USA to airline company files .
We must bring this saga to an end .
Sixthly and finally , make provision for the European Commission and the European Parliament to have the facility for constant , direct and effective control of the strict application of the USA 's obligations and to stop immediately any investigation that infringes the intended purpose .
We have even been told by a private company , by SWIFT , that they demanded and achieved this in its negotiations with the USA .
There is no excuse for twenty-seven European prime ministers to be unable to negotiate and achieve this .
If they do not , it will be a question not of ' I could not ' but of ' I would not ' and we shall all rightly judge them at that point .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , data protection has high status in the EU .
It was therefore a shock for us to learn from the media - and from the American media at that - that , despite the data protection requirements documented in all the EU Member States , SWIFT was prepared to give in to pressure from the United States and to forward data concerning European citizens to Washington .
This happened without the knowledge , never mind the agreement , of the European Parliament , the national parliaments or the individuals concerned .
To date , we have not been able to examine the memorandum of understanding between SWIFT and the United States that forms the basis for transferring the data .
We can only hope that the data has in actual fact been used only for the purposes of combating terrorism and not , for example , for economic espionage .
We do not to date have any confirmation of this .
We all support , and appreciate the need for , determination in fighting terrorism .
However , individuals ' fundamental rights must be safeguarded .
Emphatically , the fight against terrorism must not be conducted to the detriment of basic civil rights and the right to data protection .
That is a particular concern of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe too , and that is why we requested a hearing on this issue .
It did not surprise us that the Americans , who were also invited , stayed away from the hearing without saying why .
We welcome the prompt and thorough investigation by the Belgians , who have come to the clear view that a violation of rights or , as Commissioner Frattini put it , a criminal offence has taken place .
Incidentally , the people responsible at SWIFT either knew , or at least suspected and feared , this from the beginning , and they have indirectly informed us that they did so .
The failure of corporate governance at SWIFT is still incomprehensible to me .
The supervisory bodies were informed , but did nothing to enlighten people as to what was happening or to tell the governments about it .
With the best will in the world , that is no way to treat politically mature citizens .
People 's confidence in the EU as a legal community has been badly damaged . The SWIFT case is leading to an increase in Euroscepticism in the population , and it will be difficult to win back the confidence that has been lost .
I would ask the Council and the Commission to conclude the careful inquiry , of which Mr Gloser has spoken , as quickly as possible and to present practical proposals as to how the rights of European citizens might be enforced in respect of the United States too .
You should show people that you are not kow-towing to the United States but take the European Union seriously as a community of values and courageously defend it in relation to major partners too , and precisely because they are friends rather than enemies .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament was quite right to become fully involved in monitoring the routine transfer of European Union citizens ' personal data to the United States .
Control by the European Parliament is acceptable .
Refusal to transfer data is not .
It seems that data transfer can be justified on the grounds of the terrorist threat , posed mainly by Islamic extremists .
Nonetheless , such a threat cannot be perceived and exploited as a good pretext for the uncontrolled and unrestrained restriction of citizens ' rights .
We must not become extremists ourselves .
We must not retreat from the front line of the war against terror under the banner of citizens ' rights .
On the other hand , we need to control those who would like to control us in the interests of that war .
I refer to the monitoring our flights , financial affairs and privacy .
If the justifiable war against global terrorism is not to transform into a dictatorship and a war against citizens ' freedoms , it must itself be subject to strict scrutiny by the European Parliament .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a thorough assessment in the run-up to an agreement .
Central to this will be the issue of the effectiveness not only of the present agreement , but also of the previous one .
This question must be answered before we can make further progress in this matter .
Any future agreement must be based on the push system .
The pull system is no longer acceptable , since , as is well known , the push system ought already to have been introduced in the previous agreement .
The transfer of passenger data needs to be strictly limited in terms of the purposes for which such data is used . Otherwise , we cannot contemplate such a regulation .
The future agreement must also be given full democratic legitimacy , a process that should involve the European Parliament and , if appropriate , the national parliaments .
We also need an annual evaluation as a necessary component of any agreement , and the evaluation reports must be publicly accessible .
Clearly , the rules governing personal data need urgently to be protected under the third pillar , as do global standards covering all the categories of personal data .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I very well remember the statements by Chancellor Merkel in Strasbourg , in which she rightly spoke of European values and also about our need to get across to people , and make it clear to them , what Europe 's strong points are .
Mr Gloser , this would appear to be a case in which we should explain to people that the European Union helps them safeguard their rights .
We are not concerned in this instance with the issue of combating terrorism .
There is consensus in this House on that matter , and it does not need to be discussed .
Where , however , do we stand , then , in this debate ?
We began by discussing airline passenger data , and now we come on to SWIFT .
In view of the speed with which the Council debate is currently being conducted , it is to be feared that , over the next few years , we may possibly have further SWIFTs to contend with , but we still have not made further progress .
In the meantime , we have a situation in which , under pressure from the United States , a European company signs a memorandum of understanding with the Americans , which Europeans are unable to scrutinise .
Moreover , SWIFT still does not even have a registered office in the United States , but only a data bank .
That is sufficient for American regulators to be able to take SWIFT to task in Belgium .
This is like a running theme . There is more and more American regulation of European affairs , appropriated by the United States without we Europeans managing to adopt corresponding countermeasures and to monitor the effects of these .
I would therefore , bearing in mind that Germany does not only have the Presidency of the European Council but also chairs the G7 , urge the Commission to take an active stance in this area and , as well as investigating matters , to resolve one issue : how , on the basis of our common values and while adhering to data protection requirements and safeguarding human dignity , are we to join together in combating terrorism ?
Mr President , of course the reality of this is that on PNR , the Americans are setting a negotiation bar for conditions of entry into the US or into their airspace .
That is the reality .
They can set the bar as high as they like .
We have citizens who wish to travel and businesses who want to work there .
That is the reality .
The reality on SWIFT is that we had an institution , not I believe the only institution , that was dealing with a conflict of jurisdictions , operating and holding data in the US and equally in the EU .
It had subpoenas which it legally had to meet in the United States of America and that was where we had the conflict .
SWIFT , I believe , has actually operated and negotiated an excellent memorandum of understanding .
We can either come into politics to name , shame , moan and whinge , or to try and solve a problem .
I came in for the latter .
Therefore I believe , Commissioner Frattini , you are absolutely right .
We need legal certainty for EU citizens , for EU businesses operating outside the EU and with offices outside the EU as well as within , and in which they hold data .
We need a joint political commitment of Congress and this Parliament working across the transatlantic divide to fight the threat of terrorism which affects us all , and indeed we need to protect above all our fundamental rights and freedoms .
Therefore I welcome the joint meeting of this House and US elected representatives so that we can reach an agreement .
Finally , this will only be achieved by decisive action at Council level , not just at Commission level .
I welcome the excellent suggestion of the previous speaker of bringing this up at the G7 .
Let us solve the problem ; let us not moan about it .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner and the President-in-Office for being present at this very important debate .
We have heard that maintaining good cooperation with the US was crucial in our fight against terrorism .
I do not deny that .
I even believe that the transatlantic relationship must be reinforced because terrorism is a global phenomenon .
We must join forces to fight it efficiently by exchanging information and providing our law enforcement agencies with the necessary means .
Our citizens have the right to live in a safe and secure place .
However , the SWIFT case is showing us again the drifts arising if we do not ensure strict safeguards when exchanging information .
There is a correct balance to be struck between freedom and security , and in this case , security has once again prevailed .
You cannot combat terrorism by giving up the very rights that terrorism seeks to destroy .
Our high standards must not be lowered under pressure from any third country , even from our closest partners .
It is even more important that many of the new Member States have a long history of dictatorship and mass surveillance of their population .
Unfortunately , in some of these countries , there is a perception that the illicit practices of the past are still carried on .
That is why Europe must remain the defender of fundamental rights , and that includes the right to privacy .
On the one hand we need a framework decision on data protection in the third pillar to ensure high standards in police and judicial cooperation .
We have been waiting for it for too long now .
On the other hand , we must also remain vigilant and ensure that the existing instruments are properly enforced in our own countries .
We must prosecute those who infringe our basic rights to privacy .
We need to reassure our citizens that we want to maintain high standards in Europe .
Mr President , as my colleagues have said before , this is not a debate about the shape of the transatlantic relations .
Everyone in this House should know that the United States is our strongest ally in the fight against terrorism .
But this does not change the fact that if we are partners it makes it easier for us to stand firm and really defend our values and our laws .

I can only echo what my PPE colleagues - especially Mr Radwan - have said : in order for us to really safeguard the respect of the European regulatory framework , we need full information from the Commission and Council on the information that is delivered to the US authorities and how this information is protected by the US authorities .
We have to start to negotiate and get an agreement on information exchange which is on a viable basis and which respects the EU laws .
If this does not happen , we have to immediately stop delivering any kind of information to the US authorities .
Even after the ECB 's response , I am quite puzzled as to what the role and the responsibility of the ECB is in this case .
The ECB itself is subject to the data privacy requirements of EU law , but it does not seem to take any responsibility for what it might have in this information exchange .
I also understand that there is a clear need for the US to track down information on international bank transfers that might have a link to terrorist financing , but these details have a link to other kinds of financing .
Our European businesses , especially , might be at risk if we do not act and stand firm .
The information that will be given should always be in line with our legislation and protect our citizens and European businesses .
The national financial transfers contain such delicate information that this is really an issue which should be taken seriously by the Commission and by the Council , this Parliament and the US Congress .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , Commissioner , the Presidency-in-Office of the Council should , in my view , observe the following guidelines in its current negotiations with the United States on the transfer of airline passenger data .
Firstly , it is through a proportionate approach that an appropriate level of security will be achieved , and that approach is not apparent in the case of the current agreements .
Such an approach depends - and this is my second point - on implementing compliance with normal European data protection standards , and that in my view involves changing the status quo , mainly through reducing the quantity of behaviour-related data .
Where switching over to the push system is concerned , Austrian Airlines has , to my knowledge , operated this system from the beginning - successfully , too .
The system involves having a clearly defined framework for using the data , a limit on the period for which the data is stored and , not least , the ability to lodge a complaint in the event of data being misused .
Mr Gloser , you rightly said that we need legal certainty as quickly as possible for European airlines .
As a politician involved in transport issues , I can only concur with that .
Given that the transfer of data really is about making progress in combating terrorism , it has an international dimension , and we no doubt also need international agreements with internationally binding data protection rules .
These are what we should be negotiating towards .
We must always be concerned to uphold our right to freedom of movement , which can only be achieved in an open society in which people can move about freely without falling under general suspicion .
It would be unacceptable to us as Members of the European Parliament if the principle of equality were to be violated and if different levels of data protection were to apply to US citizens , on the one hand , and to non-Americans , on the other .
I have confidence in the determination of the German Presidency of the Council as it conducts the negotiations .
I know that these will not be a simple matter .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , Commissioner , the fact that you have heard the same refrain right across the political groups should , I believe , give you pause for thought .
The message is that we do of course need a transatlantic partnership and that we are allies in the fight against terrorism .
Not only the refrain , but even the verse was the same across the board , namely that credibility , confidence and transparency are necessary where these issues are concerned .
Let us begin with credibility .
I still remember very well how , in his last speech in this House , the Commissioner particularly praised the data protection aspects of the agreement .
I do not believe that such praise is compatible with the rights that we should have from the point of view of data protection law .
Where the transfer of airline passenger data is concerned , there is no duty to provide information , and the individuals concerned have no right to correct the data .
What , moreover , has happened to credibility when you call the conversations you are conducting with the United States ' negotiations ' ?
You are standing with your back to the wall and with a pistol pointing at your chest .
The United States is threatening no longer to allow aircraft to land , and none of the European Union 's institutions has the backbone to say that , in all good faith , we shall not allow ourselves to be treated like that .
Credibility is undermined by our hearing again and again that Parliament is to be involved .
If you are serious about that , then include us around the table and , in so doing , show us that you mean what you say .
Turning now to the subject of transparency , which European citizens are aware that , when they board an aircraft , 34 items of data , including information about what they have to eat and where they sit , are transferred ?
None do .
I have discussed this very question with citizens in a broadcast .
No one knows that this is what happens when he or she boards an aircraft .
We are on your side , so involve us instead of just fobbing us off .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the SWIFT debate very clearly fits within the wider discussion on the high-wire balancing act between the fight against terrorism on the one hand and the protection of fundamental human rights and privacy on the other .
Not only , though , is there a clear dividing line between the European and American positions , we cannot even seem to agree on a common definition for terrorism .
The Commissioner has indicated on this platform how he would like to develop a European instrument for the future that would meet these requirements , but that is something that cannot , of course , be done overnight .
We are , indeed , left with the situation from the past and present , something about which I have quite a few questions .
To this day , data are being passed on , as if there was nothing wrong , within the SWIFT dossier .
The conclusions of the reports from both the Belgian privacy committee and the European Committee are clear and unanimous : the Belgian and European rules on data protection have clearly been flouted .
In view of the fact that the Belgian courts have now decided not to prosecute SWIFT , and the Belgian Government cannot see any point in continuing those illegal practices , I should like to ask what Europe 's response to this is .
Will the Commission now start an infringement procedure against Belgium ?
If so , when will this be decided ?
If not , what does the Commission intend to do to ensure that the European privacy rules are respected hic et nunc in all Member States , including Belgium ?
Finally , at the Council of 15 December , the SWIFT case was also raised by the Belgian Prime Minister who argued in favour of a European approach .
Although I understand from the presidency that the inquiry is still underway , I have a very straightforward question : are the Council , and hence all the Member States , behind the idea of regulating this issue by means of a European instrument ?
Mr President , I do not doubt Commissioner Frattini 's own personal good faith and commitment to data protection .
But I think the Commission , as well as the Council , are being as feeble about SWIFT privacy abuses as they have been over PNR over the last four years .
This is European data , belonging to European citizens , made available for commercial purposes in Europe under the protection of European data protection law .
But despite the persistent and insistent demands of MEPs , the EU , in the less than robust hands of the Council and Commission , has allowed a large degree of US extra-territorial jurisdiction .
In any global framework for exchange of mass commercial data for security purposes , the EU must forcefully project its own laws and principles .
Commissioner , you say that it is ' unlikely ' that SWIFT data have been used in the automated targeting system , which is a profiling exercise assigning a risk score to each individual based on assumptions - and no doubt stereotypes - deriving from their behaviour and characteristics .
But why do you not know categorically , yes or no , whether SWIFT data has been used in ATS ?
In relation to PNR , you accept the Department of Homeland Security 's assurance that the use of PNR data for profiling complies with the undertakings of the PNR agreement .
But do you agree with the DHS assessment ?
Yes or no ?
The lack of clear answers is undermining trust , and I think that we are owed those clear answers as to the Commission 's legal evaluation .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner Frattini , you did not beat about the bush when you made your commitment to the negotiations known .
Full compliance with the fundamental rights , including privacy , there is no room for any misunderstanding here , and we will keep you to this pledge .
There is , then , little point in 780 MEPs sitting where the negotiators should be ; it would not work .
That does , however , mean that the Council must be ambitious in its negotiations , instead of - as I now hear them doing - mainly weighing up the hazards it might meet with along the way .
We assume , however , that your commitment to the negotiations is as firm as Commissioner Frattini 's , because we will hold you to that as well .
This is about SWIFT now , and SWIFT not being a bank should not be a licence not to take privacy rules seriously or not to comply with them .
The inquiry you mounted , Commissioner Frattini , is to be welcomed , but you will need to take legal measures promptly in order to fill the vacuum , because data exchange at SWIFT should also be able to stand the test of European privacy rules .
The fight against terror must also be able to look into financial transactions in this framework , because this may well lead to terrorist organisations .
Something that has struck me is that many citizens have much sympathy for the difficult dilemmas we face in this context .
We cannot resolve this overnight .
I am , for example , quite shocked by the fact that there has not been more of a fuss made about the rules on liquids in aircraft .
We should not seize this as an excuse , though .
Tough negotiations are needed .
The suggestion mooted by Mr Radwan to place this in a wider G7 context is something I am happy to endorse .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , none us in this House disputes the fact that there needs to be enhanced prevention of terrorism in the future .
However , the issue inevitably arises of the means to be used in this connection , as well as the issue of the strategies to be adopted .
Undoubtedly , international cooperation and the exchange of data are just as much a part of the process as , on the other hand , legal certainty and the necessary data protection .
As all of us do in this House , I support transatlantic cooperation in this connection .
We must , however , attach importance to seeing a balance maintained between security and the combating of terrorism , on the one hand , and data protection , on the other .
If , moreover , it is now a question of negotiating a new agreement , then this new agreement needs to fulfil certain basic preconditions .
Firstly , personal data needs to be given the same level of protection as has already been achieved in the interim agreement .
Secondly , the airlines must be afforded legal certainty so that the promise to switch over to a push system , enabling us to control which data is delivered to whom and at which juncture , is kept .
The purpose for which the data can be used must also , of course , be laid down so that the data can only , and is only allowed to , be used for the purpose of preventing and combating terrorism . There should also in future be a duty to provide travellers with information in this connection .
I would make one last point , which I do think is important . In negotiating the new agreement , added value should also be created .
As soon as an act of terrorism is suspected , the US authorities should be obliged to notify the corresponding judicial and police authorities in the Member States , as well as the corresponding EU institutions , namely Europol or Eurojust .
If all this is guaranteed , we shall have available to us a further instrument designed to make EU citizens more secure .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank you most sincerely for the many comments , ideas and of course - whether one likes them or not - the critical remarks .
In a debate , they serve to indicate whether or not one is on the right track and whether it is possible to prevent some state of affairs that was not perhaps right in the past from arising again .
Not only legal protection and legal certainty but also the issue of how we are to combat specific forms of international terrorism are , it is true , unanimously deemed to be important , but we must not in any circumstances play these off against each other .
Where the two areas of PNR and SWIFT are concerned , we face different situations .
In the statement by the Presidency , I again made a point of clearly emphasising cooperation and interchange with the Commission , on the basis of which we wish together to arrive at a legally certain regulation .
This raises many issues to which you have also referred today , including those of how extensive the information is , what access there is to it and what controls need to be exercised by the other party .
Similar issues arise too where the subject of SWIFT is concerned , and in this connection I am again happy to take up Mr Radwan 's idea .
Irrespective of whether or not it is at present on the agendas of the G7 or G8 or comes within the area of relations between the European Union and the United States , it is important to address this issue .
There would certainly be no benefit in just moving constantly from one aspect to the next , as what is at issue here is essentially the same .
We are concerned with data protection , with legal certainty and , furthermore , with the form to be taken by the transatlantic partnership , in connection with which we are of the view that partnership is not a one-way street .
It is a question of working with , rather than against , each other .
We need the information concerned , and relations between the European Union and the United States should be such that , in the forthcoming meetings between the two countries , it should be possible to address the issues very clearly , above all with a view to confronting the danger that some of you have described .
I can do no more than say how absolutely right it is to address these issues openly .
When are we to be confronted with the next case in which data is perhaps unsafely accessed ?
That is a point that we should like to take up .
Without now going into technical details , I also say that with , specifically , SWIFT in mind .
Where is the data ?
Is it here , and would we have the opportunity to put it in order and limit its extent without its being passed on ?
Or is the data possibly already available in the USA where , because of the nature of data protection there , it is very easy to access ?
The implication in that case , however , is that we have no influence at all .
The question is , however , that of what influence the European Union has on data that is transferred and that is , as it were , ready to be called up elsewhere ?
Specifically where SWIFT is concerned , this is certainly a complicated procedure .
All this should , however , give us the opportunity for discussing these matters in depth and for arguing how important it is for us in the European Union to stand for certain values and also to act in defence of those values . It should also give us the opportunity for arguing how essential it is to maintain the existing balance .
That does not mean that we are always in agreement about the fight against international terrorism .
It is just that all these matters have to be balanced out .
Commissioner Frattini did in fact make this very clear in giving precedence not only to people 's safety but also to legal protection and to the very high level of data protection such as we do in fact have in the European Union .
I can only assure you that these many facets that you have discussed are also to be included for discussion in the forthcoming negotiations , and in relation not only to PNR but also , of course , to SWIFT .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as always I shall be perfectly sincere in my reply to this House , and I shall also address the points on which I do not share your views .
First , as the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs is well aware - and its chairman , Mr Cavada , is here - I have never , under any circumstances , either denied or concealed any information , including confidential information , that I could have given to the committee and thus to Parliament .
I intend to continue in the same way , as I said in my introduction .
Thus I do not share the opinion - which is actually to prejudge the issue - that the European institutions and Parliament in particular might be in danger of being excluded from this political process .
You are well aware that I am in favour of your being politically involved , even when the Treaties do not allow for it .
I have said it a thousand times and I shall say it again : we shall find a way , and that is why I welcome Mr Cavada 's idea of even organising an agreement with the US Congress to monitor the political stages of these negotiations .
It is also clear that this debate has affected Euroatlantic relations , contrary to what somebody said .
I am convinced that , if Europe wants to be a leader on the world political stage , it must achieve a global balance between the right - I personally consider it a duty - to pursue and investigate terrorists and the duty to protect fundamental rights , such as the privacy of personal data .
It is therefore obvious that if , as the President-in-Office of the Council has just said , we want to achieve an overall balance together with the United States , we want to do so because we are convinced that Euroatlantic relations are crucial , not only with regard to Europe 's past history but , above all , with regard to its present and future history .
As many of you are well aware , I have on many occasions supplied detailed answers , above all to the Committee on Civil Liberties , of course , but I address Parliament when I am invited to do so and I speak to those committees that invite me .
Regarding the ' push ' system , for instance , I announced in December that experiments with such a system for passenger name records would begin before the end of the month , and they did .
The experiment was started with the US Administration 's Customs and Border Protection System and Amadeus .
There is a technical point regarding requests for ad hoc data , but it is a technical problem , while the ' push ' experiment has indeed started , as we had been promised .
With regard to the number of data items , I was interested to hear what many of you had to say about the 34 items that are currently the subject of the PNR agreement .
I can tell you quite openly that , as far as my part in the negotiations is concerned , I intend to call for the number of data items in question to be cut , but not because I subscribe to the idea that the US is asking for too many .
If all 34 items were of use in pursuing terrorists , I would not be afraid to tell you that 34 items were needed .
However , the really useful items are probably those 19 that have been mentioned : that is to say , a much smaller number .
Believe me , though , the principle that counts as regards the data to be processed is not the number of items but rather the usefulness of the data , and it is on those grounds that I intend to take action in the negotiations .
I do not mean to endorse the idea that , if we cut the 34 items down to 15 , we will in any case have done a good job : we may actually have done a very bad job if some of the excluded data items could have prevented a terrorist attack .
I am in no doubt about one thing : I am quite certain that the main aim is to make the system effective .
Who has access to the data ?
What for ?
How many data and for how long ?
These are the points of an agreement that we are going to start negotiating soon , and Parliament will be kept informed , as I have already said .
Ladies and gentlemen , many of you believe that passenger information is the missing factor in the PNR system .
It is fair to imagine that if no consensus is reached between the two sides , no agreement will be made at the end of July .
Just in my mind 's eye , I can see a very simple solution : every ticket to the United States that is purchased could come with a sheet for the passenger to sign , informing them that their data will be processed in a particular way .
If that should happen - and I strongly hope that it never will - we will certainly have ensured that passengers are given information but , without an agreement at European level , passengers ' rights will be limited to the private sphere of the air carriage contract .
That is an eventuality that we must avert by every possible means , which is why we must try to achieve a new European agreement .
The alternative would be very simple : passengers would merely need to be asked to accept a few restrictions as part of the air carriage contract , and I believe that the majority who want to go to the United States for honest reasons would sign it .
We would , however , be giving up a role for Europe that we have already played and which it is vital that we still play .
That is why we need new negotiations , in part to cut down the number of data items , but in such a way that reducing the amount of data does not jeopardise the fight against terrorism .
In connection with the ATS system , I have mentioned to the Committee on Civil Liberties that I have received written assurances from the United States regarding compliance with the PNR agreement .
In a speech made in this Chamber , I was criticised for not having checked the veracity of this statement .
Ladies and gentlemen , if I , in Brussels , had the power to investigate the behaviour of the United States , I would have powers that no authority at either European or national level has ever had or is ever likely to have .
Everything is possible , apart from checking the veracity of that letter , as I was asked to do in that speech .
When I receive a formal reply saying that the rules are being complied with , I have to take it at face value unless there is evidence to the contrary .
That is what happens between allies , unless you have some evidence to the contrary - which I frankly do not have , and I am being absolutely honest - because otherwise we would have to open a permanent inquiry into every minute detail of the letters we receive from the United States .
Mrs Roure asked me whether we can give Parliament our information on the negotiating mandate .
As you know , such information is classified ; nonetheless , as I said before , even though it is classified , we will find a way to keep Parliament informed , in other words a way to give you political information without violating a rule enshrined in the Treaties , whereby classified ( ' EU restricted ' ) information cannot be published .
This is the political solution that I propose : if the Treaty is amended so as to specify a mechanism by which classified acts may be communicated to Parliament , I shall apply such a rule without hesitation .
It is a matter , however , of overcoming the obstacle that Parliament cannot be informed if classified material is involved .
I shall keep you up to date on this .
Many people have called for a framework agreement , Mr President , which I think is the right way to go .
A framework agreement on data transmission is precisely what we have started working on with the Presidency : we are setting up a joint working party to deal with a number of topics relating to personal data processing - separate , therefore , from the SWIFT case and PNR , which are going on in parallel .
We believe that the time has now come to conclude a Euroatlantic political agreement - a framework agreement - with the United States on personal data processing , and we intend to work on this agreement in order to specify what kinds of data can be transmitted , for what purposes and for how long .

Ladies and gentlemen , there is a further point that has not been addressed in this debate , but which needs to be addressed : how can we preserve the confidentiality of the technical information that forms part of this agreement ?
Since it concerns investigation procedures , it would be a gift to criminals if it were revealed .
Such information needs to be kept confidential .
There is thus another problem , because it is obvious that we would be giving suspected terrorists a powerful tool if we revealed details about how they are monitored .
Can a solution be found ?
I am quite sure that one can , but there needs to be political will on both sides .
I should like to end with a final thought : none of all that justifies the specific violations of European law and the legislative failings in the SWIFT case .
You may recall that , when nobody was yet talking about a European agreement , I addressed the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the need for such an agreement , because it is much better to close a legislative gap with a European rule than to leave it to the individual Member States to legislate as they please .
The SWIFT case is typical : out of 27 Member States , only seven have given me a reply .
That is a sign that the issue needs to be addressed at a European level .
For all these reasons , therefore , I can assure you that 1 ) I believe that a political agreement is essential and that the legitimacy of such an agreement will be weaker if Parliament is not involved ; and 2 ) such a political agreement should be aimed at solving the problems constructively , without pointing the finger at the United States as if it was the problem : the problem , ladies and gentlemen , is the terrorists , not the United States .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session .
Since it is time to resume the sitting , there will be no suspension .
I would like to thank the interpreters for their generosity and professionalism ; this Parliament could not function without them .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
( PT ) There have been months and months of condemnation of the unacceptable transfer of passenger name records by airlines and of personal data by the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications ( SWIFT ) system to the security and information services of the United States .
Yet , in response to the questions asked here in Parliament , the German Presidency of the Council and the Commission have offered nothing that would result in complete clarification of these matters and an end to this blatant violation of the citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees .
Their responses do not contain a single word on the practical measures needed to put an end to these unacceptable , illegal practices , or on demanding full clarification from the US Administration .
Such behaviour is ultimately indicative of the Council 's submissive , passive attitude to the USA 's blackmail and demands .
I must also mention the attempts by those whose only goal is to benefit from these situations by further applying qualified majority voting in the Council on issues of justice and home affairs .
All measures that , under the guise of the so-called ' war on terror ' , undermine the citizens ' fundamental rights must be rejected outright .
( EL ) Both the Commission and the Council have confirmed in their statements that they will continue to satisfy US demands by holding files on all European citizens and handing over their personal data to the US secret security services .
The representatives of the German Presidency and the Commission have not only accepted that the new agreement with the USA on the transmission of the personal data of passengers flying there will not differ from the present agreement ; they have also cynically admitted that they are prepared to legalise the SWIFT scandal by laying down so-called principles for the provision of information on financial transactions by European citizens in the USA , so that this will now be legal .
As they clearly stated , they will not commit the cardinal sin of disrupting relations between the EU and the USA .
As far as the protection of fundamental rights , personal data and privacy are concerned , they will try to persuade our ' American friends ' to respect them , obviously just as they respect them in Iraq and Afghanistan .
It is crystal clear that the policies of the EU and the USA are identical , are equally reactionary and anti-democratic and are equally dangerous to democratic rights and grass-roots freedoms , using as they do the ' fight against terrorism ' as the necessary pretext to limit fundamental rights .
Limitation periods in cross-border disputes involving personal injuries and fatal accidents ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Wallis , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , with recommendations to the Commission on limitation periods in cross-border disputes involving injuries and fatal accidents .
rapporteur . - Mr President , in opening this discussion I would like us to imagine ourselves as one of those people we represent , perhaps off on holiday to another European country or a young person off to study somewhere else , or somebody off to a business meeting in another European capital , or even to work on a building site .
All of these are simple everyday scenarios that sadly contain the potential for mishaps , for accidents involving personal injury or even death in another country .
Let me also give you some figures by way of example : in 2004 alone in Germany , just one of our 27 Member States , there were 50 000 road traffic accidents involving personal injury and a foreign national from another European country .
In the UK last year , one firm of lawyers alone reported opening some 6000 files on cross-border personal injury accidents in Europe .
Well , you might say , let the lawyers get on with it .
But the lawyers have come to us with a problem .
All legal actions are subject to a period of time within which they have to be commenced , a so-called limitation period .
All good lawyers are training in their national system to observe and watch these time limits very carefully .
Otherwise the whole claim is dead , finished , struck out .
It is one of the nightmares of every young lawyer to miss a limitation period deadline .
Of course , they all know their own , but can they be expected to know the intricacies of 27 national systems ?
And there are intricacies , sometimes involving differing definitions of what is a civil or criminal claim .
More importantly , the time limit itself varies tremendously , between one and thirty years across the European Union .
It is bad enough to be an accident victim in another Member State .
But then to fall a secondary victim to a technical difficulty over limitation periods which then stop any claim being made is , as we say in English , really a case of adding insult to injury .
This is a real , practical and growing problem as we encourage free movement of persons .
I hope that the very limited numbers I have been able to quote give an idea of the problem which in reality must be multiplied many times across the Member States of the Union .
As I have stated above , legal practitioners , insurers and victims alike have come to us with this problem asking that we approach you , Commissioner , to look at a range of possibilities .
We know the issue is sensitive .
It concerns national procedural law , so any intervention at European level should be strictly limited to the cross-border cases only .
It may be that for these cases a harmonised limitation period of say four years might be considered , or maybe we should adopt clear conflict of laws rules .
Whatever the shape of the ultimate solution , practitioners and claimants alike need certainty if valuable and personally critical claims are not to be in danger of being lost because of differing procedural rules that can really cause individual and family misery if things go awry .
This is a practical problem arising out of the use by our citizens of free movement and all that the internal market offers .
On our side we should be prepared to respond with a system of European civil justice which does not , as I have said earlier , just add insult to injury .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will feel able to respond to this initiative which has been the subject of a good deal of positive lobbying from citizens and others towards Members during the weeks leading up to this debate .
Vice-President of the Commission .
I think this report is a very interesting attempt to deal with a very difficult subject .
Mrs Wallis is to be congratulated on trying to see a way into a general European solution to the differences in limitation periods as they relate , as she just said , to actions for damages for personal injury and death .
This is of particular concern to citizens who have the misfortune to suffer road traffic accidents in countries other than those in which they live .
But it could also apply in other matters , such as medical claims and product liability .
Having said that , the area of limitation is a complex matter , as the rapporteur also acknowledged .
It is very closely linked to prescription , which is not dealt with in the report .
Any further work on the subject would need to deal with prescription , since the majority of European legal systems solve the problem of time limits through the use of prescription rather than limitation periods .
The UK system uses both .
I am ready , I am open to examining this question in the future , taking into account the different legal nature of limitation and prescription , and the fact that the Treaty base proposed excludes harmonisation of internal law , which , in large measure , is what is implied by the report .
I have to be very frank in pointing out that we will also have to take into account the priorities established in our current work programme , which will also have to be integrated in line with the human resources available in the European Commission .
That said , I can see that this very new point put by the rapporteur should be left open for further discussions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the rapporteur has done excellent work with this report .
There is much to applaud in this initiative .
This , like our rapporteur said , is a practical solution to a practical problem .
For one , it concerns one of the unfinished areas of the single market : how people 's rights travel with them when they exercise their four freedoms inside the Union .
The European Parliament must point out any anomalies and invoke its Treaty rights to prompt the Commission into action .
Secondly , it concerns justice and home affairs .
People need as much certainty as possible about their rights and obligations in order to engage in any society .
Engaging across borders in always going to be more uncertain than doing so at home but we have a duty as EU legislators to address these concerns .
The mere fact that the disparate national laws do not allow for a quick uniform solution is no excuse for inaction .
The European Parliament is doing its part by opening the debate today .
The Commission should follow with a proposal and the Member States should assume their sovereign responsibility and enact the necessary changes , employing the passerelle clause of the Nice Treaty if needed .
However , we have to be careful how we approach this .
While my group strongly supports the report of Mrs Wallis , we cannot support her amendments to it .
We believe it is too early in this report to point towards overly-harmonised and specific definitions of , for example , date of knowledge , interrupted proceedings , and special rights of minors .
We do not believe them to be fully consistent at this stage with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Let us first hear about the Commission 's inquiry as to what kinds of cross-border problems exist in the domain of limitation periods in cases of personal injury and then move on to the concrete definitions .
For example , if the inquiry were to show that there is not such a huge discrepancy between Member States ' rules , the country of origin approach , as the report suggests , might show the way .
Personally I would support this approach .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) I shall speak in Spanish , and this is the first speech in Spanish , but I believe that the Commissioner understands my language perfectly .
I would like to point out that the Castilian version of the report says ' recomendaciones destinadas a la Comisión sobre la prescripción en conflictos transfronterizos ' . In other words , it does not use the phrase ' estatuto de limitaciones ' , because , according to my knowledge of Anglo-Saxon law , the expression ' statute of limitations ' , at least in Spanish , is translated as ' prescripción ' .
I know that the Italians are very sharp and precise lawyers , and this issue probably deserves to be discussed in greater depth , although I agree that the origins of the two institutions differ .
In any event , I believe that Mrs Wallis 's report reflects the European Parliament 's desire to push the Commission in a certain direction .
Neither we nor the report are asking the Commission to present a legislative proposal quickly , but I believe that certain stages such as the one indicated in paragraph1 , which states that an investigation into what is happening is needed should be carried out .
As Mrs Wallis has said , there are currently thousands of people , or hundreds of thousands of people , crossing national borders , and I believe that Mr Frattini was right on another issue , and that is that we should not just focus on cross-border accidents or incidents , but on all of those cases in which , as a result of a series of situations - such as medical treatment or accommodation - a person suffers damages in one country and the problem of limitations arises in another country .
I believe that we should extend the possibilities as far as possible and that for the moment - and perhaps Mrs Kauppi is right - it is probably not yet time to go into details , but the Commission should at least be aware that we elected representatives of the peoples of the European Union believe that it should adopt certain kinds of initiative in relation to this issue .
As the rapporteur proposes , this kind of initiative should begin with acquiring proper knowledge of the situation , so that we have a true picture of that situation and of the possibilities available to us for legislating in this field .
When the House comes to vote on this , it may perhaps be worth noting the problems arising from the various language versions .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Wallis for taking this initiative aimed at harmonising the rules on commencement of running time and limitation periods for claims relating to property and personal injury in cross-border disputes .
Road travel has increased significantly of late , partly due to the various enlargements of the European Union , and also to people becoming more affluent and being able to travel freely .
Unfortunately , this has resulted in more people being involved in road accidents .
At present , under national civil systems , limitation periods vary from the very short , such as one year , to the very long , such as 30 years .
This is not helpful for the protection of the injured parties , who are often unaware of the variations in limitation periods in various countries and submit claims for damages to foreign courts after the expiry of the relevant period .
What happens then is that the court rejects the application and the individuals , whose health or property has been affected , are unable to assert their rights .
Harmonisation would help with the introduction of reliable and transparent principles , which would allow claims to be asserted by both the injured parties and by their legal representatives .
As a lawyer myself , I am well aware of the situation the latter can find themselves in .
That is why I fully support this initiative .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Wallis very much for the work she has undertaken .
In particular , I recall the special meetings she arranged for the Committee on Legal Affairs , enabling us to fully understand the task before us , which is of great significance for all European Union citizens .
I cannot agree with the Commissioner that the simple explanation for the delay and postponement of this legislative initiative lies in the formal inability to interfere in national legal systems .
Whenever I take the floor in this House , and the opportunity arises , I stress that the fundamental duty of every parliament and every institution with legislative power is to create simple legislation that is readily understandable and serves the citizens ' interests .
In other words , it is incumbent on us to create legislation that makes the citizens ' lives easier .
At present , there are 27 different legal systems to deal with with regard to limitation periods for pecuniary claims related to different types of accident .
It is therefore the duty of the European Parliament , the European Commission and also of the Council to find a way of rectifying the situation and creating new legislation that would make life easier .
It is difficult to explain to a claimant or to a deceased person 's family that , formally , the case has long since been closed , and that all we can do is to commiserate with them because all claims submitted after the expiry of the limitation period have to be rejected .
I therefore appeal to the European Commission and ask it to use all the means at its disposal and all its legislative competence to find a legal solution to this problem .
I am firmly convinced that the individual Member States believe that this matter , which affects hundreds of thousands , maybe even millions of European citizens , must be resolved quickly and appropriately .
If it is our intention that European Union citizens should pursue activities that involve moving between countries , we must come up with solutions that make it easier for them to do so .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Wallis for all the work she has put into this European Parliament draft resolution .
At present , there are significant discrepancies across the territory of the European Union with regard to the time periods applicable in cross-border disputes involving injuries and fatal accidents .
We must acknowledge that this is the case .
As the rapporteur rightly pointed out , the problem is a complex one .
It encompasses both the limitation periods and the commencement of running time .
Limitations , the time period for presenting information concerning the event , the possibility of suspending or halting the course of the period , as well as the examination of evidence and the process for lodging objections concerning limitations are also involved .
Major discrepancies can have undesirable consequences for accident victims , making it difficult for them to assert their rights in court .
Priority must be given to guaranteeing legal certainty for all European Union citizens and making it easier for them to enjoy the freedoms laid down in the Treaties .
I therefore urge the Commission to submit a draft legislative proposal to the European Parliament .
The proposal should take account of the wise recommendations appended to this draft resolution .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Wallis for an excellent and much-needed report which responds to the needs of the victims of various types of accidents .
Mrs Wallis rightly highlighted that the Union is open to its citizens , who may travel and relocate without any restrictions .
Unfortunately , this is associated with an increased probability of accidents .
Accident victims often suffer twice over , first as a result of the accident itself and then because they are unfamiliar with the law of the country where the accident took place .
Limitation periods are therefore often exceeded and it becomes impossible to assert legitimate claims .
Accordingly , we should endorse the proposal before us , so that a minimum limitation period for cross-border disputes involving accidents can be established across the Union .
The proposal protects the victims ' interests , and provides them with better opportunities to exercise their rights .
It therefore truly deserves our support .
I trust that , further to this report , the Commission will very soon table specific proposals to protect the interests of people to whom fate has been unkind .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
The recommendation is not intended to substitute national legislation but to take into account when proceedings involve parties who reside or are domiciled in different countries of the European Union , or a party residing or domiciled in a non-community state , or a choice between the laws of different countries .
It is becoming essential for principles governing limitation periods to be laid down clearly in an appropriate form for claims to damages .
The general limitation period which is being proposed is four years , except where the proper law of the claim provides for a longer period .
This general principle may cause problems , since the national legislation may cater for a shorter period , in which case there would be a discriminatory scenario when claims for damages arise between nationals or persons domiciled in the same state and when the issue relates to parties residing or domiciled in different states .
The same may be said for interruption , suspension and methods of calculating when the period limitation initiates .
Having stated the above it is better to have clear regulations for cross-border disputes which at the same time differ from national legislations .
Perhaps the dilemma can start to be solved if national legislation is harmonised with the proposed regulations .
Strategy for a strengthened partnership with the Pacific Islands ( debate )
The next item is the report by Nirj Deva , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on EU relations with the Pacific Islands A strategy for a strengthened partnership .
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is so hugely flattering to speak to an almost empty Chamber !
The Cook Islands , the Fiji Islands , Kiribati , the Marshall Islands , the Federated States of Micronesia , Nauru , Niue , Palau , Papua New Guinea , Samoa , the Solomon Islands , Timor-Leste , Tonga , Tuvalu , Vanuatu - exotic places , fantastic places , so distant , so far away , so romantic and so on , but actually they are in need .
All these countries are part of the Pacific Islands .
Historically , Europe has had the strongest influence in the Pacific region through colonial rule .
The end of the Second World War hastened the end of European colonialism , but the relationship continued .
Through the Lomé Convention and the Cotonou Agreement , the Pacific region is now linked to us and our daily lives through the ACP .
Even if the population of the Pacific Islands is small , we have to bear in mind that the Pacific Ocean itself covers nearly 30 % of the planet 's surface .
Their location , while bringing huge benefits to the region through fisheries and tourism , means they find themselves isolated through a tyranny of distance .
However , advances in technology , air travel and infrastructure have helped to alleviate their economic circumstances .
Another thing they should consider - and I am very pleased to see the Commission in full strength here - is that the English-speaking digital economy may provide another way forward for them to provide business process outsourcing and knowledge process outsourcing services to the United States and Australasia .
The region shows an economic contrast , with annual GDP per capita ranging from EUR 500 to EUR 8000 .
This is like comparing Somalia to Bulgaria .
Therefore , the strategy for the region must have a certain flexibility in order to ensure that the development assistance is channelled according to national and regional parities and to achieve maximum benefit in both the richer and poorer islands .
For many Pacific islanders , agricultural products are their primary exports to international markets , supplying commodities such as sugar , copra , bananas , coconuts and palm oil .
However , they face challenges such as global warming , which is a huge challenge for them .
We have also given them another interesting problem : economic partnership agreements - EPAs - which they have to contend with .
They tell me that they are losing revenue through their intra-regional customs union .
What are they to do ?
Do we help them , support them ?
Do we create infrastructure so that they can come out of this problem ?
We need to think about this .
One of the major challenges faced by the region is the sustainable management of fisheries .
Tuna is especially abundant in the Pacific , with a third of the world 's catch caught in the Pacific Islands , valued at EUR 2 billion .
Are we protecting their catch ?
Are we making sure that the benefits of their catches go back to their people ?
I do not know .
Maybe the Commission should look at this .
I do not know exactly where their catch is going .
They should not be as poor as they are if they are getting EUR 2 billion for those catches .
My report stresses that any encouragement of tourism in the region must go hand-in-hand with increased local ownership of the tourist sector .
I stress that in the majority of cases only the richer countries , with more developed infrastructure and more frequent air connections , attract significant numbers of tourists each year .
In these cases , for the poorer countries , development assistance must continue to be used to finance infrastructure and to encourage sustainable tourism .
In this regard , why have we not looked at creating a Pacific hub , a regional hub ?
We could create a hub , like Dubai .
After all , what was Dubai ?
Dubai was full of sand 20 years ago !
Today it is a hub for regional air transport .
Sheik Maktoum and those intelligent Arabs have created something quite extraordinary .
Why do we not that in the Pacific for these islanders ?
My report recommends that the more developed Pacific island countries should continue to deliver local processing , thereby creating more employment .
They should explore the possibility of the European Investment Bank giving soft loans to small and medium-sized enterprises , to add value to their exports .
Many of the islands are politically fragile , as we have seen through the many military coups in Fiji .
I am sick of hearing about military coups in Fiji , but they need to be able to feel that they are going to have a future as two communities together , and we need to help them with that .
They must stop or we should stop the aid .
That is a threat , but we need to have some sort of quid pro quo on this issue .
Provision of good governance throughout the Pacific is vital , and to achieve the Millennium Development Goals we must also achieve a certain measure of mutuality .
In Papua New Guinea , for example , and the Solomon Islands , they have problems with regard to AIDS .
The EU , as a major donor to the region , has an opportunity to create a strategy that will support the island countries of the Pacific in achieving the Millennium Development Goals and bringing their people to realise their full potential .
Our report is just the start .

Mr President , I welcome the report on EU relations with the Pacific Islands , and I especially want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Deva , on his results .
When my colleague , Commissioner Michel , took the initiative to have the first ever EU strategy for our relations with the Pacific ACP States prepared , he did so because these countries are becoming increasingly important and because they are facing difficult challenges .
We can benefit from closer contacts with the Pacific , as the region is of global significance and we can contribute significantly to its development .
Parliament 's report clearly reflects this and it points out important avenues forward .
These countries are mostly remote , relatively poor , small and have become independent fairly recently .
Most have strong population growth .
They have a difficult balancing act to perform between tradition and the pressures of modernity .
Globalisation is an opportunity for them , but also carries risks for their cultural heritage .
In many countries in the Pacific , democracy has difficult growth conditions and , at the same time , the Pacific needs high-quality governance to move forward .
For this reason , your commitment to their democracies , international exposure and contacts is very important .
They have significant natural resources , such as oil , gas , fish and tropical wood , as well as fantastic biodiversity .
The Pacific Ocean is so important that it must be considered as a global public good .
This gives the Pacific Island countries opportunities on the international scene and prospects for the future .
However , climate change threatens many of the islands , even whole countries .
The overseas countries and territories serve as bridges between Europe and the Pacific and between our cultures .
Where the Pacific countries have needs and we have comparative advantages , there we propose to assist .
We have identified the ' blue-green ' theme as the cornerstone of the focus on the sustainable management of the region 's natural resources .
In addition , we have committed ourselves to a strengthened political relationship , more focused development action and more efficient aid delivery .
In our communication we foresaw that the Pacific countries would face more problems in the future if a number of significant trends were not reversed .
Last year alone there were serious security problems and political crises in the Solomon Islands , Timor-Leste , Tonga and Fiji .
The problems are so difficult and severe than many of the Pacific ACP countries cannot handle them alone .
For this reason we are working with our Australian and New Zealand friends and , as Mr Deva said , with stable conditions we can develop tourism further in the Pacific .
Parliament has , of course , noticed the Council conclusions regarding the Pacific strategy , which confirmed that the EU will strengthen its partnership with this region .
A number of Member States follow the Pacific closely .
The EU has an important role to play in the Pacific .
Your report demonstrates this very clearly and we count on your continued support and solidarity for these really extraordinary countries .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tonight we are debating the report by Mr Deva on the European Union 's relations with the Pacific Islands - Strategy for a strengthened partnership .
I was rapporteur for the opinion issued and approved by the Committee on Fisheries .
I would like to congratulate Mr Deva on the work he has done and I am delighted that the Committee on Fisheries ' proposals are going to be included in the text of the resolution , at least in part .
The Pacific is one of the richest fishing grounds in the world , and the European tuna fleet has been fishing in those waters for some time thanks to the bilateral agreements signed with the countries of the region .
According to the scientific studies , the level of stocks is entirely satisfactory , and European Union financial aid represents an important source of income for the countries of the region .
We must therefore strengthen our relations with those countries .
We have a mutual interest .
We can contribute to promoting measures in those waters for the sustainable management of fisheries resources , and for EU fishermen fishing tuna it would be a very positive thing to make more progress towards creating a network of tuna agreements similar to the one already in place in the Indian Ocean , as requested by the Committee on Fisheries in its opinion .
When it comes to strengthening the partnership with that region of the world , therefore , we must not overlook fisheries .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , many thanks to the rapporteur for his hard work .
A strategy to strengthen partnerships with the Pacific Islands sounds good at first encounter and inert enough not to cause any measure of suspicion or discontent .
After all , the projected aim is to improve relations , mainly trade , for the mutual benefit of EU citizens and the Pacific islanders .
This might be the case for the majority of the Pacific Island countries .
But for a significant number there is a hidden truth in the fact that many of the Pacific Islands are not countries at all : they are 21st century colonies , and two of the colonising nations happen to be members of the EU , namely France and Britain .
Take for example New Caledonia .
It has an area of about 18 500 km2 and its approximately 250 000 inhabitants are recorded as being merely a ' sui generis community ' .
New Caledonia is not a country but an overseas Department of France .
On a much smaller scale , the Pitcairn Islands are an overseas territory of Britain administered by a governor appointed by the Queen of England .
So colleagues , apart from the despicably shameful ethics of accepting that France and Britain should continue to have colonies , we seem to be content with going on to form relations with such colonies as though nothing wrong is going on .
In fact , nothing about colonisation and consequent democracy deprivation is mentioned in this report .
In conclusion , let me pose the following question . Since some of the islands are in essence parts of the aforementioned EU Member States , then in reality are France and Britain going to form relationships with themselves through this strategy partnership ?
Perhaps the Commissioner could enlighten us on this exciting but strange prospect .

( PL ) Mr President , I would first like to thank Mr Deva for this very important report on a strategy for a strengthened partnership between the European Union and the Pacific Islands .
The European Parliament supports the European Commission 's view that a more intensive political dialogue with the Pacific Islands Forum is required .
Indeed , the Forum 's leaders have adopted a new agreement establishing the Forum as an intergovernmental organisation under international law .
At the same time , we wish to emphasise that strengthening dialogue at regional level must also take account of the needs of the poorest countries in the region .
The exploitation of natural resources must help to generate income for all the citizens of these island nations in the Pacific .
In particular , it must help to reduce poverty .
The European Parliament wishes to highlight the importance of tourism in the region , bearing in mind that the natural beauty of the Pacific islands is one of their main assets .
Support for tourism in the region must go hand in hand with an increased involvement of the islanders themselves in the provision of tourist services , in order to secure the future of the tourist sector and maximise its benefits for the local economy .
I would also like to point out that the report emphasises the need to support technical education and training systems in the countries of the region , within the framework of the 10th European Development Fund .
The European Parliament shares the European Commission 's view that political instability and conflicts can have a destructive impact on the region 's economic development , particularly as regards the loss of income from tourism and damage to economic infrastructure .
We wish to draw attention to the situation in East Timor , where an outbreak of violence took place in May and June of 2006 .
It is to be hoped that , working in close cooperation with the international community , the Commission will be able to assist the leaders of East Timor to solve the problems underlying the crisis , taking account of the need for political stability , alleviation of poverty , social development and reconciliation between the various social groups .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( FR ) The European Parliament is being consulted this week about the first formal strategy for 30 years on relations between the European Union and the Pacific .
This strategy is aimed at strengthening political dialogue , improving cooperation and increasing the effectiveness of development aid , more than a quarter of which is supplied by the European Union .
In the case of a number of vital sectors , the strategy emphasises sustainable development from both an ecological and an economic point of view .
These sectors include tourism , transportation , mining , agriculture and fisheries .
In the Committee on Fisheries , I had an amendment adopted to the effect that the European Union should support regional cooperation projects on the evaluation , monitoring and management of fisheries resources , conducted with third countries in the area and with the overseas countries and territories associated with the European Union : French Polynesia , New Caledonia , Wallis and Futuna and Pitcairn .
I am delighted that the European Union is willing to get more constructively involved in the Pacific by emphasising economic development , political stability and the sound management of resources in the immediate neighbourhood of our overseas countries and territories .
Let us hope that the financial resources will match the declared ambitions .
( PL ) I would like to record my support for the content of Mr Deva 's report on EU relations with the Pacific Islands entitled ' A strategy for strengthened partnership with the Pacific Islands ' .
I hope this much-needed document will herald a new era in contacts between the EU and the Pacific Islands .
European countries have now been involved in the Pacific region for thirty years , and are major donors to the area .
It is therefore particularly important to develop a long-term strategy .
This is actually the only part of the world for which the Union has not yet developed a overarching , integrated strategy .
The adoption of the document under consideration represents an excellent opportunity to create a new relationship with this region .
This relationship should be both economic and political .
The Pacific Islands play a very important role in stabilising the climate , and they also possess a great wealth of natural resources such as mineral deposits and fish .
It would be a partnership with a region that is a world leader in tuna fishing and which accounts for one third of global catches .
My support for the aforementioned document also relates to the need to promote democracy and stability in the Pacific region and to prevent extremist ideologies from taking root there .
The European Union has historical ties with these islands , and should support them in their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
Adopting the Strategy for a strengthened partnership will provide us with an opportunity to set higher economic and social targets .
The European Union 's involvement in these efforts could go beyond simply providing support to former colonies .
EC-Gabon Fisheries Partnership ( debate )
The next item is the report by Stavros Arnaoutakis , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Gabonese Republic - C6-0303 / 2006 - .
Mr President , the Community and the Republic of Gabon have negotiated and initialled , on 28 October 2005 , a Fisheries Partnership Agreement for a period of six years .
The new Protocol has been in provisional application since December 2005 under a decision of the Council .
On the date of its entry into force , this Agreement will repeal and replace the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Gabon on fishing off the coast of Gabon , which entered into force in December 1998 .
The financial contribution is fixed at EUR 860 000 per year .
Of this financial contribution , 60 % will allow annual financial support for defining and implementing a sectoral fisheries policy in Gabon , with a view to introducing responsible and sustainable fishing .
This new Protocol provides fishing possibilities for 24 tuna seiners and 16 surface long-liners , with an annual reference tonnage of 11 000 tonnes .
The Agreement is part of an important network of EC Tuna Agreements in the Atlantic Ocean off the Western African coast .
The Commission considers that the Agreement will give the Community and Gabon an appropriate legal and political framework for monitoring and controlling the activities of the EU fleet in the Gabonese fishing area .
It also allows the Community to support the development of the sector in this country , for the mutual benefit of the parties .
Mr President , the European Union and the Gabonese Republic negotiated and signed on 28 October 2005 a multiannual fisheries partnership agreement which will cover relations between the European Community and the Gabonese Republic in the fisheries sector .
The partnership agreement , which is accompanied by a protocol , has been concluded for a period of six years , while the technical and financial terms governing fisheries activities entered into force back on 3 December 2005 .
The main objective of the partnership agreement , which goes beyond the narrow commercial framework of the previous bilateral agreement , is to develop a sustainable fisheries policy with responsible exploitation of fisheries resources , support for coastal populations and the creation of small local freezing and processing industries through general economic and scientific cooperation .
One important innovative step is the monitoring of fishing vessels by satellite in order to stamp out illegal , undeclared and uncontrolled fishing .
As emphasised by the Commissioner responsible for fisheries , Mr Borg , this new agreement opens up a new chapter in cooperation between the European Union and the Gabonese Republic , given that it will step up its efforts to safeguard the future of fisheries in its waters .
We should emphasise that agreements such as this are particularly important , because they promote economic development and cooperation with third countries .
This agreement with Gabon in the fisheries sector is another development tool being used by the European Union in order to emphasise its solidarity and intention to cooperate further with developing third countries .
I therefore consider it necessary for the European Parliament , as the institution directly elected by the citizens , to be kept informed well in advance and not to be called on a year later purely and simply to ratify the decisions .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to protest once again at the fact that fisheries is always dealt with in a secretive nocturnal manner ; that is what is happening today once again .
I would like to thank Mr Arnaoutakis for his wonderful report .
Since it is so late , I shall be concise and stress three aspects relating to Gabon and fisheries agreements in general that I believe to be important .
I must once again point to the Commission 's delay in presenting this issue to the European Parliament and point out that the European Union is going to be paying the first portion of the financial payments to Gabon at least six months late .
This is unacceptable and the European Union must not cause this kind of delay , especially when it comes to third countries whose economies are so weak .
I believe that we have reached an agreement with Commissioner Borg and I hope that there will be no more such delays in future .
Secondly , I would also like to stress the financial aspects of fisheries agreements in general , this specific case being one very infamous example .
There are many people here - and I regret that they are not actually the people who are most critical of the fisheries agreements - who complain that the fisheries sector does not cooperate in , or hardly contribute to , the funding of these agreements .
In fact , in this case , in the Gabon agreement , the fisheries sector is going to pay almost 20 % more than the European Union pays from the Community budget .
That should reassure those who say that the fisheries sector does not contribute to the funding of the agreements .
Finally , Mr President , I would also like to put a request to the Commission relating to the agreements that we in the Committee on Fisheries have been making repeatedly : that , in the name of greater transparency , Members of this Parliament should be able to participate as observers in the joint committees that control the implementation of fisheries agreements .
We have already achieved that for the regional fisheries organisations and it would be good if we could take part in the joint committees in the future .
We put this request the other day to the Presidency-in-Office of the Council and I hope that Commissioner Figel ' will communicate this request to the European Commission , so that , amongst the three institutions , we can obtain greater participation by Members of this Parliament .
If only because of the time of night we have to work , I believe that we deserve to be in those committees as observers .
Mrs Fraga Estévez , I agree with your assessment and I shall pass on to the Bureau your concerns about discrimination regarding the topics for debate .
Perhaps a rota system would be fairer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
Mainstreaming sustainability in development cooperation policies ( debate )
The next item is the report by DanutBudreikaitė , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on mainstreaming sustainability in development cooperation policies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all who have found the time at this late hour to discuss here in the plenary session the important question of integrating sustainability into development cooperation policy .
The most important EU documents - the European Community Treaty and the EU Sustainable Development Strategy - define sustainable development as development which allows the present needs of society to be satisfied without reducing the chances of future generations to meet their needs .
Sustainable development is an all-embracing EU rights principle which should have an influence on all spheres of EU policy , including the development cooperation policy .
One of the most important aims of our community is to fight poverty in the world , to pay back some old debts to developing countries , to help them climb out of the status of least-developed nations and to reach the status of developing nations , and ultimately - the level of developed nations .
Developed nations know what the cost of progress and modern life is .
I have in mind the environmental impact of human activity - the development of various fields of economy , especially industry .
It is a huge cost that is being borne by the whole world , even though not all countries have or use the technology that contributes to the greenhouse effect , CO2 or other pollution .
We are all paying , and we all would like to see the amount of pollution reduced .
We direct our attention not only to our own economies , adopting appropriate solutions , but we also want developing countries to use non-polluting renewable types of energy and non-polluting technology .
However , this is not so simple .
The report raised some of the problems of sustainable development and offered some directions for possible solutions for developing countries - and not only for them , but also for the EU itself .
Sustainable development comprises three fundamental aspects : stable economic growth , protection of the environment , and social justice and cohesion .
This means that economic issues , environmental protection issues and social issues are interrelated and reinforce each other , and their interconnection should already be in evidence at the policy formation stage .
Economic issues are linked with management , human rights , democracy , regional integration and other aspects of economics and life .
The financial support of the EU and other countries is necessary for their solution , as are the strengthening of developing countries ' institutional competence , the fight against corruption , new methods of helping businesses and markets to implement sustainable development , the attraction of direct foreign investment , and so on .
The environment is affected by unlawful destruction of forests , which encourages corruption and the possibility of armed conflicts ; lack of access to potable water and shortcomings in sanitary conditions ; pollution , especially the greenhouse effect ; and the use and depletion of natural resources , which are also precursors to conflict situations .
In the social sphere environmental issues are also important , such as access to potable water and sanitary conditions , access to education and health care systems , and the fight against poverty .
In implementing three fundamental aspects of sustainable development , it is evident that the stimulation of economic growth and the elimination of poverty , together with ensuring the protection of the environment , are the greatest challenges to the EU development cooperation policy .
Therefore , in this policy the EU must also encourage other large economic actors , such as the United States , China and India , to contribute to the implementation of global sustainable development .
When stimulating economic growth , it is essential to implement sustainable development in all sectors , to invest in non-polluting technologies , to introduce alternative energy technologies , and , most importantly , to apply entrepreneurial behaviour standards .
Talking about the environment , it is important to highlight that international corporations operating in developing countries must respect the environment .
A start should be made to implement a code of corporate social responsibility for European firms .
Seeking to fight the deterioration of environmental protection in developing countries , the EU should cooperate more actively with small and medium-sized firms to shape their respect for the environment .
The protection of biological diversity , monitoring of the ecological state of the environment and the appropriate measures to support it are our collective debt to coming generations .
In the social sphere we must try to achieve the defined millennial development goals , to encourage a sustainable consumption model , to combat diseases , and to direct more official development aid to education about health and environmental issues .
In addition , it is essential to involve the civil society , NGOs and women in finding solutions for the problems of sustainable development , and in invigorating social dialogue .
As well as these three fields of sustainable development , I would also like to mention the strengthening of institutional competence as a priority side issue for all sectors .
In assisting institutional , administrative and legal reforms , expansion of infrastructure systems and national financial management , the environmental , economic and social impact needs to be evaluated .
These are long-term action programmes to achieve sustainability in development cooperation policy .
Already , however , the EU can take action to achieve sustainability , to solve the agricultural export subsidy issue , and to encourage the importation of products that have been produced with respect for sustainability and without contravening international agreements , invoking a migration policy to stop the brain drain from developing countries , as well as stimulating investment in developing countries , and faithfully applying 0.7 % of GDP to development assistance .
Mr President , I shall aim to comply with my allotted speaking time so that we can finish before midnight !
Of course we welcome this report which is so focused on mainstreaming sustainability in development cooperation policies .
I am pleased to know that this report is well in tune with our own analysis of this subject .
The Commission is fully committed to improving the mainstreaming of sustainability in our development cooperation .
The overarching objective of this cooperation is the eradication of poverty in the context of sustainable development .
We are working in the direction of most of the recommendations which are made in the report , and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Budreikaitė .
I shall illustrate this only with a few examples .
Firstly , we are improving the mainstreaming of environmental concerns in development policies in a variety of ways , for example by staff training , by setting up an environmental helpdesk , by systematic preparation of country and regional environmental profiles and , whenever relevant , strategic environmental assessments and environmental impact assessments .
Secondly , we are stepping up assistance to developing countries to adapt to climate change .
We are working to enhance our alliance-building with the developing countries in the area of climate change adaptation and mitigation .
Because the most immediate effect of climate change on developing countries is the incidence of extreme weather phenomena , we are also preparing a new disaster risk reduction strategy .
Thirdly , we are promoting clean and renewable energy through specific projects .
Another new initiative that has been well received by the international community is the global energy efficiency and renewable energy fund .
Fourthly , we are working hard towards preventing the import of illegally sourced wood via the negotiation of voluntary partnership agreements under the forest law enforcement governance and trade initiative .
Negotiations have recently started with Malaysia , Ghana and Indonesia .
Lastly , we are programming resources for building capacity in developing countries to prevent illegal dumping of toxic waste and to clean stocks of solid pesticides .
The efforts needed to deal with these objectives and with others also raised in the report certainly remain considerable .
The European Parliament 's support in relation to the development cooperation instrument and the environment and natural resources climatic strategy will be critical , and from this point of view I want to express gratitude for your engagement and support .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can do no other than extend warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Budreikaitė , for a successful job of work , and for a very balanced report that does not give rise to contention .
The report contains the core of what the Committee on Development wanted to say about , firstly , the challenges presented by climate change ; secondly , the protection of biodiversity ; thirdly the discharge of the least developed countries from their debts ; fourthly the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises for the sake of improved social , environmental and economic cooperation in the countries of the South , and , fifthly , more foreign direct investment and greater diversification in exports .
The report calls on the Commission to base all the Community 's development programmes on transparency and accountability , since corruption damages sustainability in the developing countries , and this House therefore advocates the introduction of independent offices to combat it , together with an adequate allocation of funds to them , and I can do no other than ask all Members of this House to endorse this report when we come to vote on it .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I , too , should like to join in congratulating the rapporteur .
The idea prevailed for a long time that protection of the environment and sustainable development were luxury items that could not be discussed , let alone achieved , until a society had developed to a certain level .
Sustainable development has since then become one of the millennium development goals , since the effects of poor environmental conditions impact poorer people far more directly .
Their living conditions are largely dependent on access to natural resources - for example , 90 % of people living in absolute poverty are dependent on woods for a living .
It is also the case that the developing countries are harder hit by the consequences of climate change than the industrial nations that are largely responsible for it , and so the Commission 's proposal for a Europe-wide reduction in CO2 emissions from new cars by 2012 is to be welcomed .
In this report , we are again calling on the United States , but also on India and China , to ratify the Kyoto Protocol and to join with the European Union in taking responsibility for sustainable development worldwide .
While the building of infrastructure can be an important factor in sustainable development , it is also important that social and environmental considerations be borne in mind , and so we urge the Commission to have an environmental impact assessment carried out on every project receiving financial support from the EU and made available to the public .
We are again and again shocked by reports of the inhuman conditions under which people in developing countries have to work , and the code of practice for European businesses operating in such countries really must be made more effective .
We must also play our part in ensuring that the International Labour Organisation 's core labour standards are applied .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.05 )
Documents received : see Minutes
The European private company statute ( debate )
The first item is the report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , with recommendations to the Commission on the European private company statute .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I feel particularly honoured to be able to see this topic discussed today , when you , Madam President , are chairing a sitting of this House for the first time .
The action plan on company law already envisaged examination of which additional forms of company might be considered as subjects for legislation within the European Union .
As a result of the studies carried out at that time , these questions were , in essence , left open .
Now , the Commission , a number of years ago , invited discussion of the company law action plan and subjected it to a wholesale revision .
This House made a full contribution to this debate , and , following on from it , decided to produce and discuss an own-initiative report on the European private company .
Such is the background to this item on today 's agenda .
We have considered this question carefully and organised in this House a hearing on the subject , which drove home the fact that there is a real need for that sort of European private company and for the Commission to initiate legislation to create it .
Smaller industrial companies in particular - export-driven businesses that are at present obliged to set up subsidiaries and companies in other Member States and in accordance with those states ' laws on companies - would welcome with great enthusiasm the creation of a European legal form whereby they could organise their subsidiaries throughout the European Union .
At present , they are in serious need of advice , which may well be good for the lawyers , but it does cost a lot of money , since there has to be , again and again , examination of individual cases to ascertain what rights and duties their directors and members of their supervisory boards actually have and what they have to do in order not to end up at odds with the law .
I think they will be able to avoid that if they can be offered a single European legal form that regulates a number of core matters , in particular directors ' powers and questions of liability , in one way at the European level and thus offers something to businesses .
There is , then , absolutely no question of additional bureaucracy , for companies can decide for themselves whether they want this legal form or not ; it is simply something of which they can avail themselves , something that plugs a real hole in the law left over after we created the European Limited Company for bigger firms .
Let me also say , by way of an aside , that the insufficient progress made in the past in the development of European company law is one explanation for the European Court of Justice 's rulings in such cases as Inspire Art , and this is where we can help to provide and create an exemplary structure in the European Union .
I believe that the Committee on Legal Affairs - which adopted this report by a large majority , or , indeed unanimously - has succeeded in finding a suitable compromise between the different approaches to the structure of such companies found in continental Europe on the one hand and in British legal thinking on the other , especially on the issue of equity , where we achieved a good compromise on the basis that equity ought , as a matter of principle , to exist , but without the obligation to make cash payments , which , as a means whereby registration may be made easier , is , in my view , a step in the right direction and also shows how it is possible for the Commission to submit a proposal with the Council then being able to find a rational compromise between the various legal traditions .
What we in the Committee on Legal Affairs - and I think , after today 's vote , this House too - expect of the Commission is that it should , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty , with our Rules of Procedure , and with the interinstitutional agreement , stir itself into action and , within the foreseeable future , take definite steps to put a definite proposal for legislation before this House and the Council .
As I draw to a close , I would like to mention another consideration that has had some input into the amendments , that being the debate on workers ' participation in decision-making .
Let me make perfectly plain something that was not a bone of contention in our deliberations , namely that nobody is seeking to restrict workers ' rights in any way whatever .
In so far as they are guaranteed at the national level , they are also to be guaranteed and maintained when this legislative project is put into effect .
This is something on which there have been a number of amendments , which I do not regard as crucial , for they all have the same end in mind , that of protecting workers ' rights .
One final comment - and yes , I do mean final , for I will then have used up my five minutes : I note with pleasure that the German Presidency of the Council has declared the European Private Company to be one of its priorities , and so I assume that the Council , too , will be as supportive of this as - I hope - an overwhelming majority in this House is about to be .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , firstly I would like to thank the Committee on Legal Affairs , and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , for the excellent work done in the preparation of the report on the European private company statute on which you will vote today .
My departments are already studying in detail the suggestions and recommendations proposed in this report .
We need to make it easier and cheaper for small and medium-sized companies to conduct cross-border business .
It is important to take action that will help small and medium firms to reap fully the benefits of the single market .
The growth of small businesses is crucial for the competitiveness of the European economy .
One means of facilitating the expansion of small businesses is to simplify the current legal framework and reduce unnecessary administrative burdens .
These burdens are particularly onerous for SMEs that do not have big legal departments at their disposal .
That is why I have decided to present a communication on the simplification of EU company law in the spring of this year .
This fits in with the broader programme of the Commission on simplification of the acquis communautaire which provides for a 25 % reduction in administrative burdens by 2012 .
I am all for initiatives that will give European firms , and in particular small and medium companies , a flexible regulatory framework .
The European private company statute could be a useful option for them in this respect .
The idea was supported by industry in the recent public consultation on future priorities for the action plan on company law and corporate governance .
Many respondents stressed that such an option would create more choice for companies and reduce compliance costs for firms which wish to operate in several Member States .
However , a number of our respondents also questioned the usefulness of such a measure and , as you know , in accordance with better regulation principles the Commission must carry out an impact assessment before any initiative is proposed .
Accordingly , my departments are now examining the costs and benefits of such a statute , as well as alternative measures to address the problems at stake .
I would only propose a European private company statute if the impact assessment clearly shows that this is the most appropriate instrument to tackle the problems SMEs face today and that the European private company form would be useful to them in expanding their activities and developing their businesses across borders .
Experience with the European company statute has shown that creating a new European corporate form can be a very long and complex process .
The end result may be legal instruments that are not always easy to use .
If a European private company statute is to be worthwhile , then agreement would need to be found swiftly .
The end result would have to be simple for SMEs to use , thereby bringing real added value .
I note that your report and associated resolution are based on Article 192 of the Treaty calling on the Commission to submit a legislative proposal .
Under the framework agreement , the Commission undertook to take account of any such request made pursuant to Article 192 of the Treaty .
I intend to live up to these commitments .
We will assess the practical suggestions set out in the report in detail .
I want my departments to take the time necessary to consider carefully all possible options in order to provide the best balanced solution for SMEs .
Upon conclusion of the impact assessment , I will report back to you on its results and the policy conclusions we draw from it .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I , too , as a former fellow-member of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , wish you every success in the exercise of your functions .
If every President were to keep the Chamber as quiet as you have done this morning , our deliberations would indeed be much more constructive , and so I can only ask you to carry on the way you have begun .
I can tell the Commissioner that small and medium-sized enterprises are the driving force behind the European internal market .
That may well be reiterated time and time again , but the progress towards the achievement of this goal is often too slow .
I , too , therefore , am among those who believe that the creation of a European legal framework with the interests of the self-employed and smaller businesses particularly in mind is an extremely important matter , not least for the Committee on the Internal Market .
Mr Lehne 's own-initiative report is much to be welcomed , not least on the grounds that it sends an important signal to the Commission - and , let me add , to the Presidency of the Council too - and I would like to thank him for the splendid work he has done in this regard .
It is cause for thanksgiving that many small and medium-sized businesses already work across borders , and you , Commissioner , were able to see that for yourself when you visited Offenburg , my own electoral district .
In many instances , though , their dedication and growth are hampered by bureaucratic restrictions and the lack of experience of the local legal situation , and small and medium-sized enterprises from the new Member States have hitherto been put at a considerable competitive disadvantage by this .
Offering in future a European legal form in parallel with the legal forms of the nation states therefore not only serves to further the completion of the European internal market , but also makes it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to set up subsidiaries in European countries other than their own , and hence to develop their activities beyond their own country 's borders .
What is of the essence in this is that the consultancy and administrative costs involved in setting up and running a company can be reduced to a considerable degree and that cross-border business activity no longer involves the laws of more than one Member State being applicable .
A survey conducted by the German International Chamber of Commerce - I can refer only to German businesses - showed that enterprises were very keen that there should be a European legal form that met the needs of small and medium-sized businesses , and the businesses that responded said that they saw this as being a ' little sister ' to the European Limited Company and believed that it needed to be slimline , practicable and - above all else - European .
I can therefore tell the Commissioner that what this House is saying by means of this report is that it wants to see the Commission presenting a legislative proposal on the basis of Article 308 before this year is out .
We are of course pleased to hear you advocating the impact assessment , but we have also seen , from the example of other directives relating to the internal market and consumer protection , that , where the political will is present , an impact assessment can either be carried out briskly or limited to specific individual questions , and so I would ask you to move the impact assessment forward with some speed in order to arrive at a legislative proposal as soon as possible .
I would also ask the German Presidency of the Council to process this dossier as soon as possible and with vigour .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I believe that this is the first time that I have had the opportunity to speak while you are presiding over the sitting and I would like to congratulate you on your appointment .
I am sure that you will do your duties in your characteristically independent manner .
Secondly , I would like to thank Mr Lehne for his report .
I believe that he has done a good job , but I would like to point out a couple of problems that we have .
Firstly , I do not believe the Committee on Legal Affairs ' current approach of presenting reports on an issue of legislative initiative with an annex which has not been sufficiently discussed to be the appropriate legislative technique .
We are talking about an initial phase of legislative proposals .
What we are doing is asking the Commission to look into the possibility of presenting a report , and I believe that at this stage we should restrict ourselves to the first part of the resolution .
I do not believe that the annex to the motion for a resolution has been sufficiently debated .
We cannot therefore take the view that these conclusions of the annex genuinely reflect the will of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Secondly , I believe that Mr McCreevy was absolutely right to point out that we should not be legislating for the sake of legislating - our failure in relation to the European Company should give us cause for concern in this regard - and the impact study is therefore clearly necessary .
Furthermore , it is clear that we in this House believe that it is necessary to draw up a statute to enable small businesses to operate and that we should work towards achieving that .
In doing so , we are faced with certain difficulties : for example , the problem of worker participation .
We have held discussions on the text of recital H. In my political group , there have been certain reservations about the way Mr Lehne had worded it .
I believe that the final formula proposed by Mr Lehne is satisfactory and I hope that we in my group can approve it .
In short , I believe that Mr Lehne 's proposal is a good one .
We are not demanding that the Commission accept it , but we are asking it to look into this possibility .
I hope that Mr McCreevy will do everything he can to ensure that this Parliament 's will in this regard is implemented .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , first let me also extend my congratulations to you on your appointment and the conduct of your first debate .
I must also start with an apology to the rapporteur because , although I attended the hearing on this subject , I was unable to participate in the debate in committee and I know it is a bit irritating when somebody then pops up in Plenary .
I broadly welcome the underlying idea in the proposal , but I have some concerns that I hope the Commission will investigate further during future work on this matter .
Mr Lehne , you have said in your explanatory note to the report - and indeed the Commissioner has also said just now , and I agree - that the statute will need to focus on the needs of SMEs .
But that of course covers just about all companies except multinationals .
To me it is clear that if we follow all of the recommendations in the annex , those that are likely to benefit or choose this option are towards the medium rather than the small end of the spectrum of companies .
They certainly would not be start-up companies .
The suggested capital requirements ensure that is the case .
I do not want people to say ' here you are standing there as a Brit not wanting any capital requirement ' .
I recognise that the capital does not necessarily have to be paid in and I welcome attempts to find a compromise on that , but it will still have an impact , especially on small businesses .
Smaller businesses , whether at the start-up or whether trying to expand , have enough cost and difficulty trying to give belt-and-braces guarantees to banks without there being an added tier of financial expectation .
And , make no mistake , the fact that shareholders could potentially lose EUR 10 000 , even if not paid in at the start , does add an extra tier of financial expectation .
Now , that may not matter at all since it is optional , and if you do not like the statute , you do not have to use it , but I would prefer that if you propose something , it would be liked and used and accessible to all companies .
While I have said that there may be little incentive in some quarters to choose this , that does not mean it is because small companies do not conduct cross-border business or do not aspire to do so .
Many quite small companies do engage in significant cross-border business and European Court of Justice decisions make it clear that they can do so .
But , as it is optional , maybe that is no matter .
Or is that really the case ?
I would not like to see the situation where the new statute introduced a factor of discrimination where consumers were concerned that if you were not big enough to consider it worth being a European private company , you are not big enough to do business in Europe .
That would run completely counter to the notion of a single market and the mutual importance of fostering and nurturing small businesses within that market .
In a single market , size must not matter .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I fully support the view that the European Private Company Statute should be based on Community legislation and dispense with references to national law .
The aim is to create a new legal form for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the driving force behind all European economies .
A new legal form will help to foster cross-border activity too .
We must also keep in mind joint activities when it comes to promoting the development of the internal market , and consequently economic growth .
If a single European legal form is created , consultancy costs will be cut .
In the many countries involved , the law will no longer apply to cross-border activities .
Instead , we shall have a single , uniform statute .
For this type of company to be competitive on the market , it must be flexible and able to adjust to market requirements .
This could be achieved by endowing such a company with a wide range of possibilities for transforming itself .
In this context , the issue of legal harmonisation arises , for instance , with regard to the cross-border transfer of registered offices .
For an undertaking of this nature to be able to operate with maximum efficiency on the market , however , it must focus primarily on the security of business transactions and on protecting the company 's creditors .
We still need to give further consideration to these issues .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , I find this absolutely fascinating !
Every time I come here I have to smile .
What this place knows about running small businesses is absolutely unbelievable .
When I look up the CVs of Members of this Parliament , I find that nobody has ever had any serious responsibility for a small company in their lives .
It is amazing what we all know about these things !
In 1992 I started a small business .
I thought about it and I bought some old-fashioned , second-hand furniture .
I sucked my pencil and thought , ' My goodness me , what have I done ?
I have left a big corporation , where do I go from here ? ' .
That business now has branches in Hong Kong , Jersey , the Channel Islands and South Africa , as well as London and York , which is my constituency .
I really do not think I could do that again .
There are so many regulations , it is unbelievable .
If you really want to fire up small business in the European Union , and particularly the United Kingdom , I would suggest that these people here and the Commission get their blasted noses out of everybody else 's business and stop trying to tell us how we should run our businesses !
Just let us get on with it , because if you do not , more and more businesses are going to go to Dubai , Bermuda and the Channel Islands - I am moving half my business to the Channel Islands as it is .
I would counsel you and the Commission to please keep your ill-informed noses out of small businesses !
on behalf of the ITS Group . - Madam President , this report is a contradiction in terms .
Governments cannot micro-manage enterprise .
Since when has the European Union initiated anything that improves trade , minimises costs , cuts red tape , generates new wealth , creates new jobs , frees up enterprise ?
When ever ?
Most governments can hope to contribute to economic growth only by clearing the decks of obstacles and creating an enterprise-free environment .
Government ought to be about enabling people and their initiative to thrive .
After that it should stand well back .
The UK has a huge , permanent and growing deficit with the EU .
Does anyone here seriously imagine that by seizing control over company law relating to SMEs , the European Union will change or improve that situation ?
Do you really imagine that possible , especially as these proposals are based on German and French ideas of a social market ?
I endorse what Mr Bloom has just said .
How many of you here have ever started a new business at your own risk ?
Created jobs ?
Funded it for yourselves and successfully run it for , let us say , 20 years ?
How many of you have done that ?
How many people on that committee have done that ?
How many of you know what it takes to start a new business in the UK ?
Well , I will tell you .
Less than a hundred pounds , ten minutes on the phone and you can do business anywhere .
Compare that with these proposals .
We have centuries of company law in the UK , thank you very much . And it works just fine .
We also have SMEs trading all over the world and they do just fine .
Most of their nightmares come from past misguided attempts by the EU to ' help ' with trade on the Continent .
Most of that ' help ' merely interferes with their activities , and the idea of yet more ' help ' will be greeted with horror .
Over the years we have seen masterpieces of unintended consequences from this place .
There is the Working Time Directive , which finally proved to a business friend of mine that the EU was clinically insane .
There is the drive for a level playing field , the very antithesis of wealth and job creation , which totally depends on finding differences . And now we have got the licensing of authorised economic operators , which hugely benefits those who qualify and undermines everyone else with extra costs and bureaucracy .
Even the Socialist British Government has figured out that this proposal is expensive and dangerous nonsense and it belongs in the bin .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for a very sound and detailed report .
In my view , it sends out an important message to small and medium-sized enterprises , indicating that their development and activity on the common European market will soon become much more straightforward .
It also sends out a further message to SMEs , namely that European legislators recognise the role of SMEs on the Union 's market and are making an effort to improve their situation .
The main aim of our activities relating to the common market should be to create an optimum situation whereby European enterprises are not hindered by unnecessary red tape or commercial and technical obstacles when they move from one country to another , or set up branches in various Union countries .
It should be just as easy as if they were moving from one part of their own country to another .
All companies should be able to operate on the same principles across the length and breadth of the Union .
Only then will it really be possible to speak of a common European market with benefits for all .
Mr Lehne 's report is a further step in developing legislation designed to enhance the efficiency of the SME sector 's activities on the common market .
Its implications will certainly significantly contribute to increasing the economic activity of European companies , and consequently to improving all our lives and meeting one of the aims of the Lisbon Agenda .
I was actually a businesswoman myself in the past .
I ran my own business for 15 years , and employed some 100 people .
I am well aware of the problems entrepreneurs face and am convinced that the proposal to develop a European Private Company Statute represents an excellent and much-needed solution for undertakings conducting cross-border business .
It is important , however , to proceed with caution and learn from the mistakes made when developing the European Company Statute .
Companies of that type do not fully fulfil their role as European Companies because of the large number of references to national law .
That is why the European Private Company Statute must be based mainly on Community law , with minimum reference to national law .
Such an approach will result in a more uniform text and legal provisions .
In addition , it will provide legal certainty , which is crucial to entrepreneurs .
We must make every effort to ensure that the Statute is as uniform as possible , and that it makes minimal reference to individual legal systems whilst referring to Community law as much as possible .

( PL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Lehne , the rapporteur , for all the work he has undertaken on a matter which is of such vital importance to the future of European integration and the development of economic cooperation within the framework of the internal market .
The current situation regarding the internal market is that we already have a European Company .
It is intended for large capital-based companies .
A legal form which will also make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to conduct cross-border business is therefore essential .
It is important to bear in mind that SMEs are the main driving force behind the European economy and the main source of employment for Union citizens .
That is why further efforts should be made to enhance the economic activities undertaken by these companies .
However , the new legal solutions we are proposing to our entrepreneurs do call for detailed consideration .
We should learn from the experience gained when introducing the legal form for the European Company on to the common market .
That statute took a long time to draw up and was the result of a compromise .
In fact , the final compromise has not proved entirely satisfactory .
We should therefore learn from our mistakes , as Mrs Handzlik suggested earlier .
As far as is possible , the European Private Company Statute should be a uniform European legal form .
It must provide for the simplification of the principles of establishment and organisation .
It will be important to retain a balance between protecting creditors , a flexible company structure , and ensuring the security of business transactions .
In the interests of protecting the flexibility of such undertakings , provision must be made for ensuring ease of transformations such as mergers or changing the registered office .
Therefore , there is every justification for the European Parliament 's initiative containing recommendations to the Commission on the European Private Company Statute .
( PL ) Madam President , there are several reasons why the development of a European Private Company Statute is such a crucial project for accelerating the economic growth of the European Union .
Firstly , measured in terms of GDP growth , the rate of economic growth of the United States is more than twice that of the European Union .
This has been the case for many years .
In addition , the rate of economic growth of the countries of South-East Asia is several times higher than that of the Union .
Secondly , many internal barriers still persist within the common market created by the free movement of capital , goods and services .
Thirdly , the draft European Private Company Statute is aimed at small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the cornerstone of the economies of all the Member States of the European Union .
Fourthly , a European Private Company would be a very useful instrument for the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , which places great emphasis on eliminating obstacles to the development of European entrepreneurship .
These reasons alone justify supporting the development of a European Private Company Statute .
It is important , however , not to repeat the mistakes made when drawing up the European Company Statute .
The market has refused to accept the European Company as a company form , despite the long and difficult process involved in developing this statute .
An effort must therefore be made to ensure that the European Private Company Statute contains the minimum number of references to the national legislation of individual Member States , so that it is relatively flexible in nature and provides security for both owners and contractors .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this legislative proposal on the European private company statute is very important .
It is , in fact , crucial not only to remove barriers to trade but also to develop the factor of production at Community level .
To that end , there is undoubtedly a need to create unitary legal entities in order to overcome the current legal uncertainty .
It should not be forgotten , however , that , as well as trying to make markets transparent and to protect savers , the company law reform will also directly affect the future of the European social model .
Therefore , if allowing companies to move wherever they like in order to take advantage of the single market is a legitimate aim , it must be fulfilled by giving our workers the same transnational rights .
That was the thinking behind some of my amendments , certain of which were accepted , which were aimed at safeguarding the rights to codetermination , information and consultation that exist at the time of a company 's turning into a European private company .
We are talking here about an important adjustment that will mean more careful attention being paid to aspects relating to the strengthening of social Europe , one of the fundamental elements of which must be worker participation .
We therefore endorse this important proposal and we thank Mr Lehne for his work .
We would point out to the Commission that , if allowing companies to move wherever they like in order to take advantage of the single market is a legitimate aim , it must be fulfilled without the demands of the market prejudicing those of social equality .
Madam President , I should like to thank the Members very much for their comments on this important topic .
The growth of small and medium-sized enterprises is crucial for the competitiveness of the European economy .
It is , therefore , necessary to facilitate the expansion of these small businesses .
Looking at the legal form of companies that operate across borders can make an important contribution to this .
I will take Mr Lehne 's report into account .
As it is under Article 192 of the Treaty , we are bound to do it in a prompt manner .
But even if it was not under that article , I will still deal with it in as prompt a manner as possible .
I give you that commitment .
Commissioner , I should like to thank you for your participation in the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
( FR ) The creation of the European private company statute has the support of both the Member States and industry , and I congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report and his pragmatic recommendations .
I am very much in favour of the creation of this statute for at least two reasons .
Firstly , because the adoption of this statute will help remove one of the obstacles to SMEs ' mobility .
All too often , company founders are reluctant to do business because they do not understand the legal environment very well , particularly when they establish themselves in another Member State .
Next , this statute will enable us significantly to enhance legal transparency and thus to build confidence among the various economic players .
The fact is that confidence is crucial in trade relations and forms the basis for a prosperous economy .
I am therefore in favour of Mr Lehne 's report , with one exception : its recommendation 7 .
Including legally reprehensible behaviour in the private company statute would mean amending Title VI of the Treaty and unnecessarily complicating the link between the statute and our national laws .
I therefore feel that this provision runs counter to the objectives of the European private company statute : to produce better legislation and to make European entrepreneurs ' lives easier .
Government Procurement Agreement ( GPA ) ( debate )
The next item is oral question to the Commission on the renegotiation of the Government Procurement Agreement ( GPA ) by Daniel Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B6-0450 / 2006 ) .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are putting this oral question on the renegotiation of the Government Procurement Agreement , which will end in March , because we are at a crucial moment .
Furthermore , in view of the importance of that agreement and its period in force , which will once again be ten or twelve years , it became necessary to raise the issue with the Commission here in Parliament .
The government procurement markets are becoming increasingly important in the world , in view of their volume , which may be up to 25 % of world GDP and , furthermore , because they represent a comparative advantage for the European Union , since at the moment we can be competitive in this sector compared to the competition that we are facing from other countries in other sectors , such as agriculture and industry .
If we want to adapt to globalisation , therefore , it is important that the European Union develop the sectors in which it can be competitive internationally and thereby create fair and favourable conditions for European companies .
In most countries , these markets are reserved for national companies , which is one of the main non-tariff barriers to international trade .
There are two aspects in this renegotiation that I would stress in particular .
Firstly , the geographical extension of this agreement , with the entry of significant players , such as China and the developing countries , and , secondly , the need to ensure fair , balanced and reciprocal conditions for the companies of the different countries .
With regard to the first point , the greater the geographical area covered by this agreement on government procurement the more valid it is .
Parliament therefore wishes to know whether any new countries are interested in signing up to the agreement in the short term , and particularly whether we can expect substantial commitments from China in relation to the opening up of its public markets .
Let us not forget that China committed itself to opening up its government procurement market - which largely remains closed , or has requirements that are unacceptable to European companies - and to beginning negotiations in 2008 on accession to the Government Procurement Agreement , following its accession to the World Trade Organisation .
Secondly , with regard to fair and reciprocal conditions , we must remember that the European Union 's public markets are already very much opened up to international competition .
This has considerable advantages for the public bodies awarding contracts , since this openness gives them greater choice and therefore makes it possible for them to find better quality goods and services at lower cost .
Let us not forget , however , that this may harm European companies in cases where foreign competitors are preferred .
The Union 's trade policy is geared towards greater opening up of all aspects of the international markets .
The solution is not therefore to close the public markets to foreign companies .
For this reason , we have the legitimate right to demand that our companies enjoy similar conditions of access to the public markets of our main trading partners , whose companies currently enjoy access to our public markets .
That is not currently the case , however , since the commitments made by our trading partners are very limited compared to those made by the European Union .
Commissioner Mandelson also referred to this imbalance in his communication on a competitive Europe in a globalised economy .
In it , he suggests the possibility of introducing concrete restrictions to access to certain sections of the Union 's public markets , with the aim of persuading our trading partners to open up their markets in a reciprocal manner .
Having said all of that , I consider this oral question on behalf of the Committee on International Trade to the European Commission , calling upon it to explain its strategy in this renegotiation of the agreement , to be timely - and hence more than appropriate . I would repeat that we are at a crucial time , since we need to reach an agreement over the coming weeks .
How is the Commission going to defend the interests of European companies in the markets of sectors in which we are highly competitive , such as transport , energy and public works , within the context of the objective of continuing along the path towards greater commercial openness , and not the reverse ?
Within this context , how are we going to deal with the situation of European SMEs , which are already at a disadvantage compared to large companies , compared to the situation of other SMEs in other countries whose governments reserve a proportion of their public contracts for them , as in the case of the United States ?
In view of the lack of reciprocal arrangements , the disadvantages faced by European SMEs and their importance in terms of the main objectives of the Lisbon Strategy , we would call upon the Commission to demand that the other parties in the negotiation remove their exceptions or , if that is not possible , to accept our application of an exception of this same kind in favour of European SMEs .
In any event , we need that kind of reciprocal arrangement since European companies are currently at a disadvantage .
I would therefore ask the Commission to tell us how the negotiations are progressing , particularly with regard to the issues that I have raised and those referred to in the text of our question .
I would also ask the Commission to take note of the concerns expressed by the European Parliament and to take them into account in its negotiations in Geneva .
Madam President , the issue of the renegotiation of the WTO Government Procurement Agreement , known as the GPA , is important for Europe as it should provide our companies with future opportunities outside the Community .
Last December , after many years of long and difficult negotiations , the GPA parties reached a provisional understanding on a new revised text .
I consider this to be a major achievement in the current context of the Doha Round .
It demonstrates that the political will to reach an understanding on sensitive issues remains alive .
The new text provides for more clarity and transparency , as well as better guarantees for equal treatment in the procurement procedures .
It includes , for the first time , provisions for conducting electronic procurement .
The European Community played an important role during the negotiations .
The existing agreement is unbalanced , both in terms of procedural guarantees and coverage .
Our main objectives were to fill the gaps and to eliminate ambiguities .
We wanted to obtain better legal guarantees for our suppliers , similar to those offered by our internal regime .
At the same time we sought to make the new agreement more attractive for developing countries via new specific measures .
The final agreement on the new text is subject to a satisfactory outcome of the market access negotiations which are ongoing .
Here as well , we need to rebalance the situation in favour of the Community .
Hence the coverage our partners currently offer should be extended to the level the Community has offered and it should be more uniform .
We all want to see improved access for our companies to foreign countries ' procurement markets .
The Council emphasised in its recent conclusions on the Commission 's communication ' Global Europe - Competing in the World ' that we need to achieve additional improvements in market access with our future major trading partners , namely in public procurement .
The Community has submitted a comprehensive request and offer which will give the other GPA parties all the necessary incentives to offer significant additional procurement opportunities .
Should we fail to get a substantial improvement from other GPA parties , we will consider taking the necessary measures to adapt the Community commitments in the new GPA accordingly .
In the absence of improved access for the EU to third-country procurement markets , Commissioner Mandelson and I are reflecting on a market-opening instrument to enhance EU access .
The case of our SMEs certainly deserves particular attention .
It will specifically benefit from the new text , with the introduction of rules on electronic procurement and , if negotiations are completed successfully , the lowering of thresholds of some parties .
However , let me remind you that the agreement deals with rather large procurement contracts which are mainly undertaken by big companies .
SMEs certainly have an important role to play , but mostly as subcontractors .
This is why we have asked our GPA partners who currently maintain specific derogations for their domestic SMEs to abandon them .
On the prospects of extending the geographical scope of the agreement , eight WTO members are in the process of acceding to it .
Among those , Jordan is the most advanced .
China has indicated that it will start accession negotiations by December this year and , following my visit there last year , we are already preparing this important accession .
As already mentioned , the Community has pushed for better provisions on the special and differential treatment for developing countries .
I believe we have achieved a good result with tailor-made new rules that fully take their specific needs into account .
I am confident that if we succeed , this new agreement will constitute a milestone for international trade and create new opportunities for our companies .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall start by congratulating my esteemed colleague , Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , and by thanking him for having asked , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , this oral question on the negotiations under way at the World Trade Organisation regarding the rules on access to public contracts .
We need derogations for small and medium-sized enterprises , Commissioner .
The subject bringing us together today is a crucial issue as far as growth and employment in Europe are concerned .
The WTO rules on trade in goods and services do not apply to purchases made by a State for its own use , that is to say to public procurement .
That is why some countries , operating just outside the Marrakech agreements of April 1994 , have voluntarily signed a special annex containing an agreement on public procurement .
With the exception of the European Union , all the major countries participating in this agreement - Canada , Korea , the United States and Japan - have excluded from their offer contracts that they reserve for their SMEs .
This imbalance is unacceptable , and the public contracts that have thus been excluded are precisely those that concern our small and medium-sized enterprises , while the SMEs from those countries have unrestricted access to all our public contracts .
Our SMEs are thus under-represented where public procurement is concerned , and we need to launch a broad debate on the reasons for this .
We need to put right this imbalance by obtaining a derogation on public procurement that favours European SMEs .
We cannot accept distortions of this kind .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over and above this negotiation , the issue at stake is the will of the European Union to provide small and medium-sized enterprises with the favourable environment that they need and to use access to public procurement as an extraordinary lever for growth and employment ; also at stake is the need to provide legal certainty , within the European Union , between the international legal system , European law and national laws .
We are not talking here about protectionism ; quite the contrary , we are talking about increasing the supply by having more businesses to meet the demand .
Commissioner , there are three areas on the planet today : Asia , excluding Japan , which has poor countries but strong growth ; the United States , which is a rich country with strong growth ; and Europe , which has rich countries but weak growth .
We need to reflect .
When we regulated the internal market by voting for the Services Directive , we built this market on the laws of competition , and the European Union took a great interest in consumers .
We now need to take an interest in our manufacturers .
The renegotiation of the multilateral agreement on public procurement that is currently under way at the WTO is , in our view , an extraordinary opportunity to act and to reflect on the place occupied by SMEs in terms of accessing public contracts .
We need , Commissioner , to give the internal market the gift of a European Small Business Act that includes social market economy considerations .
The debate is open , and I welcome that .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , it is a pleasure to see you in the Chair .
What is interesting and fascinating about this debate is that we are talking about a plurilateral agreement that is very specific in character .
It is , of course , part of the multilateral framework but , as it is plurilateral in character , it allows much more flexibility for those Member States that are part of this agreement .
With regard to this , and as it is its tenth anniversary , could the Commissioner tell us a little bit about it : how it worked in the past , whether he is satisfied with it and thinks it is a worthwhile undertaking that is worth renegotiating .
It is not part of his portfolio , but does he consider that it is also worthwhile renegotiating the telecoms agreement , which is also ten years old this year ?
With regard to the agreement on government procurement - which Mr Audy mentioned - we are very concerned about SMEs , because we know by experience that they are definitely having much more difficulty in accessing international markets .
What is the Commission going to do about it beyond what has been done in the past ?
China is of great concern .
We are happy to have China as part of the global environment , but it puts a lot of pressure on some companies .
So once China becomes a member of the plurilateral agreement , what safeguards will the Commissioner put in place to safeguard the interests of European companies and workers ?
How much is this exercise part of global Europe ?
How much is it related to the new approach from the Commission agreeing on different bilateral agreements and what will be part of this connection ?
With regard to services of general interest , how , again , will the Commissioner ensure that European interests will be safeguarded ?
Can the Commissioner tell us more about that ?
He has not touched on that .
Finally , can the Commissioner ensure that Parliament will be kept informed ?
Can he promise that the Committee on International Trade , which has just elected its new chairman this morning , will also be kept informed ?
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , it is entirely appropriate for the House to be dealing with the question of the greater liberalisation of public procurement markets today , and I believe it is regrettable that the same determination was lacking when we debated the liberalisation of services across our continent .
Essentially , the issues are the same .
It is right to consider extending the geographical scope of the GPA , and it is unfortunate that we did not seize the opportunity of significantly deepening our services market a few months ago .
Both cases involve more than just measures to help the operation of the larger European companies .
There is a particular emphasis on promoting the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I support contract negotiations that will allow us to participate in the Chinese public procurement market , but it is also important to bear in mind the actual opportunities for participation in the European market for the other side , as Mrs Mann just mentioned .
As far as our Chinese partners are concerned , there are two sides to this coin , and it seems to me that we should also take into account the specific challenges that exist for the European market in this area .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , congratulations !
It is very good to see you in the Chair .
Commissioner McCreevy , I too should like to start off by talking about how best we support small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am very pleased that there seems to be a concern right across the different political groups of this House .
I think we all share that .
I would like to ask first of all for some clarification of remarks made by the French Trade Minister , Christine Lagarde , when she came to Parliament 's Committee on International Trade just last week .
She spoke very passionately and rightly , I believe , about the importance of defending small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe . And yet you , Commissioner , seem to have a very different view of the role of SMEs and how best to support them .
Guaranteeing better access to public procurement contracts for innovative small and medium-sized enterprises is essential .
They represent 75 million jobs in the Union and 50 % of Community GNI , and they are a vital component of thriving local and regional economies all around the EU .
But it seems that the Commission is voluntarily giving up the right to support its SMEs .
There are already five countries- Canada , the US , Israel , Japan and South Korea - that will introduce provisions into their legislation which give privileged access to SMEs for public procurement , and yet the EU , bizarrely , has decided it has no interest in standing up for its own SMEs .
So Commissioner , can you really justify this position ?
For the EU to forego the right to a level playing field which would allow SMEs to have an equal opportunity to compete like the large multinationals seems both extraordinary and indeed unacceptable .
Surely we too should be using the renegotiation of the GPA in Geneva to break down the WTO barriers which prevent Member States from implementing a privileged access measure for SMEs should they so wish .
We too should be arguing for derogations as part of the revised GPA to allow us to bring in preferential measures , and by doing this we are simply restoring equality of treatment in order to prevent the large multinational corporations from having all of the advantages .
I very much regret as well that we have not had the opportunity for a prior debate really in Europe about whether it is appropriate to try to extend international trade rules to cover government procurement at all .
Many would argue that government procurement has little or nothing to do with traditional matters of trade , tariffs and quotas , and that it is an unacceptable area for negotiations at the WTO , because subjecting government procurement at the national , local or regional level to one-size-fits-all rules at a global level on how taxpayers ' funds are spent I think destroys citizens ' reasonable expectations that they should have a level of democratic accountability over how their money is spent .
Essentially , taxpayers ' money is different from private , corporate money , and citizens rightly expect that they should have the right , for example , to lobby to cut off expenditure on companies that were doing business in South Africa when there was apartheid , or to disqualify companies with bad labour or environmental records .
I believe we have a really important role to play in defending local sourcing and procurement as a vital instrument of local employment and industrial policy .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President - with my warm congratulations on your election , Commissioner , the Government Procurement Agreement has hitherto applied only to the OECD states , and their expenditure on public contracts in respect of supplies , services and building works make up something between 10 % and 25 % of their GDP .
China has now been giving consideration to the possibility of joining them .
The renewed negotiations currently in progress are , in general , aimed at extending the scope of the Agreement , and that would , of course , give it a vast amount of added significance in terms of the international exchange of goods and services .
While the Commission must certainly , in the revision process , seek to improve transparency and combat corruption in international public procurement , the urgent environmental challenges mean that ecological sustainability in the public sector must be given high priority , and that , as I understand it , means that regulation is needed to deal with it .
It must , for example , be lawful and legitimate , when awarding state contracts , for preference to be given to environmentally friendly goods and services , even if they are minimally more expensive .
One crucial question is how one deals with developing countries .
It needs to be ensured that public procurement , in the same way as the other Singapore issues , is dealt with absolutely independently of the current Doha development round negotiations , the need for which was expressed very clearly by the developing countries at Cancún .
The document that we are talking about - the one that is due to be renegotiated - can in fact only apply to partners of comparable strength , and so I see something problematic in the idea of non-discrimination or reciprocity , which seem to me once more to tend towards treating highly industrialised countries and developing countries in exactly the same way , which does not work .
The proposed provisions for developing countries , involving a transitional period of three years - or five for the least developed - are quite utterly inadequate when it comes to persuading them to sign up to the Agreement .
I think one regrettable consequence of this is that many of these countries will give this Agreement a wide berth , which I , in principle , regard as a disgrace when this is meant to be being handled plurilaterally .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the debate we are having about this oral question epitomises so much of what is wrong with the European Union .
Firstly , we have to deal with the WTO through one man who represents no less than 27 nations .
He has no popular mandate and in the light of his record in British politics would not have been chosen to run a village fête .
I do not want an EU representative to speak for my country at the WTO .
I want a representative of Her Majesty 's Government who not only knows my country but cares for it too .
Then there is the whole issue of competitive tendering .
China was mentioned as a potential provider in the oral question and it may well be highly competitive .
Whilst I condemn the suppression of individual freedoms and rights in China , the Chinese know a few things about running a successful economy .
Government spending is only some 20 % of GDP , whereas in the eurozone it was 47.5 % in 2005 .
In China , business runs with a light regulatory touch .
In the European Union , we are regulating ourselves to death .
In 2005 Mr Blair promised that the British Presidency would cut red tape .
It did nothing of the sort .
How many thousands of pages did it add to the mountain of legislation ?
My country was hoodwinked into joining the European Union in 1973 on the basis of it being just a free trade area .
This is all it should be : no Parliament , no Commission , no directives .
Instead it has become a bureaucratic monster which is wrecking our economy .
( EL ) Mr President , provisional agreement has already been reached on the revised text of the Public Procurement Agreement and is expected to be reached on the final agreement .
I respect the need for negotiations to be carried out in secret , but do you not think , Commissioner , that you have been late informing the European Parliament about the priorities , demands and offers of the Union during the renegotiation of this important agreement ?
I think that the Union 's basic negotiating principle should be reciprocity and the achievement of a balanced result between the trading partners .
The balanced result should not be at the level of theoretical commitments between the trading partners on behalf of the other partners .
It must be evaluated at the level of the real facility to make full use of the volume of invitations to tender subject to cross-border competition .
Has the Commission prepared studies on the real access of European undertakings to the market of the other states from the application of the agreement so far ?
The USA , Canada , South Korea and Japan - the parties to the agreement - have already safeguarded preferential access for small- and medium-sized enterprises to the public procurement market .
Paradoxically , however , the Union has not .
I believe the European Union should demand an exemption within the framework of the application of the Public Procurement Agreement for small and medium-sized enterprises .
This demand is reasonable , especially as our partners have already acted .
Small- and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of the European economy and an important source of development and employment , as both Mr Varela , the author , and Mr Audy have emphasised .
They contribute to economic and social cohesion .
We have an obligation to take initiatives that will safeguard their dynamic role .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate you on your appointment .
I am not going to speak about SMEs because many of my colleagues have already done so , but I want to emphasise and agree with them that this is an extremely important issue .
Government procurement accounts for 20 % of GDP in developing countries and around 15 % of GDP in developed countries .
I feel a little bit Janus-faced on this issue , because intuitively I am in favour of opening up public procurement to competition .
It should in theory reduce government costs and increase transparency in government procurement and therefore cut out corruption .
That should bring benefits both to the developed and the developing world and , in the developing world , would free up resources for health and education .
However , if you look at the list of those who have signed up for GPA , there is not a single African country among the 36 .
It is clear that the African countries and other LDCs feel that the costs potentially outweigh the benefits of signing up to this agreement .
I would ask the Commission what support could it plan to give , firstly , African and other LDC countries to enable them to compete in the European market and the other developed markets on a fair footing and what assistance can they be given to develop their own industry so that they can sustain competition inside their own country if they sign up for opening of the government procurement contracts .
I also worry , as Mrs Lucas has indicated in a slightly different way , how non-trade issues will be taken into account in GPA and the application of GPA , how issues like the environment , human rights and labour rights will be taken into account .
I agree with Mrs Lucas that this is public money and that there is a danger , if we simply have GPA without any conditions , that labour and environmental standards could be driven down .
On the one hand I can see the advantage of opening up public procurement , but it is fraught with dangers and I hope the Commission will examine these issues .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate you once again , and to thank the Commissioner .
In Britain , SMEs are unfairly shut out of public procurement due to well-meaning requirements such as corporate social responsibility and environmental standards ; quite often a requirement for three years of audited accounts , which many small businesses cannot meet ; a lack of competitive tendering ; the bundling of contracts that become too big for SMEs and favour the large companies ; and secrecy and a lack of transparency .
We know that the EU directive requires transparency and competitive tendering , but most contracts that SMEs bid for are quite often below the threshold .
So when you speak to SMEs and ask them what they want to see , they say they want to see a cut in bureaucracy and paperwork .
They want to see authorities avoiding the one-size-fits-all requirement for certification .
They want to see contracts advertised on websites such as ' supply2.gov ' , and they also want to see unbundled contracts .
But we have to recognise that government departments are not commercial organisations and will often want to seek to avoid the extra work involved in multiple tenders , so we therefore need to provide incentives for governments and local government .
In America , targets have been provided as to whether fair competition actually does or does not exist .
SMEs do not require quotas , but they need a performance metric to see whether there is fair competition .
Also in America there are small SME advisers helping the government to enable SMEs to have fair access .
These requirements - benchmarks and competition advocates - would probably not be allowed under the WTO agreement , and I understand the reason , but it does unintentionally forbid measures which ensure fair competition .
The WTO agreement is actually generally positive , as it is anti-protectionist , but it forbids measures which are needed to help small businesses .
So while some Member States want an opt-out , others rightly fear that this would increase protectionism .
Therefore , let us call on the Commission to seek a compromise whereby an opt-out is secured , but a new agreement is drafted to allow SME-friendly measures and to greatly extend anti-protectionist measures .
If we allow SME-friendly measures , the agreement would remove America 's reasons for its opt-out , which has been used to retain the Buy America Act .
It would also help British and European SMEs to compete globally .
( NL ) Mr President , a Government Procurement Agreement could mean more transparency and thus less corruption .
It could also mean fair prices - which is not unimportant given that public service contracts involve taxpayers ' money - with the right , though , to include social and environmental criteria at the tendering stage .
Developing countries could also benefit enormously from all these advantages .
Needless to say , their participation in the international Government Procurement Agreement in future cannot be ruled out , but the Commission should ensure that they can implement this method - and the same applies to fair competition rules - nationally or regionally at first , just as we did in Europe , and do not need , therefore , to allow in the entire world and the large monopolies straight away .
It would then have to be up to the developing countries to determine when they would feel sufficiently developed .
Something that , in fact , applies the world over , is that forced large-scale tenders , as a result of which the small and medium-sized enterprises are pushed out of the market , should be avoided at all costs .
Unfortunately , I have first-hand experience of exactly that at a train station in Amsterdam where the train station 's security service was put out to tender .
The company that was previously responsible for the station 's security was a small company and was doing an excellent job .
During tender , however , this company proved too small to compete for the total tender for many of those stations and was elbowed out of the market , therefore .
My fellow Members have undoubtedly come across similar examples , and that is why we would like to ask the Commission how the SMEs can be guaranteed better access to procurement contracts .
Finally , the forced break-up of the national and semi-public provisions for the sake of large foreign suppliers is fundamentally wrong .
Every country has the right to regulate publicly what the public would like to retain .
We are talking about basic provisions here , like education and water , provisions that are at the heart of society and that should not be messed with .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner McCreevy , ladies and gentlemen , it is because the question raised by the Committee on International Trade on the problem of procurement at WTO level directly affects the European internal market that I believe that we have to consider these more closely .
Of course , on the one hand , it is the WTO agreement that is at issue here , but , on the other , it must also be clear to us that these international treaties - as is the way of things with globalisation - have direct effects on the European internal market .
Mr Kamall pointed out that , in a number of WTO member states , the United States of America being one of them , certain quotas are to be adhered to even now in the award of national contracts to small and medium-sized enterprises , which means , at the end of the day , nothing other than that the scope of the procurement regulation laid down by the WTO is being restricted .
I would like to see an impact assessment indicating whether or not this is of any long-term benefit to small and medium-sized enterprises ; that it is , in any case , not certain .
As long as we do not know that for certain , we do not need to worry about the limitation of scope , for it is of course the case that small and medium-sized enterprises live from markets that are as transparent as possible and that they find easiest to access , and if the WTO member states reduce the scope by a quarter , I do not know whether small and medium-sized businesses actually derive any benefit from that .
It would surely be a worthwhile exercise - and it is with this in mind that I , too , support this question - if the Commission were to be able to examine this closely and show us whether this does have positive effects on small and medium-sized businesses .
In the Council , of course - none of whose representatives are , alas , present - a balance must be found between those who would favour an approach like that of the USA and those who want to see the precise opposite of that , that is to say , the reduction of quotas to create a free and open market right across the WTO , giving small and medium-sized enterprises a chance everywhere .
It is for that reason that I believe that the crucial problem for small and medium-sized enterprises in this respect is much more that we have not yet really got a handle on the problem of sub-contractors , for it is in that capacity that small and medium-sized enterprises are often used , being in that way able to create jobs and have the chance to earn money , but they are , ultimately , managed from higher up and that often puts them in a difficult position , with their feet in two different camps .
What I think we should do is give this problem , in particular , closer attention , and so I would be glad if the Commission were to give some thought to this and keep us up to speed with what is going on .
In other words , it should start by addressing the problem to which this question refers and then we can make definite demands of the Commissioner .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna and to thank him for having submitted his question , which gives us a means of addressing the issue at stake .
I was rapporteur in this House on the reform of contracts , supplies and services , in this case Directives 17 and 18 .
Even though there is very little time , I think that it is worth pointing out the main aspects of the problem .
As I have heard some speakers say this morning , Parliament has very much focused Directive 18 , or the general directive on contracts , on environmental issues , the updated system of electronic contracts , the social sphere and the issue of thresholds , and I therefore believe that we have legislation that is without doubt exceptional , but that does not actually concern this morning 's subject matter .
The issue raised is completely different : a review is under way of an international agreement that places EU countries - and therefore EU businesses - at a disadvantage compared with others .
What is the problem ?
In 1994 and in subsequent years , very different types of activity were planned worldwide through plurilateral agreements .
The United States , China and other countries in reality enjoy privileges that are not enjoyed by EU businesses .
This system is now being reviewed , but the methods of reviewing it need to be laid down , because , as my fellow Members and I myself should recall , the United States alone has an annual output of almost USD 200 billion , a sum that actually remains within the United States .
The point is that , while anyone can come and work in Europe , our small and medium-sized enterprises cannot go and set up business in the rest of the world .
The GPA agreements are , among other things , agreements that deny European businesses access to the international system .
What decisions can therefore be made today ?
As I see it , the Commission believes that , by abolishing the privileges of others , we can compete once again on an equal footing .
That is not so .
I believe that we need instead to protect Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises , by guaranteeing them the same privileges within the European Union and thus with regard to the European Union that are enjoyed by small and medium-sized enterprises from the United States and from other countries in the world .
Therefore , not only am I grateful to Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , but I am also of the opinion that the argument being upheld by France at the moment within the Council should definitely be favoured and supported over the European Commission 's position .
Mr President , I should like to thank all Members for their comments .
I attach the utmost importance to public procurement .
Proper , fair and transparent procedures are crucial not only for businesses that want to bid for projects but also for authorities that would be able to save themselves and taxpayers huge amounts of money if they applied the procedures properly .
Getting commitments from our trading partners to open their procurement market for European bidders is essential .
Our companies have something to offer .
They are competitive , but too often they are simply not allowed or invited to make a bid .
SMEs benefit from public procurement .
They already have a big share of the market , but I do not think that setting aside quotas or giving preferential treatment is the answer .
If we were to do that , so would more of our trading partners and the result would be that European companies would lose out .
I believe that all sides are best served by open markets .
Our SMEs are dynamic and strong .
They will benefit as well .
Mrs Mann asked to be kept informed .
I shall ask my officials to keep her committee closely informed .
They will attend meetings of the committee and will answer your questions about the details of the negotiations .
Various Members referred to special arrangements for SMEs and that this should be part of our negotiating stance .
As I have said , I do not agree .
I agree with a lot of what Mr Kamall said , and his observation that Member States themselves could do a lot to assist their SMEs in the area of public procurement without contravening any rules at all .
If they unbundled some of their contracts and cut out a lot of the bureaucracy , that would benefit SMEs substantially , and would not require the setting-aside of quotas .
Where I would disagree is with the conclusion drawn by some people that the way to do this better for SMEs is to set aside quotas .
Mr Kamall also raised the issue of the United States having a Small Business Act and an agency to deal with these matters .
However , the figures show that , either in volume or in quantity terms , SMEs in Europe get a far higher percentage of contracts than they do in the United States .
That should be of some interest to people .
Therefore , I say - and people are entitled to disagree with my views on this - that public procurement is all about competing : the best goods and services for the lowest amount .
That means value for money .
Reserving parts of the market underlines this .
We were also discussing SMEs in an earlier debate this morning .
Members said that SMEs need opportunities .
I certainly agree .
However , protectionism is not the answer .
But , of course , we will not be naive : we expect our trading partners to open their markets as well .
We shall suspend the sitting and resume at 11.00 a.m. for the formal sitting with the President of Bulgaria .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.00 a.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Protection of passengers against displaced luggage ( vote )
2 .
Approval of motor vehicles with regard to the forward field of vision of the driver ( vote )
3 .
EC-Korea Agreement on scientific and technological cooperation ( vote )
4 .
Mainstreaming sustainability in development cooperation policies ( vote )
5 .
Draft Amending Budget No 1 / 2007 ( vote )
6 .
Human rights of the Dalits in India ( vote )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to suggest that we avail ourselves of the option provided by Rule 168 ( 2 ) of our Rules of Procedure and send this report back to the committee .
The reason I have for saying this is that I am familiar with the problem of Article 90 and that this report surely describes the situation of the Dalits , India 's so-called untouchables , in accurate terms , it is no less apparent that nobody among us finds these conditions tolerable , and we are obliged to do whatever we can about them .
However , it also appears that India has raised serious objections to this report on the grounds that it discusses the caste system in India and hence something that is part and parcel of that country 's traditions and culture .
I would , then , ask that consideration be given to whether it might be well-advised , in the interests of what we are trying to do , to discuss this again in the committee , even if what emerges from it later on differs from the present motion for a resolution in no respect whatever .
We would , however , be well advised to talk to the Indian authorities again , since it is all too often we Europeans who wag the finger at others and tell them what to do , which tends to hinder us from achieving the objectives we seek , so I put it to the House that this would be a wiser course of action .
( DE ) Mr President , unless my ears deceive me , you said that this act , under Rule 90 , is adopted , in the absence of any objection to it .
Secondly , embassies keep on interfering in what we do ; in this instance it is the Indian embassy doing it , but we speak for a people rather than for any embassy , and so we should stick with the resolution as it stands .
Mr President , I have an altogether different point to make .
I was the Vice-President of the Human Rights Sub-Committee and the deputy coordinator in the Committee on Foreign Affairs at the time when this report went through the Development Committee .
It is primarily a human rights report .
The opinion of neither Foreign Affairs nor Human Rights was sought on this .
We have had no opportunity to amend it .
It is a human rights report going through Development .
It is not within that committee 's remit .
It is not just a question of the Government of India , it is a question of procedure .
How can we have a report going through Plenary without a vote or an opportunity to amend it when the committees with the main responsibilities for the issue have never seen the report , have never had an opportunity to correct factual inaccuracies ?
It is not factually correct !
( Applause )


( DE ) Mr President , as Mr Swoboda has said , it has already been adopted , so the debate is over , and all other deliberations are superfluous .
If Mr Nassauer and Mr Tannock want to produce another report , they will have to start from the very beginning , and we will vote on it five years from now .

Mr President , as a negotiator on this report in the Development Committee , I recognise the point made by my colleague Mr Tannock , because if we have a Human Rights Sub-Committee , this report should have gone to that committee for comment .
It only went through the Development Committee , but it should have gone to the Human Rights Sub-Committee because this is fundamentally a human rights report .
Therefore I recommend that we send the report back to committee and ask the Sub-Committee on Human Rights of the Foreign Affairs Committee to give an opinion on it .
( Applause )
Mr President , speaking as chair of the SAARC Delegation , I recognise that this is a very delicate report .
However , we also have to recognise that there are factual inaccuracies in here .
For procedural reasons , this report was approved in the Committee on Development on 19 December 2006 and the deadline was 15 January 2007 .
Most of the intervening period was taken up by the Christmas break .
We have looked into the issues ; we have had several meetings ; we have opinions ; and I would ask , as a delegation chair , that we have an opportunity to make our view heard .
I would support referral back to committee .
You cannot have a report without any debate or any vote .
It is short-circuiting the democratic scrutiny process and I think it is important that we do credit to this House .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am deeply saddened by the example we are setting regarding a resolution that we have debated thoroughly within the Committee on Development and on which we have had time to table amendments .
This is an issue that does not interfere - certainly no more so than many other far more forceful resolutions adopted by this House - in China 's internal affairs .
We know perfectly well that the caste issue is an extremely sensitive one , but we have listened to the Dalits , who do not just live in India , but in many other countries too : we are talking about millions of people who live in degrading and inhuman conditions .
I am sorry but I really think that our Parliament is setting a very bad example and , as with all the other resolutions that are being voted on , I believe that this resolution , being , as it is , a resolution voted on by the Committee on Development , should be voted on in Parliament , since it concerns a problem of human dignity and of the right of millions of people to live , and to have their lives and their dignity respected .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , we must do as the law says .
I shall now read out to you Rule 90 ( 4 ) , and I ask you to listen carefully , for this is pretty difficult legalese , but this is the Rule to which the President has to keep , for the President must be guided by the law as it stands .
Rule 90 ( 4 ) states that : ' Recommendations drawn up in this way shall be included on the agenda for the next part-session .
In urgent cases decided upon by the President , recommendations may be included on the agenda of a current part-session .
Recommendations shall be deemed adopted unless , before the beginning of the part-session , at least forty Members submit a written objection , in which case the committee 's recommendations shall be included on the agenda of the same part-session for debate and voting .
A political group or at least 40 Members may table amendments . '
I have to say at this point - and I am keeping to the law , as I am required to do - that no written motion has been submitted by 40 Members prior to this sitting , and so my recommendation is that the relevant committee should continue to discuss this issue - which is a very delicate one - and , should they come up with another result at some other point in time , that is in order , but right now , I have to do as the House 's rules require .
( Applause )
7 .
EC-Gabon Fisheries Partnership ( vote )
8 .
Moratorium on the death penalty ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 2 :
( FR ) Mr President , we would ask you to add to paragraph 2 , after ' the universal moratorium on executions ' , the phrase ' with a view to the universal abolition of the death penalty ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
Before the vote on recital H :
Mr President , I should like to move the following small addition to recital H , which deals with the execution of Saddam Hussein : ' and deploring the way it was carried out ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
9 .
Promoting healthy diets and physical activity ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I have a small point concerning Amendment 1 , which I tabled as shadow rapporteur on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
That was correct , but I should have also said that the original author was Professor Trakatellis .
I apologise to him for not including his name .
I would hope that the inclusion of his authorship will encourage wider-spread approval across this House for a good amendment .
10 .
Limitation periods in cross-border disputes involving personal injuries and fatal accidents ( vote )
11 .
Discrimination against young women and girls in the field of education ( vote )
- Before the vote on recital G :
( DE ) Mr President , I have just a brief statement to make on the amendment .
( PL ) The report refers to many negative aspects of so-called feminism and segregation , and I therefore consider it is worth highlighting a positive example .
Marie Skłodowska-Curie could serve as an inspiring example of a woman , mother , wife , scientist , Nobel prize-winner and exemplary European .
That is why I am surprised that Mrs Flasarová , the rapporteur , is opposed to Marie Skłodowska-Curie and I cannot understand why .
Is it a case of woman against woman ?
Is it politically and psychologically correct ?
- Before the vote on the amended motion for a resolution :
rapporteur . - ( CS ) Thank you for giving me the floor , Mr President .
I feel that in terms of women who have made a significant contribution to our European Union and to Europe , there are too many to name .
I therefore feel that it is not only Marie Curie-Skłodowska , a woman for whom I have great admiration , who should be on the list .
This report , in my view , deals with the issues that have been mentioned here . Thank you .
12 .
Strategy for a strengthened partnership with the Pacific Islands ( vote )
13 .
The European private company statute ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . ( DE ) I cast my vote for the recommendation on the approval of partitioning systems to protect passengers against displaced luggage , supplied as non-original vehicle equipment , since this , firstly , makes easier trade in motor vehicles between one contracting party and another and , secondly , also guarantees a high standard of safety and environmental protection .
With these considerations in mind , I can do no other than support the harmonisation of the rules applicable to motor vehicles .
I cast my vote in favour of a regulation concerning the approval of motor vehicles with regard to the forward field of vision of the motor vehicle driver .
The harmonisation of regulations applicable to motor vehicles will , on the one hand , reduce obstacles to trade between various contracting parties and , on the other , guarantee high safety standards .
The draft guarantees an adequate field of vision through the windscreen and other windows on the motor vehicle , which , from the point of view of general safety , is to be endorsed without exception .
I will be supporting this report which reinforces our agreement with the Republic of Korea on scientific and technological cooperation .
Seoul is an increasingly important global industrial player and it is vital that the EU engages with this country which traditionally has been closer to the US rather than us .
I presume that this agreement will cover scientific and technological research in the Kaesong Industrial Zone jointly administered by North and South Korea , and in that I am sure the Republic of Korea will welcome our commitment that is currently withheld by Washington .
We are radically opposed to the Council proposal on scientific cooperation between the ΕU and Korea , because the orientation and fragmentation of research contributes to the profitability of the monopoly groups of companies and to capital in general .
It is contrary to the real needs of the workers .
It is in the people 's interest to fight this reactionary choice for research and similar agreements and the anti-labour policy overall and the EU itself and to fight for radical change so that research can be oriented towards satisfying the contemporary needs of the working and grass-roots classes .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by Lithuanian MEP Mrs Budreikaitė , on mainstreaming sustainability in development cooperation policies .
She rightly points out that sustainable development is based on the idea that the needs of the current generation should be met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs .
It is right to mainstream sustainable development concepts in public policy at European and Member State level , concepts that include economic prosperity , social cohesion and respect for the environment .
This is essential when it comes to development cooperation , which is very difficult to achieve given the planet 's demographic development and the need to eradicate poverty .
The EU should be at the forefront of the worldwide affirmation of sustainable development concepts .
This , after all , is one of the EU 's key missions .
The report omits to mention the underlying causes of the increasingly deep social inequality and disparity in development , of the unchecked exploitation of natural resources and of the massive destruction of the environment around the world , and fails to mention the real culprit , which is capitalism .
Despite this , it does contain a wide range of proposals and points that we welcome , such as the call for the target of 0.7 % GNI to be met in order to achieve effective development cooperation characterised by solidarity .
However , we cannot accept the following points , for example :
because ' local authorities in developing countries are not always in a position to provide the volumes of financing required to make major investments in the construction and maintenance of infrastructure networks , for example to supply water or provide sanitation ' , the report concludes that the solution is ' only supplementary injections of private capital , through public-private partnerships , will be able to provide the requisite volume of funding ' , thus handing this fundamental resource for life on a plate to private capital ;
and making the reduction - rather than the cancellation - of the debts of the least-developed countries contingent on what is termed ' good governance ' , the criteria for which are dictated by the whims of the major powers .
Hence our vote .
in writing . ( DE ) Over the past fifteen years we have made progress in combating poverty , albeit far from to the extent we had hoped , for even if we manage to drive a country 's economic development forward , this does not mean by a long chalk that poverty has thereby been reduced .
Funds intended for those in disadvantaged circumstances must not be allowed to seep away into corrupt systems or be able to be used even for such things as the purchase of weaponry or the shoring up of dictatorial regimes .
It is here that effectiveness needs to be better monitored if development funds are to be applied in the right place and for the right purposes .
It might also be worth considering concentrating them on what are termed ' anchor countries ' , which are capable of fast-forwarding a whole region 's development , and we should also be open to new approaches , including the use of microcredit as a means of getting the poor permanently back on their own feet .
I just wanted to expand on what I said earlier regarding the way the resolution on Dalits ' human rights went through the House without an opportunity to amend it , and in particular to point out a number of factual inaccuracies in the report which never came before either the Foreign Affairs Committee or the Human Rights Sub-Committee for an opinion .
I would like to protest at the way in which Rule 90 ( 4 ) is being used by certain Members of this House .
For instance , the resolution highlights the incidence of crimes against the Dalits and talks about frequent heinous crimes against them , e.g. murders .
Well , I would like to point out that in fact the incidence of murders in India against Dalits is 2.04 % , whereas they constitute 14 % of the population .
So actually , if you are a Dalit , you have a safer lifestyle than if you are somebody from one of the other castes .
The resolution makes no mention of the workings of the Prevention of Atrocities Act , which was designed to help convict those who have attacked Dalits , and in addition it makes no mention of the fact that the rate of literacy , although very low for Dalits , is extremely close to the national average .
It does not mention that there is a national reward from the government , basically designed to eradicate untouchability , and there are cash incentives given to encourage inter-caste marriages .
This report is very unbalanced ; it is full of factual inaccuracies and I lament the fact , Mr President , that you were not in a position to refer it back to committee , but my case rests .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution tabled by the European Parliament 's Committee on Development on the human rights situation of the Dalits in India .
Although I believe that the European Union should be very careful when it comes to interfering in countries ' constitutions , I support this resolution denouncing the unacceptable situation of the Dalits , which is due to the non-application of various provisions prohibiting caste discrimination .
According to the report and numerous studies , the Dalits are the victims of unpunished crimes and offences .
Added to this are the abuses of children and women , who are the victims of two forms of discrimination - caste and gender discrimination - throughout their lives , with sexual abuse being included in this .
Yes , the European Parliament was right to denounce this disgraceful situation .
The treatment of the Dalits in India presents some serious human rights concerns .
There should be a universal right to decent work and non-discrimination and the caste system as it currently exists in India guarantees neither of these right to Dalits .
As the EU and the European Parliament 's very foundations are based on shared values , of which non-discrimination is a key element , then it is our duty to voice concern where we see these values being violated and these rights denied to others in third countries .
The huge problem involving people who are , to this day , considered outcastes and therefore ' untouchable ' is disturbing .
The social segregation experienced by Dalits can be likened to Apartheid as it used to be in South Africa .
The largest group of these ' untouchables ' live in India , where more than 160 million people are affected .
They are often excluded from basic provisions , such as education , health care and clean drinking water , are not allowed to own land and are regularly at the receiving end of violence and exploitation .
This is why I intend to vote in favour of this resolution which insists on the Indian Government stepping up its efforts in effectively stamping out caste-based discrimination and in promoting equal opportunities .
It is to be welcomed that the European Parliament is making specific proposals in order to counter this structural discrimination against a people .
As the Indian Prime Minister himself said on 27 December 2006 : ' Dalits have faced a unique discrimination in our society that is fundamentally different from the problems of minority groups in general .
The only parallel to the practice of ' untouchability ' was Apartheid in South Africa . '
I hope that the EU will be discussing this in its relations with India and will help stamp out this gross social injustice .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to express my support for the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and Gabon , as well as the other similar agreements with other ACP countries ( Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific ) and with certain other States .
These agreements are based on the principle of reciprocal cooperation and are in line with the partnership approach which is being applied to the external dimension of our common fisheries policy .
By means of these agreements , we achieve a twin objective : firstly , we guarantee that the interests of the Union 's deep-sea fishing fleet are protected and , secondly , we improve the conditions with a view to achieving sustainable fisheries in the waters of the partner countries .
In this regard , I would like to end by stressing that the Union and our deep-sea fishing fleet , in contrast to others that operate illegally - has committed itself to ensuring that world fishing activities are sustainable and has accepted the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation 's Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries .
We must support this and other agreements , because they promote the development of our partner countries .
in writing . ( PT ) The new Partnership Agreement with the Gabonese Republic , which entered into force on 3 December 2005 , is valid for six years and contains a protocol that will lead to a 40 % reduction in the fishing opportunities available to the various fleets of the EU Member States operating in these waters , including the Portuguese fleet .
Furthermore , in common with other tuna fishing agreements , fees for ship-owners have increased from 25 % to 35 % of the total cost , obviously with the reduction in the Community contribution .
What may now happen is low uptake of the opportunities offered by the agreements , and the scrapping of many long-distance fishing vessels , which is already happening in Portugal .
This situation leads us to question the actual impact of these agreements , the costs of which to the fleets are rising while fishing opportunities are falling .
It is alarming , not least for the Portuguese fleet , that this agreement will undermine the proportionality and the relative stability of the previous one in terms of the distribution of fishing opportunities with other fleets .
Portugal is to lose 50 % of the fishing opportunities for surface longliners , with only three licences as opposed to the six under the previous agreement .
I support this report amending the Fisheries Partnership Agreement .
I particularly support the call for greater parliamentary involvement prior to any extension of the agreement .
I am also glad that the development needs of coastal populations are addressed .
( NL ) Mr President , I have , needless to say , voted in favour of the resolution on a worldwide moratorium on the death penalty , because I am a staunch opponent of capital punishment , not least at a personal level .
I do want to make myself absolutely clear though . I may be opposed to capital punishment , but I do firmly believe that we should come down hard on crime .
What I am trying to say here is that it is because of the apathy and cowardice on the part of many European governments that , as is the case in my country , serious common law criminals , assassins and child rapists , are systematically given early release , and so it is because of this laxity and this cowardice that people are calling for the reintroduction of capital punishment in Europe .
As an opponent to capital punishment , I can see where these people are coming from , and my view is that proper account should be taken of the complaints lodged by them .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the joint motion for a resolution that was tabled by five political groups and that concerns an initiative in favour of a universal moratorium on the death penalty .
At a time when the third international congress against the death penalty is being held in Paris , it made sense for the European Union to restate its convictions and to ask that everything be done to obtain a universal moratorium on executions , with a view to the complete abolition of the death penalty .
I write this with a certain sense of pride in belonging to a Member State that , on the proposal of its President , the President of the French Republic , Mr Chirac , and thanks to the wisdom of its elected representatives , will shortly be amending its Constitution to include a ban on the death penalty , as is already laid down in law .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because I am opposed to the death penalty , which , in the 21st century , is an appalling example of barbarity and a violation of human dignity .
This state of affairs cannot be allowed to go on .
I therefore agree with the proposal to call for a universal moratorium on the death penalty at the United Nations General Assembly .
I did not sign the draft joint resolution , tabled by several political groups , on a global moratorium on the death penalty , nor do I intend to vote in its favour .
I fully endorse the undertakings Poland entered into under international law on joining the Council of Europe and the European Union , but I do not consider that the abolition of the death penalty in other parts of the world is a solution to the problem of violence and brutality .
I believe it is right to condemn the abuse of capital punishment and its barbaric implementation , as was the case at the execution of Saddam Hussein and of Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti .
Nonetheless , the total abolition of the death penalty for criminals , terrorists and bloodthirsty dictators in the most unstable and violent parts of the world is an irresponsible , nonsensical and harmful proposal .
As it seeks to achieve the introduction of this global moratorium , the European Union is unable to offer countries ravaged by violence any significant aid in the area of public security .
Consequently , the Italian Government 's initiative , which is to receive the European Union 's support today , may also be deemed hypocritical .
The EU has as part of its requirements for membership for Member States that they do not exercise or have on their statute books the death penalty .
It is only right that we try to promote this around the globe .
It is a disgrace from the US to China , from Central Asia to Central Africa .
The problem is that we exhibit a degree of hypocrisy when some executions are more acceptable than others .
It is just as wrong to execute Saddam Hussein and Timothy McVeigh , the Oklahoma Bomber , as Ken Sara-Wiwo , the Nigerian human rights activist , or the hundreds of victims of Saddam Hussein 's brutal , totalitarian regime .
I can only hope that in future we oppose those barbaric public spectacles in the same way we oppose China 's executions , as now modern technology allows public executions to be replaced by execution broadcast via mobile phone .
I did not sign the draft joint resolution , tabled by several political groups , on a global moratorium on the death penalty , nor do I intend to vote in its favour .
I fully endorse the undertakings Poland entered into under international law on joining the Council of Europe and the European Union , but I do not consider that the abolition of the death penalty in other parts of the world is a solution to the problem of violence and brutality .
I believe it is right to condemn the abuse of capital punishment and its barbaric implementation , as was the case at the execution of Saddam Hussein and of Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti .
Nonetheless , the total abolition of the death penalty for criminals , terrorists and bloodthirsty dictators in the most unstable and violent parts of the world is an irresponsible , nonsensical and harmful proposal .
As it seeks to achieve the introduction of this global moratorium , the European Union is unable to offer countries ravaged by violence any significant aid in the area of public security .
Consequently , the Italian Government 's initiative , which is to receive the European Union 's support today , may also be deemed hypocritical .
Fundamental human rights are a core part of the European Union 's role and identity .
As an institution of the EU , the European Parliament has a duty to support efforts to spread these values outside of the borders of the Union .
Supporting the moratorium on the death penalty sends out the message that certain human rights should be upheld universally .
I particularly support the reference in the resolution to the disgraceful manner in which the execution of Saddam Hussein was carried out .
in writing . - ( FR ) Of course , there is France with its judicial imbroglios ; yes , there is Iraq , where those charged with judging the Head of State turned up astride the missiles of the invaders ; and , naturally , there is China , where everything is up for sale , even bullets for people to blow their brains out with .
Then there is Libya and the case of the Bulgarian nurses .
In the 21st century , where , increasingly , the issues are wilfully confused , the death penalty is now carried out in French hospitals , where the old are finished off in order to free up beds and balance the accounts .
It is carried out in the Europe of Maastricht where , by pulling the plug on vital investment , we have killed off our future .
The ideological scourge of the Reverend Malthus - of zero growth and sustainable underdevelopment - has infected our decision-makers .
There would seem not to be enough room at the banqueting table of the human race .
So we leave the old to the mercy of heatwaves and lethal injections , and we retire folk early and reduce their working hours .
Tax law exerts its stranglehold , labour law may leave no room to breathe and budgetary law short-changes us .
Meanwhile , at the top of this ladder of Malthusian penalties , criminal law tops off this society of ours with the culture of death .
In the Malthusian economy , the ' euthanazi state ' , the ' precautionary principle ' and the ultimate penalty of execution are the bedfellows of pride and complacency .
in writing . - ( FR ) There is a long list of countries that permit the death penalty , and the list of victims is longer still .
In 2005 alone , 2 148 people were executed .
So what about Europe ?
Is it possible to be a European state and , at the same time , to permit the death penalty ?
No , it emphatically is not .
Moreover , countries that are candidates for accession to the European Union are actually obliged to abolish it .
We MEPs even think that there is a need to go further than that .
That is the objective of the resolution against the death penalty , adopted today by Parliament .
With the predictable exception of the extreme right , all the political groups in Parliament had already signed the declaration in favour of a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its universal abolition .
The majority required for the adoption of the resolution has been obtained , constituting an unusual consensus in Parliament .
This majority makes it clear that being a Member of the EU is not only about agreeing to fishing quotas .
Above all , it makes it clear that Europe does not compromise on its basic values .
Europe is at the forefront of the fight to abolish the death penalty , a fact worth pointing out .
I did not sign the draft joint resolution , tabled by several political groups , on a global moratorium on the death penalty , nor do I intend to vote in its favour .
I fully endorse the undertakings Poland entered into under international law on joining the Council of Europe and the European Union , but I do not consider that the abolition of the death penalty in other parts of the world is a solution to the problem of violence and brutality .
I believe it is right to condemn the abuse of capital punishment and its barbaric implementation , as was the case at the execution of Saddam Hussein and of Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti .
Nonetheless , the total abolition of the death penalty for criminals , terrorists and bloodthirsty dictators in the most unstable and violent parts of the world is an irresponsible , nonsensical and harmful proposal .
As it seeks to achieve the introduction of this global moratorium , the European Union is unable to offer countries ravaged by violence any significant aid in the area of public security .
Consequently , the Italian Government 's initiative , which is to receive the European Union 's support today , may also be deemed hypocritical .
( SV ) Mr President , Mrs Ries 's report and the fight against obesity make serious inroads into issues that I think come within the competence of the Member States .
Moreover , the report addresses issues with which politicians ought not to concern themselves at all .
In my view , the individual 's perspective is entirely missing .
To state that obesity is a chronic disease is not only mistaken , it is to accept responsibility for people who are overweight or , worse still , to deprive a great many overweight people of the hope of being able to influence their own situation .
Being overweight can , in fact , be a symptom of a chronic disease , but to assert anything more is to create the stigma that the report maintains it wants to do away with .
What , in my view , is most serious , however , is something quite different : namely , the desire to steer the media in a direction that , in the present situation , is opportunistic .
That is unacceptable , and it is not what politicians should be doing .
It amazes me that so many of my fellow Members from Sweden have voted in favour of this report .
We Swedish Conservatives obviously voted against the report .
in writing . ( SV ) We do not believe that the assessment of what may be referred to as chronic obesity is a political issue .
That needs to be a task for medical science .
We therefore abstained in the vote on this issue .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by my fellow Member , Mrs Ries , on a European dimension for the prevention of overweight , obesity and chronic diseases .
The number of people in Europe who suffer from obesity has increased spectacularly over the last 30 years .
This development is comparable to what happened in the United States during the 1990s : today , in Europe , 27 % of men and 38 % of women are classed as overweight or obese .
The European Parliament 's proposals are based on healthy eating , physical activity and treatment from childhood and throughout adulthood .
Health professionals , sport , the quality of agricultural produce , school canteens , education , communication and nutritional labelling are all factors , among others , on which the European Union must rely in order to fight this scourge .
It is very important for the European Commission to carry out a socioeconomic study into the consequences of diseases linked to a person 's being overweight , not only at the level of health care spending , which we know represents between 4 % and 7 % of total spending , but also at the level of employment : unemployment , lost time and invalidity .
Earlier this week I called on the Irish Government to bring forward proposals which will have the effect of totally banning television adverts of food and drink products that are high in fat , salt and sugar and which specifically target children under the age of 16 .
Child obesity is a serious problem in Ireland and in Europe and this problem must be effectively tackled head-on .
A ban such as that to which I am referring is being introduced in Britain after four years of extensive research and consultation .
This research included 2000 interviews with children , parents and teachers as well as details of family eating habits drawn from a panel of 11 000 people .
This research clearly found that television advertising does have an effect on the dietary preferences of children .
It is estimated by the British Government that in households where children 's viewing includes a large number of programmes targeted at adults as well as at children and young people , children would see 41 % fewer adverts of food and drink products that are high in fat , salt and sugar .
We are talking about the protection of our children , and that must be our overriding interest at all times .
in writing . ( SV ) Public health issues are very important , and people with health problems need all the support they can get .
In our opinion , this resolution oversteps the limits of subsidiarity , however .
The issues concerned should instead be dealt with at national and regional levels , which is why we chose to abstain in the vote .
I voted in favour of this report , because the fight against obesity should be a political priority for the EU . After all , 27 % of men and 38 % of women in Europe are overweight .
More worrying still is child obesity . More than 5 million children ( in the EU-25 ) are obese and around 300 000 new cases come to light every year .
This is a trend that , as a matter of urgency , must be reversed .
I endorse most of the measures proposed , for example informing consumers from childhood ; restrictions on television advertising ; nutrition and health claims on food labelling ; and greater consistency between the common agricultural policy and health policies .
We welcome the adoption of this report , which , among other points , includes the following key issues : the recognition that promoting a healthy diet and physical activity should be a political priority for the Member States and the EU as a vital component in the fight against obesity , and the recommendation that obesity be officially recognised as a chronic disease .
Obesity is the most common form of malnutrition and arises from an excessive storage of fat . It is associated with progressive debilitating diseases and constitutes a greater risk of death rate among the rest of the population .
As such it is a growing public health problem .
As the report says , according to data from 2006 , more than 300 million people around the world are obese , a figure that has more than doubled in the last 15 years .
Accordingly , in addition to boosting the fight against the disease in terms of providing patients access to healthcare , medicine , psychological advice , and so forth , a prevention strategy must be adopted that involves promoting healthy diet and lifestyles , with particular focus on women and children because , as studies have shown , they are particularly vulnerable to this disease .
Everything that we try to do on the environment and health fronts is aimed at protecting health .
Responsibility for this rests with the Member States , and that is where it must remain .
The idea of prevention is becoming ever more prominent .
The Ries report describes the health risks involved in obesity , excess weight and chronic illness .
Why is it that our children are overweight ?
What are the causes ?
These issues need to be discussed in order to raise awareness , particularly in families .
The ability to keep our bodies healthy on a day-to-day basis is something that must be communicated through school and general education .
Preventing these illnesses will , of necessity , involve social changes , but that will be accomplished not merely through bans on advertising , providing information relating to health and giving children sports bags when they start primary school .
We live in a fast-living society ; when both parents work , time for the family , for bringing up children and for cooking is often lacking .
This makes it ever more important that society should take preventive action , and schools and educational facilities must be entrusted with the communication of day-to-day life skills .
Even so , we must not stop reminding families of those tasks and duties that are inherently their own , and empower them to perform and fulfil them .
Not even the EU can make people be slim and enjoy life and health .
The Member States must produce action plans and measures , but people have to put them into practice themselves .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is to its credit that , in order to combat excessive weight , obesity and chronic diseases , the European Commission is concerned that everyone should have a healthy diet and engage in physical activity .
The marathon motion for a resolution , with its 18 recitals and 53 paragraphs , produced by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety is , however , unacceptable inasmuch as it proposes provisions recommending dubious interference in the competences of the Member States , partly in the form of a Community legislative framework .
I do of course sympathise with the warning that we wish to sound , faced with the epidemic of obesity affecting three million children and between 20 % and 30 % of adults at a time when 14 million children and half the adult population are overweight .
In the fight to promote healthy eating habits and the use of high-quality products , we have high-calibre allies in the form of the Eurochefs - an association bringing together 4 000 cooks from 17 Member States who stick to a code of honour , championing the intrinsic quality of food and acting to safeguard rural products .
I believe that we should do well to benefit from their knowledge and their readiness to promote best practices ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I strongly support this report as well as the Commission Green Paper entitled ' Promoting healthy diets and physical activity : a European dimension for the prevention of overweight , obesity and chronic diseases ' , which the report addresses .
Public health issues are of increasing concern in Europe , and this report provides a welcome contribution .
The report 's emphasis on the key role played by schools is to be welcomed , as is the call for action to be taken to address the alarming decline in the nutritional value of fruit and vegetables .
in writing . ( DE ) The fact of the matter is that we all know what is healthy and what is not , even without labels prescribed by the EU , yet our eating and living habits have changed to such a degree that obesity , with all its consequences for our health , has assumed disturbing proportions .
However , the combination of lack of movement , poor nutrition and too much television also makes people more aggressive .
Various action plans on health have been running for some time , and it is only right that they should start in children 's early school years , since it is then that the risk of compulsive over-eating is very great , but nutritional certificates , health-oriented playgroups and even bans on advertising will not get us where we want to be .
It is in the family that the love of sport , which is so important in reducing stress and aggression , and healthy eating habits , must be experienced and encouraged .
Yet it is this , the fundamental building block of our society , that is under constant bombardment from the modern working world , with its flexible working hours , weekend and shift working patterns , and the constantly-renewed call for longer opening times .
When people are tired to the point of exhaustion from a long working day , it is easier for them to grab fast food than to make the effort to cook ; they find themselves wanting to flake out in front of the television with crisps and a fizzy drink , and their children imitate their behaviour .
While preaching that people should exercise more , we reduce sports lessons on budgetary grounds or excuse foreign children from them on religious grounds , and sports clubs see their support ebbing away .
I support the report by Mrs Ries on promoting healthy diets and physical activity .
I agree the fight against childhood obesity should be a political priority of the European Union and its Member States .
We should take urgent steps to encourage children to enjoy a healthy lifestyle and to urge Member States to increase the amount of physical education available in schools .
I am glad to see the report recognises the importance and potential of food signposting systems in place in several Member States .
I welcome calls to the Commission to research and develop a scientifically based EU-wide ' front-of-pack nutrition labelling scheme ' .
I feel this is a straightforward but very effective way of encouraging people to choose healthier options .
We must act urgently in informing people that their health and that of future generations is in their own hands .
Long-term bad eating habits and a lack of sufficient exercise result in thousands of people in the European Union being faced with obesity every year .
This increases the risk of numerous serious diseases , including heart diseases , higher blood pressure and respiratory disorders .
Not only does this affect public health , it also increases the cost to health insurers in the Member States .
I would therefore argue in favour of an integrated way of addressing the problem .
Providing information , as well as educating , consumers , exchanging best practices among Member States , clear labelling on foodstuffs or campaigns in schools in order to promote healthier life styles : these are all ways of bringing about the necessary behavioural changes .
The battle against the bulge transcends borders .
We in Europe can make a positive contribution and learn from each other 's ways of addressing the problem .
Cooperation with the Member States , industry , the media , education and civil society strikes me as being the right way .
in writing . ( SV ) There is no doubt that obesity and excessive weight are a major public health problem in Europe too , and one that must figure high on our agenda .
It ought not , however , to be regarded , as it is in the report , as a chronic disease .
It is also important that school children be given opportunities for sports education and for physical activity during breaks .
However , it is for each Member State to determine what priority to give to this issue .
In view of the principle of subsidiarity , it cannot be transferred to EU level .
I have therefore chosen to vote against the report as a whole .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by Mrs Wallis , which contains a range of recommendations on limitation periods in cross-border disputes involving injuries and fatal accidents .
As part of the construction of our European area , we should do everything we can to make our fellow citizens ' lives easier .
This applies to the timeframes for harmonising limitation periods .
The introduction of the country of origin principle , at least provisionally , is a very interesting idea insofar as it would confer on victims rights with which they are familiar .
This report sends a strong message to the Commission , and demonstrates that Parliament is expecting a legislative proposal that should be preceded by a study into this issue .
As cross-border traffic has increased , so has the number of accidents involving people from other EU Member States .
An inquiry into the effects of the existence of differing limitation periods and in particular into the number of personal injury cases involving citizens in cross-border areas and differing limitation periods may help us understand the situation .
There are limitation periods that vary from as little as 12 months in some countries to 30 years or more in others . This may lead to injured people having their right to compensation denied because they did not initiate legal proceedings in accordance with the applicable foreign law on limitation .
The most vulnerable members of society are thus at great risk of seeing their rights curtailed . That includes those who have been most seriously injured or those who for some reason are incapable of protecting their own rights adequately .
It might therefore be appropriate to find a fair and workable solution that helps the victims and their representatives without insurance costs becoming prohibitive and without undermining the principle of subsidiarity , or that of seeking countries in which the costs to insurers is lower , as may happen when the country of origin principle is applied to them .
I have voted in favour of the proposals on limitation periods in cross-border disputes involving injuries and fatal accidents .
I believe it is essential that Europe 's citizens can enjoy the freedom to travel in the European Union , and be safe in the knowledge that should problems arise they will not face unnecessary constraints in getting proper legal redress across borders .
This report will play a part in ensuring that .
It calls for the European Commission to carry out an inquiry into the effects of the existence of differing limitation periods on the internal market , and particularly on citizens exercising their freedoms under the Treaty .
It is important that any new legislation in this area is based on sound evidence , not least to ensure that any future law brings forward specific and focused measures to tackle the problems .
I have therefore voted in favour of the Wallis report , which demands that the Commission bring forward the evidence to enable this law to go ahead .
( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what struck me in the report was the emphasis on the fact that women achieve significantly fewer academic qualifications than men .
Only 15 % of full professors are women , whereas the number of women graduating from university is higher than that of men , at 59 % of the total .
The low proportion of women with academic qualifications cannot be put down to discrimination against young women and girls concerning access to education .
There are a number of other factors behind this low figure .
If we really want to reverse the trend , it is crucial that we define and analyse these factors , and try to address the matter in a targeted fashion .
For example , take the need to eliminate stereotypes in organisational hierarchies .
Women are very much welcomed and accepted as members of research teams .
Their capabilities are less trusted , however , when it comes to being team leaders .
Yet it is precisely these positions which enable and allow the formation of scientific schools and contribute to the development of various disciplines and specialisations in university faculties .
Declaring from time to time that the number of women in academia should be increased is all very well , but it falls a long way short of what is required .
What we need to do is to define the conditions of the process carefully and to work on optimising them in such a way that women become more involved . Thank you .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Flasarová on educational discrimination against young women and girls .
The current situation , in which fewer women than men obtain post-graduate level qualifications and go on to pursue lifelong learning for reasons of gender , is one that we must combat collectively .
Education is one of the essential prerequisites - albeit not the only one - for citizens to enjoy all their other social , economic , cultural and political rights , and to assume all their duties as citizens .
I have high hopes for the activities of the future Institute for Gender Equality .
It is also essential to fight against the discrimination with which women , and in particular the youngest women , have to contend when they live in communities where gender equality is not respected , by rejecting all forms of cultural and religious relativism which could violate women 's fundamental rights .
Young girls , as well as boys , should have access to compulsory schooling .
As the rapporteur says , although there has for a long time been evidence to show that young women and girls are no less capable than men and boys when it comes to education , there is a series of factors that continues to place them at a disadvantage , especially in higher education and lifelong learning .
In 2004 , eight out of ten girls studying in higher education in the EU Member States completed their studies .
This figure is higher than that for boys , of whom only three out of four completed their studies , which proves that girls are no less motivated or capable when it comes to education .
Yet the proportion of girls who took their studies further or embarked on an academic career is lower .
Although women outnumber men in university education 59 % to 41 % , only 43 % of PhD graduates and only 15 % of full university professors are women .
These figures demonstrate the major inequality between the sexes in terms of lifelong learning and in the continuing vocational education of women outside the academic world , thereby confirming that both phenomena are rooted in the continued inequality between the sexes , which can clearly be seen in pay discrimination .
I voted in favour of this report as it seeks to address the inequalities for women which still persist , mainly in gaining access to and obtaining higher academic qualifications , including at postgraduate level and in scientific research , and in the area of lifelong learning .
There is a need to reform the content of school textbooks and to ensure that the training of educational workers be directed towards fulfilling the requirements of a balanced gender policy .
I think it is important that the Commission and the Member States implement a policy towards national , ethnic and cultural minorities , paying particular attention to a multicultural approach and allowing access to quality education in order to avoid double discrimination .
I voted in favour of this report as it has the potential to eliminate stereotypes discriminating against women in the workplace .
in writing . - ( FR ) The progress made when it comes to equality between men and women in the field of education is mainly quantitative .
From now on , we need to fight for a qualitative improvement and for a change in attitudes , paying particular attention to the situation of girls and young women , who are the victims of two-fold discrimination .
I therefore voted in favour of the report by Mrs Flasarová , which recommends to the Commission and the Member States that they put in place a policy targeted at national , ethnic and cultural minorities , ensuring in particular that a multicultural approach is adopted and permitting access to high-quality education , and this with a view to preventing two-fold discrimination .
The report also asks the Member States to make the option of lifelong education available to women and men who choose to look after their children and to make it easier for women to obtain jobs involving responsibility and decision-