Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 6 November 1997 .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am happy to inform you that yesterday , 16 November , the Chinese dissident Mr Wei Jingsheng was released .
In 1996 , the European Parliament awarded him the Sakharov Prize for freedom of expression , in recognition of his struggle to promote democratic freedoms and human rights .
However , although Mr Wei Jingsheng has been released , we should not forget that he has been forced to leave his country , and that China 's prisons are still full of political prisoners .
Unfortunately , ladies and gentlemen , the second news item I have to mention is by contrast a source of sorrow and anger : an extremist group has gunned down two busloads of tourists in Luxor .
As far as we know at the moment , 79 people appear to have been killed , including a number of German and French citizens of the European Union .
I feel sure I speak for the whole House in expressing our outrage at this act , and our solidarity with the victims .
We will immediately send Parliament 's condolences to the victims ' families , and to the government of the country in which this barbarous act was committed .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of 6 November 1997 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , on a point of order .
During the last part-session of Parliament , nine Liverpool supporters were arrested following an incident outside the Strasbourg stadium .
Three of them were sentenced to eight months in prison .
Whilst I quite understand that the French authorities wish to send a firm and clear message to potential football hooligans that this will not be tolerated in next year 's World Cup , I must say that I find it somewhat excessive to impose a sentence of eight months for what was actually a very minor scuffle in a very incident-free match , involving people who have no previous convictions and no history of being involved in such incidents .
I wondered whether you would join with me , Mr President , in appealing to our former colleague , Mrs Elisabeth Guigou , Minister of Justice and Garde des Sceaux , to look into the sentencing policy that surrounds this incident .
( Mixed reactions )
Mr President , I asked you four months ago if you would find out how it was possible for the Council presidency to say at the conference in Zimbabwe that Parliament had no view on CITES .
Parliament had in fact passed an urgent resolution , so it did indeed have a view .
That view was available there as well , yet the whole international assembly said that we did not have one .
I have asked here several times how such a thing could be possible , and I insist on getting an answer . I am slowly beginning to suspect that we increasingly pass resolutions here , which never reach their recipient .
This can only create the impression that our work is pointless , or that it is not taken seriously .
I do not believe either is the case , and it annoys me , for one .
I would ask you now , and I am very much in earnest , to arrange for an answer to be given please , because the matter dates from July and it is now November .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz .
I shall certainly ask the Council why you have still not received an answer , and we shall insist that they do reply .
Mr President , the special Air France flight which enables us to attend the week-long part-sessions is experiencing constant scheduling difficulties , because of the attitude of the authorities at Madrid-Barajas airport .
I would be grateful , Mr President , if you could approach the airport authorities on our behalf to sort out this scheduling problem once and for all .
Also , I should like to thank Air France for all their efficiency and care today , which meant that we were able to arrive on time . I think they deserve our gratitude .
Thank you very much , Mrs Díez de Rivera .
It appears that the problems could not all have been due to a single airport authority , but that certain other people were also responsible .
I have asked the Secretary General to find out exactly what happened , and once we know that , we will approach whoever is responsible for these alterations .
Mr President , on a point of order .
As the rapporteur on China , I wish to associate myself with your remarks about Wei Jingsheng .
We should also remember , of course , that there are many thousands of others still in prison in China for the same alleged crime .
The Sakharov Prize is for freedom of expression .
I refer to a matter that was brought to your attention at the last Strasbourg plenary regarding the now famous ' Strasbourg Four ' - some of our colleagues in the Labour Group who were under an injunction not to speak about their selection procedures for the European elections ...
Mr McMillan-Scott , this matter has been dealt with by the committee responsible .
The decision has been taken .
It is not on the agenda and it is not a matter for the part-session .
I am sorry , I cannot let you raise this matter again .
Mr President , on a point of order .
It is a matter that will be raised during the week and it concerns a human rights issue , a question of civil liberties ...
Mr Andrews , questions of human rights cannot be dealt with in part-session at this time .
I know you are referring to Ms McAliskey .
If you want , I will take your letter and ask what is happening .
If you want to give me more information that would be good .
However , we cannot waste time now with questions which do not relate to the agenda .
Mr President , thank you for your remarks concerning Mr Wei Jingsheng .
As he was not able to receive the prize in person last year , perhaps it could be combined with the next part-session ceremony for the presentation of the Sakharov Prize to Mrs Ghezali ?
Thank you , Mr Dupuis , I will talk to the Conference of Presidents about this .
We will choose the best moment to receive Mr Wei Jingsheng , as the Sakharov Prize was presented to him via a third person .
We will , however , try to receive him here at the most appropriate moment possible .
Mr President , I should like to comment briefly on the issue you allowed Mr Corbett to comment on .
Thank you for saying that you will look into this issue .
I do not disagree with what you said about the judiciary in various Member States but I would say that many football supporters across Europe get very poor treatment both by police and courts .
I would also point out that there is much more reticence in criticizing courts and police behaviour in many parts of the world during our human rights debates each month in Strasbourg .
Please bear that in mind .
Mr President , I wish to comment on the agenda for today and tomorrow .
It mentions that the sittings from 7 p.m. onwards today and between 5.30 p.m. and 7 p.m. tomorrow are reserved for urgent meetings of parliamentary committees authorized by you yourself , Mr President .
I note that this method is new compared to that of previous agendas .
I believe this is a consequence of the Court of Justice 's ruling of 1 October last .
I note therefore that you are applying , as from 1997 , a ruling of the Court of Justice of October 1997 .
I would have liked to have seen the same happen for our 1997 session timetable .
I therefore note that with regard to this ruling of the Court of Justice you are using different methods of implementation depending on the point in question .
No , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I am not implementing the points differently .
It is the Conference of Presidents which has drawn the conclusions from this ruling .
On the one hand , it was not financially possible , as you well know , to organize an additional part-session in Strasbourg in November . However , on the other hand , we wanted to adhere strictly to the Edinburgh decision regarding committee meetings .
We have therefore adopted a system which limits committee meetings at Strasbourg to the bare minimum required for the work of the House .
This system will be applied as strictly as is necessary .
On this occasion , once again , we are in a transition stage . I hope that , by the next part-session , there will be fewer committee meetings .
Mr President , I cannot understand how you can pass over the rights of an Irish person , who has been in a British prison for 12 months with no charges preferred , and yet give a hearing to UK Members who are raising the matter of four Liverpool supporters in prison in Strasbourg .
I would suggest we should have the right to raise a matter concerning a citizen of our country and I would respectfully say to Members of this House that they should have been in Brussels last Saturday night when there was no trouble at all with 10 , 000 Irish supporters .
And even if there had been we would not be raising it in this House .
Mr Gallagher , I do not think we need return to a matter which , at the moment , is not our responsibility .
I have already said that we will find out the precise details .
Order of business
Ladies and gentlemen , I must inform you that the deadlines in relation to the statements on the third conference on climate change in Kyoto have been extended as follows : motions for resolutions , 7 p.m. this evening ; amendments and joint motions , 4 p.m. tomorrow , Tuesday .


The vote will be taken on Thursday .
Tuesday and Wednesday : no changes .
Thursday :
The UPE Group has asked for Mr Scapagnini 's report , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Commission communication on energy policy ( A4-0308 / 97 ) , to be given a more favourable place on the agenda on Tuesday , Wednesday or Thursday .
Mr Scapagnini now has the floor , to move the request .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak on this point .
I would like to point out that I have had to complain several times , including in writing , as chairman of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , that the its reports end up being discussed at very odd times : either late in the evening or at the very end of the sitting .
This has happened again today with this important report on the review of energy policy measures .
However , Mr President , as I realize that the agenda is extremely full , I would be prepared , if you agree , to ask for the report to be deferred to a future sitting provided , I must add , respectfully but also emphatically , that it is possible to discuss it at a suitable time .
We are therefore prepared to defer the report to a future sitting because I realize that the situation is very critical at present , provided , as I said , that a suitable time is allocated .
Mr Scapagnini , are you asking for your report to be dealt with on a different day of the week , or for it to be postponed to another part-session ?
Mr President , the main request is to be able to bring the report forward to a more suitable time on Tuesday or Wednesday .
If that is not possible , the secondary request is to defer it to a future part-session at a suitable time .
Mr President , I wish to oppose that , because this report is a good one , and it would be a pity if we were to adjourn it .
Whether it is dealt with on Wednesday or Thursday really makes no difference .
I see no earthly reason , in any case , why we should adjourn the report .
I move that it should not be adjourned .
Mr President , I understand Mr Scapagnini 's point but there is no space to bring this forward , without breaking up some of the very important debates we already have timetabled .
My group would support taking it at a later part-session if Mr Scapagnini is not happy with its position on the agenda this month .
Well , now that we have heard that comment , I put to the House the proposal that the Scapagnini report should be brought forward to Wednesday .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
I now put to the House the proposal to postpone the Scapagnini report .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
In view of the fact that there is now a space on the agenda , you will recollect the discussion in the Conference of Presidents on the Jöns report on the European Social Fund which was originally envisaged for this month 's agenda but which had to be dropped because there was no space .
Perhaps we could now put this report in .
I understand it is acceptable to the chairman of the committee and to the rapporteur that it goes into that space on Thursday 's agenda .
So , Mrs Green has requested that Mrs Jöns ' report on the future of the European Social Fund should replace the Scapagnini report .
Does anybody wish to speak in favour of Mrs Green 's request ?
Mr President , I would like to support the proposition .
The Commission will issue its own communication on the future of the Social Fund at the turn of the year .
If we are to influence that with this owninitiative report , it is imperative that we adopt it this week .
There will be no time at all for it to be taken into account if we adopt it in December instead .
I very much support this proposition .
Since nobody wishes to speak against the proposal , I now put it to the House that the Jöns report should be placed on Thursday 's agenda .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Mr President , I notice that in the draft agenda you are proposing , no specific time has been fixed for Question Time to the Council .
This normally takes place from 5.30 p.m. to 7 p.m. on Wednesdays - which I think is traditional , and was agreed with Council - but its normal slot has been given to the important vote on the report by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , after which the agenda just says " followed by Question Time to the Council ' .
I feel this lack of formality is inappropriate , partly because the Members of this House consider Question Time to the Council to be very important , and partly because of the respect we owe to Council , whose members should be informed of the precise time at which we plan to put these questions to them .
Therefore , Mr President , I have to tell you that I am puzzled by this lack of clarity in the draft agenda .
Thank you very much , Mr Gutiérrez .
Question Time is indeed very important , and so is the debate in question , which concerns Parliament 's opinion on the Treaty of Amsterdam . They both need to be accommodated , which is why the Conference of Presidents decided to extend the evening session , as you will see in the agenda , to 8 p.m.
Assuming that the vote on the report by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos can be completed in about an hour and a half , we will still have from 6.30 p.m. until 8 p.m. for Question Time to the Council , which is the normal amount of time .
In any case , we expect Council to be very interested in the vote on the Méndez de Vigo and Tsatsos report , which means that its members will probably be here during voting time , and will therefore be available to Members of this House who might want to put proposals to them .
I realize this is not an ideal solution , but it was the only way to combine two such important items , which both had to be accommodated in a part-session which was already very full .
Mr President , I would like Mr Posselt to know that we did not hear the question in this group , because if we had I could have explained that we tried very hard to keep Question Time with the Council on the agenda .
It is just scheduled a little later now .
In fact , it has only been postponed by one hour .
I could tell you , Mr Posselt , what some Foreign Ministers have said to me about the evening sessions of Question Time to the Council , as regards attendance and Parliament 's reputation . However , I think it best not to repeat such things in public .
Friday : no changes .
( The order of business was thus established )
Climate change
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A4-0343 / 97 ) by Mr Linkohr , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee , and the Committee of the Regions on the energy dimension of climate change ( COM ( 97 ) 0196 - C4-0232 / 97 ) , and-the statements by the Council and Commission on the third conference on climate change ( Kyoto , December 1997 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when the Chamber empties one can at least say the greenhouse effect here is reduced a little - but only here inside the Chamber .
As for the matter in hand , I should like to say to the Commission that Europe has behaved relatively well in the runup to Kyoto .
I want to say that at the outset , because that praise is deserved .
When we look at reality , however , and not just at the printed word , there is rather more to say .
If the climatologists are correct , then we have to reduce CO2 emissions world-wide to 10 thousand million tonnes by the year 2050 .
At present we stand at about 22 thousand million tonnes .
If we assume that the world population by the middle of the next century will have reached 10 thousand million people , then by that time every single person will have to be producing no more than 1 tonne of CO2 .
In the EU the current figure is on average 8.4 tonnes , in Germany 11 tonnes and in Denmark 12 tonnes .
If we assume that the principle of equality applies , then Europeans will have to reduce CO2 emissions within two generations to one-eighth , Germans to one-eleventh , and Danes to one-twelfth .
In fact , though , emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases are rising , and most scenarios assume that a comparison of 2000 with 1990 will show a Europe-wide CO2 increase of 5 % .
The only exceptions amongst the 15 Member States will be Great Britain , because they started early with the replacement of coal by gas , and Germany , because its statistics have been altered by reunification .
The main cause of the reduction of CO2 emissions in Germany has been the collapse of the East German industrial base ; in West Germany emissions are on the increase again .
So if there is no great change in conditions , CO2 emissions will continue to increase up to 2010 and are even likely to reach a worldwide figure of 32 thousand million tonnes .
Those are the stark figures .
Unless , as I have said , we steer another course .
The years 1978 to 1985 show that this is possible .
In that period the ratio of energy consumption to gross domestic product was reduced by 2 0 % .
But because energy - oil - then became cheaper , the increase in efficiency over the following ten years was only abut 5 % .
We have to learn the moral of that : low energy costs are an obstacle to an active climate policy .
It is a harsh economic and social fact that only expensive energy gets saved .
We cannot avoid a new Community-wide energy tax .
Anyone who does not want that - and I can sympathize with them - should not talk about climate policy .
The European Union - by which I mean the Council and Commission - have , as has been said , taken a relatively courageous stand .
They have promised to reduce CO2 emissions by 15 % by the year 2010 .
But our courage seems to be just a front - and I do not think that is just apparent .
We are further than ever from an ecological tax reform .
We swear by renewable energy sources , but their proportion of energy production is growing only slowly , and support programmes are being cut by the Council .
I would cite our vain efforts on behalf of Thermie II .
Voluntary measures , such as green pricing and voluntary undertakings within industry are certainly helpful , but fall far short of what is needed .
Even the joint implementation recommended in Berlin did not survive an initial phase .
Up to now clear guidelines , which would make joint implementation different from mere export trade , have been lacking .
Tradeable emission permits , proposed by the USA , meet with no favour in the Council - although I would digress to recommend that we do in fact give this proposal serious consideration .
So the proposals from the Commission and Council remain , however much I regret it , pure propaganda as long as they are not followed by definite measures .
And where are those ?
We even read in the press that the Commission is prepared to withdraw its proposals .
What the European Parliament or the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy wants to achieve with the resolution is this : we need specific and ambitious objectives ; we should undertake to reduce greenhouse gases significantly within a definite period ; and we will then undertake to see that this obligation is maintained worldwide .
Where the obligations are not upheld , sanctions should be possible .
For this we further propose an international Climate Agency .
That is the essence of the message and I hope to enlist Parliament 's support for it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the eighth meeting of the Ad Hoc Berlin Mandate Group , which recently ended in Bonn after two weeks of intense negotiation , cannot be considered a success .
Progress was extremely limited and was confined to relatively unimportant issues .
Nevertheless some positions were clarified , certainly after the United States and Japan presented fairly structured proposals .
The position taken by the United States was probably the most memorable event of the ABMG meeting .
In his speech , President Clinton showed an awareness of the gravity of the problem of climate change and of the responsibilities resulting from this .
We in Europe also agree with his analysis of the great potential for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the industrialized countries at limited cost through improved energy efficiency and elimination of waste .
But we deplore the fact that this analysis does not translate into fixed objectives adequate to the challenges of climate change .
The Community and its Member States have reconfirmed their negotiating position regarding the objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the industrialized countries : 7.5 % reduction by the year 2005 , 15 % reduction by the year 2010 .
These objectives are supported by the Group of 77 and China and thus by a large majority of the parties concerned .
It should nevertheless be noted that the G77 is also asking all industrialized countries to reduce their emissions by 35 % by the year 2020 .
The Community also continues to support the need for common policies and measures .
We remain convinced that the reductions we are proposing are necessary and achievable , both technically and economically .
In its communication , the Commission set out a Community approach with a view to the Kyoto Conference , which provides very useful elements to that effect .
The proposals made by the United States and Japan , shared by other parties to the convention such as Canada , Australia and New Zealand , have increased flexibility in common .
Whilst recognizing that flexibility can contribute to finding an acceptable solution for everyone at Kyoto , we have clearly stated that the priority condition for possible acceptance of an element of flexibility is the existence of sufficiently ambitious objectives .
Regarding the elements of flexibility to be considered in this context , the Council of 16 October had already showed willingness to consider budgetary periods instead of base or target years , provided this does not delay action .
To put it clearly , this means that the pivotal years must be those indicated in the Berlin Mandate , and that periods must be short , no more than five years maximum .
Furthermore , the Union also accepts the need for flexibility in the choice of base years regarding the protocol commitments to be fulfilled by countries undergoing economic transition , whilst underlining that this flexibility should not be without limits .
In the same spirit , possible trading in emission rights would be subjected to a series of safeguards , in particular to avoid a trade in hot air , based on emission levels reached before commencement of trading .
Furthermore , in our opinion this trade must only represent a limited percentage of emissions and must be governed by a transparent and open international system .
Equally strict safeguards would apply to the possible implementation of projects in common between protocol signatories , aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
One last factor which some parties are stressing is the need to take into account greenhouse gas sinks .
Whilst not excluding this possibility , we are aware of the difficulties of setting up appropriate methodologies and we prefer to leave this problem until a later date , after the necessary details have been worked out .
Finally , regarding commitments to be fulfilled by developing countries , whilst naturally encouraging countries not party to the protocol to take on voluntary commitments , we cannot subscribe to the demands advanced by other parties aimed at immediately imposing legally binding obligations on developing countries .
It is clear that such obligations do not fall within the Berlin Mandate , which must continue to guide our action .
Nevertheless , with regard to this we think that a review of the obligations of the different parties must take place , as anticipated in the convention .
This reexamination must be of a fairly general nature and carried out on the basis of a careful analysis of all the factors , independently of the adoption of the protocol .
This process could be set in motion when the parties meet in Kyoto , where guidelines for such a review could be drawn up .
Finally , as regards the European " bubble ' , may I remind you that the Council meeting in March decided on the division of the burden between the Member States within the objective of a proposed 15 % reduction by the year 2010 .
The Council of 16 October agreed on a text which was proposed by the Community and the Member States during the last negotiations and which aims to clarify responsibilities , in case the objective is not achieved by the Community as a whole .
Furthermore , the text anticipates the possibility of other parties to the protocol grouping together to form " bubbles ' with commitments identical to those of the European Community .
Nevertheless , the attacks on the European Community continue , based largely on the fact that the burden-sharing decided by the Council is resulting in a wide disparity in Member States ' efforts to achieve targets .
It is clear that these attacks are largely pretexts .
The convention expressly anticipates the case of organizations such as the Community , in as far as there is a formal transfer of competence from the Member States to the organization , that is the Community , regarding certain areas covered by the protocol .
It is up to the Community to ensure that the common objective is respected , even if , out of concern for transparency , we propose that burden-sharing be formally notified at the time of ratification of the protocol .
The Community must assert itself , uphold its uniqueness and be proud of the guiding role it continues to have in this process .
Following the ABMG meeting in Bonn , a series of ministerial level meetings have taken place in order to attempt to advance the process .
On 4 November we had a meeting with the State Department in Washington , followed by meetings with Senator Byrd and the Secretary of State for Energy .
This meeting , which took place in a very positive atmosphere , enabled both partners to come to a better understanding of each other 's position and how they arrived at that position .
At this stage , there is still no agreement between the United States and the European Union regarding reduction objectives , particularly because the United States is depending on being able to use flexibility mechanisms such as trading and joint implementation to achieve their objective of stabilization of emissions at the 1990 level between the years 2008 and 2012 .
The United States also wants key developing countries such as China and India to be included in the process for fear of their refusing legally binding commitments .
The European Union has again clearly stated its position and made known to the United States that we do not think that mere stabilization provides a sufficient political and moral basis from which to convince the developing countries to participate in the process from now on .
Furthermore , the European Union remains convinced that the mechanisms for flexibility and above all trading in emission rights should only be applied on condition that ambitious objectives are put in place which must be achieved largely through domestic actions .
The United States and the European Union agreed to continue bilateral negotiations at all levels in the days to come .
The first occasion that presented itself was the Tokyo Conference of 8 and 9 November .
The three main areas discussed were the objectives and elements of flexibility , policies and measures , and the developing world .
At the time of the discussions on reduction and limitation objectives , it appeared that nearly all the participants were of the opinion that these should be legally binding .
However , differences of opinion existed as to when action should commenc , above all regarding objective 2000 .
The proposals currently on the table vary between zero ( stabilization ) and 15 % below the 1990 level .
A decision has yet to be taken regarding the inclusion of sinks and regarding the number of gases to be dealt with .
The participants also had different opinions on the option to be negotiated at Kyoto : the flat rate , proposed by the EU and the United States , or the differentiation of objectives .
To conclude , the discussions were held in a very constructive and positive atmosphere .
We all hoped that Kyoto would be a success . Nevertheless , there remain many points of divergence on the crucial issues and there will be a need for political will if we are to resolve all these problems in the few days remaining .
I sincerely believe agreement is still possible at Kyoto , but we must avoid agreement at any price due to pressure of time .
The European Union remains convinced that all industrialized countries must adopt legally binding and ambitious objectives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
Furthermore , we cannot delay action any longer .
I have arranged for European Union Environment Ministers to have an informal meeting on 7 December in Kyoto in order to take stock of the situation and to decide on the course to take in the negotiations .
Meanwhile , we will have to make all the necessary efforts to continue discussions with other key partners so that we can come up with a way of finding a consensus .
Finally , and independently of the Kyoto results , the European Union will have to decide , at its ordinary meeting on 6 December , whether its own negotiating position can become a unilateral arrangement if the other parties cannot accept the targeted reductions .
At that time the European Union will also have to decide on future measures to be taken in order to achieve these objectives .
Mr President , I am very glad Parliament has decided to discuss climate change during this sitting on the basis of Mr Linkohr 's report and Mr Pimenta 's resolution on climate change .
These two proposals strengthen the EU 's negotiating position , and it is recognized that there is a need for policies , measures and adequate resources , particularly in the energy sector , if our reduction targets are to be achieved .
I am sure that Parliament will support the Commission 's efforts in this field after Kyoto .
International climate policy is now at a decisive stage .
In about two weeks ' time , ministers from more than 150 countries will be meeting at Kyoto in Japan to issue a protocol on climate changes .
This protocol will contain legally binding commitments for the industrialized nations to reduce their emissions in the period after the year 2000 .
Let me therefore now take this opportunity of giving my assessment of the situation after attending the meetings in Washington and Tokyo at the beginning of November .
First , a little about the EU 's position .
The EU will of course retain its own proposals which , as you know , require a 15 % reduction in emissions of three greenhouse gases by 2010 compared with 1990 and of 7.5 % by the year 2005 .
This means that concrete action must be taken immediately , and at the same time there will be a check on progress made in this field .
I am pleased that Parliament is supporting the EU 's position : that will strengthen our hand at the negotiating table .
On the other hand , we must be careful not to weaken our joint position by discussing the possibility of an even more ambitious negotiating position .
The emission reduction targets were passed at the highest political level in terms of environment .
They were established in the light of studies which showed that the targets were technically feasible , financially achievable and politically possible by using existing technology and methods , as the President-in-Office has already emphasized .
But it was assumed , and I emphasize the word " assumed ' , that other industrialized nations would also make the same or equivalent commitments .
In view of this , I do not think it would be appropriate to follow the approach in Mr Pimenta 's resolution of the EU Member States changing their own position for the years 2005 and 2010 to a unilaterally binding commitment .
How can we put pressure on other industrialized nations if we announce that we are going to be making cuts unilaterally beforehand ?
We certainly need to get both the Americans and the Japanese more on board .
But the EU 's proposals contain more than just targets .
We believe that the best way of meeting the reduction targets is to work together on the various policies and measures .
We have also launched an active search for a system which makes it possible to use emission trading as a cost-effective solution .
However , emission trading , as it is now called in just about every language , can only occur under conditions that ensure that something is actually being done to help the climate and not just a paper transaction .
On this point , we have emphasized , in particular , that only a minority of the overall commitments can be carried out via such flexibility arrangements so as to ensure that all parties make reasonable efforts , including on their home ground .
The second main condition is that emission trading should be based on the principle of simultaneity , that is , historical emission quotas which are established for one reason or another should not be traded .
This is particularly important because there will be far lower CO2 emissions in the next few years and for a number of years to come , in Russia and other former Communist areas for example , because of the change from one system to another .
It cannot be the intention that the OECD countries should use this fall in CO2 emissions to free themselves from reasonable commitments to do something about energy consumption in the transport sector , the energy sector and industry .
If we are to achieve an ambitious result in Kyoto , it is clear that the EU must continue to take the lead .
We cannot expect the USA and Japan to be out in front .
Their targets are too modest , and their credibility amongst the developing countries is lower than ever .
I hope that the EU can build a bridge between the parties .
The EU 's negotiating position has been extensively debated , both within the EU itself and at international level , and in particular amongst other industrialized nations .
Reactions have varied considerably , from positive acceptance of an ambitious policy to scepticism and doubt about whether the targets are technically , financially or politically achievable .
To meet these concerns , the Commission issued a communication on climate change in October which meets the criticism by explaining the background to the EU 's negotiating position .
The communication shows that we can achieve our emission reduction targets without harming our economies .
When I visited Washington and Tokyo , I explained how the EU will achieve the 15 % target , with concrete examples of ( amongst other things ) renewable energy , combined heat and power generation , cars and switches to other modes of transport and energy efficiency in the household and service sector .
On the basis of our communication on climate changes published recently , we can also show that the costs are tolerable .
But it will still take some effort to combat climate changes .
They cannot make the excuse that they will take equivalent action with equivalent results in their own countries , and as President Clinton said in his speech to the National Geographic Society on 22 October , most of that action will be wholly beneficial to the USA .
On the other hand , there was considerable reluctance to deal with vested interests and any kind of costs .
So what are the main obstacles to an effective agreement in Kyoto ?
The main obstacle in our view is the minimalist , rigid positions which the other industrial countries have adopted , especially the USA and Japan .
Some countries , such as Australia and Canada , have not even put forward concrete proposals yet .
The USA cannot ignore the problem .
It accounts for the greatest emissions in absolute terms of greenhouse gases in the world : 5 , 006 million tonnes in 1994 , and the figure is rising all the time .
And they also have the highest figure when it comes to emissions per head of population , over 10 times more than most developing countries .
Most - I think we could even say all - industrialized nations now realize that the world has actually got a problem on its hands .
They agree with the EU and others in accepting the scientific consensus that human generated climate change is a reality , and ( what is even more important ) that climate change will have real effects , such as serious health problems , loss of a considerable proportion of the world 's biodiversity , loss of territory and infrastructural costs as a result of the rise in ocean levels , floods and droughts , and dramatic changes in weather patterns .
What can we hope to achieve at Tokyo ?
First , a guarantee of high , legally binding reduction targets which will put the world on the right track to solving the climate problems .
So what we have to do now is to reach a legally binding agreement which sets ambitious reduction targets for all the industrialized nations .
And ambitious is the key word .
A legally binding commitment must not become an excuse to set a reduction target which is merely a lowest common denominator .
The only way to reach a solution in Tokyo is to oppose setting the same percentage reduction for all industrialized nations .
The EU is not simply being rigid : we would like to consider flexible measures , as I said before , but only on condition that there are commitments to ambitious reduction targets , as I said earlier .
The Commission also shares Mr Pimenta 's concern about other greenhouse gases , namely HFCs , PFCs and SF6 , for which a solution has to be found .
The Council already decided in the conclusions of its March meeting that these gases would be included in the EU 's basket of gases by the year 2000 at the latest .
But the question is whether these gases should be included in this basket now or not .
The Commission has raised the question with the Member States .
The effects of including these three gases are modest , as even the whole of the EU together would only add another 2 % in CO2 equivalent .
However , for certain Member States , this additional effort will be some proof that the burden is being shared , so it is essential to find a solution .
But as this question is important to our negotiating partners , the Commission and the Member States are currently working on it with the Presidentin-Office in Brussels .
The Commission is trying to find the best way is of reaching a common EU position in this field , and I am of course hoping that Member States will show the necessary flexibility .
These reduction targets should be accompanied by certain common measures or procedures so that we avoid the problem of distortion of competition .
I am also going to Kyoto on behalf of the Commission to get results .
We are prepared to negotiate , and I know that we can count on Parliament 's support .
Parliament 's resolution on climate change will send out clear signals to our partners .
The EU has marked out a clear route for dealing with the climate question .
What we need are effective , ambitious reductions in greenhouse gases .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , global warming is undoubtedly the biggest problem facing humanity today .
Man is changing the atmosphere and the climatic cycles that have shaped human life since the dawn of civilization .
They are being changed irreversibly and we do not know where we are going .
We do know that global warming , rising sea levels and the premature appearance and aggravation of phenomena such as El Niño this year have already caused thousands of deaths in South America , huge forest fires in Asia , unprecedented floods in Germany , the Central European countries , Portugal and Spain , and a whole train of destruction with incalculable human suffering .
Humanity has a rendezvous in Kyoto in three weeks ' time .
It is quite unthinkable that Kyoto should turn out to be a failure .
This time the European Union 's position is clear ; and this Parliament has given overall support to a 7.5 % reduction in emissions by 2005 and a 15 % reduction by 2010 .
We have also given overall support to the statement of 1 October 1997 on climate change , which , furthermore , is a much better-drafted and more fundamental document than the earlier one on the implications of global warming for energy , on which we have serious reservations .
It is not enough , however , to submit a good proposal such as that of 1 October .
We need an internal set of policies on the environment , energy , transport and so on which will radically improve our efficient use of energy and renewable forms of energy and bring in tax reforms .
Unfortunately , those policies do not yet exist ; and , if we look at the 1998 budget , there is no provision for such policies .
There lies the Achilles heel of European strategy .
This Parliament has admitted as much : as long ago as January we asked the Commission and the Council to tell us objectively , in quantified terms and with supporting data , how we are going to achieve the reductions in emissions to which we are now committing ourselves .
As far as non-European countries are concerned , it is unacceptable that the United States , with 4 % of the world 's population , should be responsible for nearly 25 % of the world 's atmospheric pollution .
In Kyoto we must achieve a compulsory timetable for reduction by the developed countries and a mechanism embracing all the developing countries to achieve the levelling-out and reduction of atmospheric emissions per capita in the medium term throughout the world .
Flexibility arrangements and the devices of the market cannot conceal the enormous differences between countries .
Since we all have to make an effort , it is obviously the case that greatest effort should be made by the country that has used up most of the planet 's resources and is causing most pollution .
Madam Commissioner , Minister , we shall be together in Kyoto , but I also hope we shall be here in January , when we finally begin to put into practice what we signed up to at the Earth summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 .
Mr President , I am very pleased that we have the opportunity today to talk about the way the European Union has been performing at the Kyoto conference , and I should like to thank the President of the Council and the Commissioner for briefing us so fully .
On the other hand , I am a little sad when I hear what you have to say , and when I think back nine years to the Toronto Objective , formulated at that time , in which there was talk of a 20 % reduction in emissions by the year 2005 .
Today we are a long way from that , but I am glad that at least in the European Union a clear aim has been set , and that we have agreed to call for a genuine reduction within a reasonable time .
Mr Linkohr has already said we certainly want to , but will we be able to ?
I think we shall have to expand the political options if we are to achieve the intended reduction .
We must also discuss options other than those to do with energy , because there are one or two other things which will help us reduce greenhouse emissions , not just in the energy sector .
I am referring here to switching to other production methods , and also to the retention of emissions .
Perhaps I can mention a few examples .
As far as energy is concerned , it is certainly a matter of greater efficiency in order to achieve better utilization , but also of using forms of energy which produce less CO2 - I am thinking here of renewable resources , familiar to everyone in the House , I am sure .
One must , however , limit the use of energy by vehicles in the same way - we shall shortly have an opportunity to discuss this as part of the vehicle oil programme .
Other policy options are , for example , agriculture and forestry , and not just where the aim is to reduce methane emissions , but also where we aim to prepare our plants and forests for a general change in climate : where different forestry methods and other types of fertilizer are used so that this general change will not mean the death of our forests .
I say this as someone who comes from the Alps , where forests are very important .
We need to prepare our industry and give some thought to possible methods of producing chemicals or metals in industry ; waste disposal will have to be examined as well .
My next point is very important - and here I address myself directly to the President of the Council , because I know that the subject of jobs is being discussed this week in Luxembourg .
Not only can a reduction in heating , and hence less CO2 emissions , be achieved very quickly in almost every European country by the use of heat insulation , but numerous jobs could be created , particularly in small and medium-sized businesses , and the well-being of people can be increased .
We could be in a win / win situation here , which really ought to be exploited . I hope that a proposal of this kind will be forthcoming .
It is incomprehensible that the USA appears to be thinking only of the short term and putting cheap energy for its economy before the interests of the climate .
I think we in Europe need industrial innovation right now , and that we could save the costs of change a thousand times over , compared to when the very high costs of climatic change become payable .
After Kyoto we shall certainly receive a report in this House concerning implementation , particularly how and with what programmes we can achieve it in the Union . I very much hope that we shall not have to say afterwards that it was not a legally binding agreement , and that even if it were , the values were so low that we would not achieve our aim .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the first time the European Parliament has concerned itself with the question of how we should play our part long term in the marked reduction of trace gases relevant to climatic change , in order to achieve a real alteration in climate .
The Group of the European People 's Party agrees with the rapporteur on very many points .
We need clear and straightforward regulations in order really to achieve all the measures required within the general category of long term economic management .
This concerns many areas , not just energy and industrial policies .
These points have already been discussed .
I should also like to say , however , that we must approach all these problems undogmatically .
We must also change our attitudes a little , each in his own specialization , so that we can arrive at a common decision .
Climate protection and economic success are not mutually exclusive , but can be reconciled by , for example , the issue of emission permits - as you mentioned , Madam Commissioner .
I think that is the right idea .
We in the EPP Group have little sympathy for the establishment of an international Climate Agency .
If this should prove to be Kyoto 's sole success , then we shall have failed , then we really shall not have achieved anything !
We think it is quite the wrong beginning , to solve environmental problems by the creation of new bureaucracies .
At both European and international levels there any number of bureaucracies available to us .
More efficient linkage of existing authorities would be a different matter .
There is a very sensible proposal in point 16 of the Linkohr resolution .
We agree with that , but please , no new administrations whose main function is cooperation with other administrations .
That will not solve any climate problems !
I should also like to say that we in the PPE Group will support Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel 's amendment .
The OECD presented calculations just this weekend showing that a CO2 tax , for example , together with a reduction in taxes on labour as a factor of production , could be really practical .
That is not a matter of dogma for our group , and we shall support it .
We must also make our views felt , of course , when it comes to reminding other large economic regions of their responsibilities for climate protection .
Climate protection cannot function if reductions in some regions , such as the European Union , result in more emissions in others , because of relocation of industry .
Here it is our duty , through our numerous delegations , to work with all our partners worldwide .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the Kyoto meeting provides the opportunity to face the problem of climate change caused by anthropic activity with greater rigour .
It seems to me from the press that we can hope for a more committed attitude from the US government , which we need if we are to achieve specific results together .
On behalf of my group , and in relation to the problem of development , I would like to reaffirm several inspiring principles already set out by the Commissioner and by the Linkohr report .
First , even if the scientific information on the correlation between industrial activities and climate change is not utterly convincing , the cost of the risk is sufficiently high that serious and speedy measures are imperative .
Secondly , environmental protection measures should come first of all from the industrially developed countries .
The problem is a global one , however , and cannot be resolved without also involving the developing and recently industrialized countries .
Thirdly , it is not true that all environmental protection measures create difficulties for economic growth , but it is true that the environmental measures should be gradual and universal as far as possible , so as not to create market imbalances .
Fourthly , in addition to technical efficiency in energy production and transportation systems , I would also mention the importance of energy saving .
This point has been dealt with in Mr Linkohr 's report .
The point relating to Community energy tax was dealt with by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy with our support . The interpretation given is that the various energy taxes should be harmonized at Community level , possibly with a neutral global effect .
With regard to the action the Commission will have to take at the Kyoto Conference , I hope it will be possible to find an ambitious common position with the United States , because that could lead to a broader consensus and I do not think any progress can be made by accepting further competitive disadvantages in relation to American industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , first I would like to congratulate Mr Linkohr on his excellent report .
It is not that easy for sustainable energy from renewable sources to get off the ground , largely because there is no market for it at the moment .
Oil and gas continue to dominate energy consumption .
Yet the industry believes that sustainable energy has a future .
Shell , for example , is investing one billion guilders in a new division for solar energy .
Shell is following British Petroleum ( BP ) , which already has a separate division for solar energy .
Both Shell and BP are focussing their attention on lowering the price of solar panels in order to develop a market .
In addition , investment in developing countries can play a crucial role in this .
Two-thirds of the world , after all , is not yet connected to mains electricity .
Large-scale solar energy projects contribute to the development of village communities and promote the use of renewable energy sources , thus preventing the emissions of CO2 .
My group is of the opinion that the political world and certainly Europe has the obligation to support such developments .
Partly in view of Kyoto , the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party regrets that time and again the Council refuses to allocate sufficient resources to programmes aimed at encouraging sustainable energy and energy efficiency .
The sun rises for free , and I hope the Council recognizes that soon .
To conclude , Mr President , the Liberal Group takes the view that a Community energy tax is only feasible and acceptable when set against a reduction in tax on labour , thus retaining our industry 's competitiveness .
That alone will lead to new jobs and the preservation of existing jobs in Europe .
Mr President , first of all I should like to express our group 's agreement with Mr Linkohr 's report and with the clarifications which have been given .
We also agree with the proposal for an International Climate Agency , which we think is a very positive idea .
My region , Murcia , like other regions of Spain such as Valencia , Andalusia and Estremadura , and regions of Portugal and other parts of the world , has suffered the consequences of terrible floods and rains , which can be attributed to the effects of this climate change .
So we are well aware of the importance of the Kyoto summit , and the contribution which the European Union should make to it .
However , we think it is important to get to the bottom of the problem , and not to avert our eyes when we are faced with something we do not like .
I am referring to the fact that the root cause of these problems lies in the model of irreversible industrial growth which seeks continual increases in capital return , gross national product , profitability and competitiveness , with no thought for social needs or quality of life throughout the world .
We need to change this model for one based on sustainable development and respect for nature , which can allow society to develop a similar attitude .
Therefore , although we agree with the report , we think that certain basic elements should be introduced , such as the European Union 's firm commitment , given in Toronto , to move towards reduction , and not towards the precise opposite , which is what is happening .
Our energy consumption is increasing by 2 % , which will not get us anywhere .
Furthermore , other gases should be included in the basket of greenhouse gases , and there should be alternative models for everything which involves energy consumption .
We also need to provide more funds to improve the situation in Europe , and to obtain commitments from the three main players : the United States , Europe and Japan .
Five years after Rio , and nothing to show for it except a lot of speeches and a lot of noise - some of it unfortunately just behind me .
Absolutely no achievement . Nor are the Commission 's reports on the subject very informative .
They are vague , they lack ambition , they are insufficiently conclusive , and the biggest mistake is in the calculations - things simply do not add up .
Our aim is to achieve a reduction of 15 % by the year 2010 .
Now the Commission says we need new nuclear power stations to reach that target .
Even ignoring the fact that in most Member States these are quite unacceptable to public opinion , and the fact that their costs have grown much higher than those of gas power stations , there is still a construction period of 10 to 12 years , taking us into the year 2012 , or at best 2010 .
How is that to be achieved in the time ?
What we need is a revolution in energy efficiency .
We need a change in our road traffic , which is the largest emitter of CO2 .
We need an energy tax , and of course we also need specific regulations for phasing in of energy from renewable sources .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , last week Greenpeace activists , who had assembled outside the US Embassy in Luxembourg , melted blocks of ice to symbolize the thawing of the polar icecaps due to the greenhouse effect .
If Greenpeace activists wanted to show that the United States ' position was far from helping the cause of the environment , then NGOs are of the opinion that the Commission 's proposals are also far from helping this cause and that they will certainly not prevent the greenhouse effect worsening .
Having said that , it has to be admitted that the approaches proposed by the Commission are worth considering .
In this case it is about energy efficiency , about speeding up the establishment of renewable energy sources and , above all , about fiscal instruments .
In this context , Mr President , let me recall the words of the President-in-Office himself , who last week stated the need to reduce taxation on labour and cease putting a financial burden on work , but also to introduce , at European level , taxes on CO2 and on energy .
I am pleased that , for once , the ecologists ' ideas have not fallen on deaf ears and I believe that , if the European Union truly wants to be credible at Kyoto , we must first of all start by imposing , for example , a tax on energy in our own countries .
Mr President , we need to be careful when we talk about global warming , because at the moment there is nothing to prove that human action is responsible for this .
A few centuries ago the polar icecaps were melting at a far faster rate than they are today .
That said , it is clearly safer to err on the side of caution and it is therefore right to move in the direction of a reduction in the production of greenhouse gases .
But in this case the policy that is being followed , in particular by the majority in this House , needs revising in two areas .
First of all , the policy of globalization .
The policy of free trade , and generalized free trade at that , which this House pursues by voting regularly , month after month , in favour of free trade agreements , promotes an increase in the production of greenhouse gases . In fact , each time a free trade agreement goes through there is an expansion in traffic , in movements of people and , of course , in the volume of goods transported .
This is precisely what encourages the production of greenhouse gases . If we want to produce less greenhouse gases , let us agree fewer free trade agreements .
My second comment relates to energy . If we want to reduce the production of greenhouse gases , rather than fighting against them let us choose sources of energy which produce less greenhouse gases .
And what is currently the energy which produces the least greenhouse gases ?
It is , quite simply , nuclear energy .
Furthermore , France happens to be the country which produces the least greenhouse gases per inhabitant in the European Union for the very simple reason that , of the fifteen countries , it is the one that uses the most nuclear energy .
With this in mind , the majority in this House should be a little more critical and a little more introspective , if they want to reduce the production of greenhouse gases .
Finally , and in another respect , this House does not set an example .
With the multiple journeys it requires and its vast glass buildings , it is not one of the greatest reducers of greenhouse gas production , but that is another issue .
Mr President , currently there is a very expensive advertising campaign on US television in which people like the chairman of the Chrysler Corporation tell lies .
This is the sort of lie they tell : ' If you took the measures that are necessary we would live in a life of dimming lights , turning off air conditioning , sacrificing our industrial competitiveness and curtailing our economic growth ' .
That is a lie .
It is a lie that market forces are guaranteeing efficient behaviour .
If we undertook sensible policies , there are three things we could do which would almost eliminate the problem of climatic change .
Over one half of the threat to the climate disappears if you use energy in a way that saves money - if , for example , your household appliances are efficient .
You would eliminate another quarter if your farming and your forestry practices took carbon out of the air and put it back in the soil and the plants , where it should be .
And the remainder would disappear if you took measures on other greenhouse gases like CFCs and methane .
If our buildings and , in particular , our houses were designed properly we could manage with hardly any heating or cooling equipment .
I was in the Rocky Mountain Institute in a snow storm , with very little heating equipment in use and looking at and admiring the banana trees .
This is quite possible .
You can be in a temperature of 115ºF in California and feel comfortable with very little electricity used .
Power stations produce one-third of electricity and two-thirds of waste heat .
With combined heat and power that could be eliminated .
If we concentrated on hyper-cars we could have 70 % to 90 % fuel savings .
In the United States petrol costs less than bottled mineral water .
If we were more careful in the way we live and the materials we use , just as Mr Marset Campos said very clearly , we could eliminate this type of problem .
Let us think about the developing world and the energy needs there .
Energy efficiency in the developing world is abysmal .
It is dreadfully poor .
One shameful thing we do is to undertake negative technology transfer and deliberately sell goods in the developing world which are not energy efficient enough to use in our world .
That is disgraceful .
Luckily , where poor people live , often there is a lot of sunshine , which makes quite clearly the case for renewable energy in the developing world .
Fuel cells , a technology of the future .
Nuclear energy in the United States has cost US $ 1 trillion , one million million dollars .
Yet , because it is so expensive it is not growing at all , any more than it is in western Europe .
In fact , in the United States , it produces less energy than wood , even having cost that much .
Energy taxes need to be carefully thought about .
They certainly are a mechanism but we must make sure that they do not have other unwanted effects .
I am becoming attracted to trading as a way of meeting our needs .
In the United States - and I speak so much about it because I visited it recently to study carefully what is happening in that country - they have trading permits for sulphur dioxide .
The benefits have been far greater than anyone could have foreseen .
Once it costs you money to pollute you are very careful .
You get novel experiences .
A group of children in New York City have bought sulphur dioxide trading permits and they are keeping those permits and not selling them in order to prevent pollution .
Others are being sold , so I agree with those who say we must not shift the whole responsibility onto the developing world .
But trading permits seem to work .
In a question like climate change , the European Union justifies its existence .
It is a powerful bloc of countries whose climatic conditions could not vary more , from Lapland down to the islands of Greece , and where there is a huge variety of economic conditions .
Let us use that strength in Kyoto to show what we can do .
Mr President , the main points have actually been covered already .
I should like to restrict myself , therefore , merely to a few facts and to a description of the situation , which is none too rosy .
We all agree on the facts . We must do something to improve the climate and see that our CO2 emissions are reduced .
We disagree on the objectives .
What percentage reduction do we actually want to try to achieve ?
How fast should it progress ?
There is complete disarray about the methods for achieving our goals , themselves as yet not even properly defined .
I must ask , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , what do we actually expect of the Commission ?
The European Union is too small , faced by this global problem , to work out solutions on its own .
We at least need to have the USA on board .
We need to show all industrial nations our determination and to lead by example .
It is our duty to provide an example . It is our duty to show states which are still undergoing industrial development that there are other ways than the ones we have taken .
These states do not all have to repeat our mistakes .
We need voluntary agreements - my group and I would support that - which would then have to be kept .
According to optimistic assessments eight thousand million people will inhabit this planet in 2050 .
Other calculations forecast even higher figures .
If those eight behave then as five do today , our planet is really close to its end .
We have got to act now !
Mr President , the problem of global warming is one that the European Union cannot ignore .
The US must also play its part in Japan .
Global warming is a problem of such magnitude that national policies alone are not effective .
International cooperation is the bottom line .
If bus and car emissions are maintained at their current levels then the average temperature could rise by 2 % compared to 1990 levels .
It is worth bearing in mind that a 1 % increase can lead to ecosystem damage .
There have already been disastrous floods in Portugal , Spain , Somalia and Mexico this year .
These disasters , while significant in themselves , may be only a portent of a greater global catastrophe to come .
I am anxious about the potential damage to the Irish ecosystem with potentially dangerous effects on Irish agriculture and our tourism sector .
In Ireland , as in all of the European Union , all sectors must play their part in tackling global warming .
For my part , I am wary of suggestions to introduce new forms of taxation .
I believe it will be the hard-pressed consumers who will end up bearing the brunt .
A report just issued by Ireland 's Economic and Social Research Institute makes a significant attempt to quantify the cost of reducing gas emissions linked to global warming .
The costs involved are very real , with direct implications for jobs , consumers and electricity generation .
However , serious action is needed , and , to begin with , we need to examine what is known as ' demand-side ' management .
Energy conservation must be promoted on the supply side , and we must make sure that positive alternative fuels and electricity generating systems and renewable energy sources point the way forward .
We must promote them .
In my own report I have said that the European Union must put in place a rigorous monitoring system of Community carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions at the earliest opportunity .
Mr President , we look forward to the negotiations in Tokyo with high hopes .
But even if no satisfactory result is reached in Tokyo , the European Union will have to keep to its target .
If the Union does not do so there is the additional danger that individual Member States will retreat from their targets , and that is why I do not entirely understand the Commissioneris reluctance to support the position set out in the resolution by Carlos Pimenta and ourselves .
We must stick to the Union 's targets , even if the results from Kyoto turn out to be unsatisfactory .
Mr President , the results under the Dutch presidency are to be applauded .
Burden-sharing is a good thing .
But it imposes extra responsibility on the northern Member States .
Germany will have to show a 25 % reduction , and my own country , the Netherlands , a 10 % reduction , by 2010 .
It will be all the more difficult to achieve those targets , as the majority of the Liberal Group does not view nuclear energy as an option for a sustainable solution to combat the emission of CO2 until the waste problem is solved .
" Après moi , le déluge ' as we also say in Holland .
Because , despite the two instalments of 750 million guilders which the Dutch government has allocated , we will not manage to reduce CO2 emissions to that extent .
We will not be emitting 3 % less in the year 2000 than in 1990 ; in fact we can expect to emit 10 % more .
In that light , the attitude of the United States seems a little more realistic .
Of course we must try to persuade them to go further than the target of stabilization in 2010 .
There is some movement within the Unites States , and that is what we have to build on in Kyoto .
And we should not be to quick to congratulate ourselves on the virtue of our position when there is considerable scepticism about its feasibility .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I agree with my fellow group-member Pedro Marset Campos when he says that the most important measure for removing the threat of this environmental catastrophe would be a new economic model to lead us towards sustainable development .
I also agree with the environmental groups who say that the European Union 's stance is timid , and that we should aim for a greater reduction in the year 2005 .
However , in reality , the European Union 's proposal is the most advanced one available at the moment .
That is what we actually have .
Therefore , I agree with Mr Pimenta , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and with the resolution and amendments of that Committee .
I think the most important of these , as Mr Eisma has just said , is the one which says that the European Union must maintain its position and not retreat from it , even though other countries may continue to hide their heads in the sand .
I know that is very difficult , because Europe immediately thinks of its own competitiveness , but if Europe does not go ahead with its decision to reduce emissions , the other countries will never do so .
Madam Commissioner , your comment about the United States is very significant . During the preliminary meetings , as you so aptly said , they have taken a significant step in the wrong direction .
Well , let us not allow ourselves to be led by the United States and Japan . Let us show them what our own position is , for although it may not go far enough , it is more reasonable than any other at the moment .
Mr President , I wish to ask the Commissioner how the European Union can so confidently in the preliminary negotiations for Kyoto offer the reductions that they have done and although we have heard this evening how important these targets are - 7.5 % by the year 2005 and 15 % by 2010 - how can we achieve them ?
We show no sign of implementing this in practice and it is clearly not possible to achieve success without clear objectives , targets , incentives and sanctions .
The Commission has made several proposals for programmes - Thermie II , Synergy , Save II - which were , however , not accepted by the Council or provided with adequate funding .
Also , all progress towards introduction of a CO2 tax has failed in Council .
The most effective method of achieving a substantial reduction in emissions would be through a European Unionwide CO2 tax .
This would restrict emissions within the European Union in the long term while advancing a strategy which would minimize the economic cost as a whole .
A CO2 tax applied to all polluters should be used to reduce other taxes and applied equally to all sectors , for example agriculture and smelting .
No one should be favoured or the whole basis of such a tax would be undermined .
Mr President , I come from a country which is , arguably , the best energy-endowed in Europe , namely Scotland .
But I do not want to talk about Scotland today , I want to talk about countries on the far side of the globe , such as Kiribati , Tuvalu and Bangladesh which will bear the brunt of the rise in sea level if we do not take immediate action .
I wonder whether this House could contemplate the disappearance off the map of these little countries like Kiribati and Tuvalu and the widespread devastation of Bangladesh , one of the world 's most populous areas .
That is why this debate is so important .
I should like to commend the points made by our colleague , Mrs McNally .
I hope the Commissioner was taking copious notes and I hope she will use these as a blueprint for taking things further .
So much is at stake and although the EU is not the world and therefore we cannot take the whole world 's burdens on our shoulders , at least let us argue forcibly for the right policies and the right targets and go to Japan in an aggressive frame of mind to try to save the planet from a catastrophe .
Mr President , throughout this year , as we have gone from the recent G8 Summit to the UN Earth Summit and then on to the negotiations leading up to the conference on climate change in Kyoto , it has become very obvious that there are clear divisions on a global scale with regard to global warming , in particular on the targets to restrain emissions of the main greenhouse gas CO2 .
The current series of discussions have continued all through the autumn and are not yet at an end , but it is quite clear that we must come to some form of formal decision about the reduction in the emissions of greenhouse gases in Kyoto - in particular CO2 - and that must be done by the end of the year .
I am pleased to say that so far the European Union has maintained an honourable position .
We are proposing that the by 2010 industrialized countries should cut their greenhouse gases by 15 % as compared with 1990 .
I am here tonight to appeal to the Commission and the Council not to retreat from that position .
Indeed , I urge them not only not to retreat from that position but actually to seek wider agreement on the need , certainly in principle , for future measures which would in particular bring about an emission standstill in the next century and , possibly , take the concentration of carbon dioxide in the earth 's atmosphere from an emission standstill of 550 parts per million down to perhaps as low as 350 parts per million .
We cannot retreat from that position , we must accept that the negotiations at Kyoto are simply the first step .
Two weeks ago I was part of Parliament 's delegation to Japan .
I spent three days in Tokyo talking with Japanese parliamentarians , the Environment Minister and a number of other ministers .
It was clear to me that they would be prepared to go further .
The position announced by their Prime Minister , pushed by their industry ministry , was not a position they had agreed on a consensual basis .
It is quite clear that they would be prepared to go further , and if we press them they will go further .
We must take up that opportunity ; we must unite with them to push even the Americans towards some form of action .
I would stress that there are a whole range of issues on which we should be able to find common ground .
We must , for example , be prepared to consider very quickly the introduction of technology transfer to developing countries to ensure that they do not present a new series of CO2 emissions that cannot be controlled .
We cannot in fact rule out the possible future role of nuclear power used in a safe and sustainable way .
We cannot ignore the possible use of joint implementation .
With sufficient safeguards , I am sure that could be a step forward .
We have to realize that it is not just simply a question of CO2 : there are other greenhouse gases that we must deal with ; they have to be part of the treaty .
I urge a note of caution on the question of emissions trading .
That is a tool which has not achieved a great deal of success so far .
It is worth exploring but I would not suggest that it is something we should engage in when seeking to achieve an agreement in Kyoto .
Finally , I urge the Commission not to relax its declared position .
We should instead say that this is only the first step .
We all have the future in our hands .
The Commission and the Council in particular have the future in their hands .
Future generations want them to stand firm .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have gone from great heat to intense cold , from violent rain to drought . We no longer have the in-between seasons .
In spring and autumn we go from very high temperatures , as if it were July , to very low temperatures , as if it were January . The winds are strong and devastating at times .
According to the FAO , the US Food Organization , the consequences of El Niño could be disturbing for cereals , tapioca , oil seeds , coffee , sugar , tea , bananas , tropical fruits , citrus fruits , grapes and vegetables and the repercussions could delay the planting of the rice seedlings .
The ACP-European Union working party on climatic changes and small insular States , of which I am chairman , has presented a draft resolution , approved unanimously by the Joint Assembly in Lomé on 30 October this year , on ACP-EU cooperation on climatic change and on the third Parity Conference to be held in Kyoto next month , to adopt a binding protocol , or other legal instrument , that will give rise to real reductions in greenhouse gases based on the Berlin Mandate , although we regret we cannot be present or represented in the Japanese city .
The variability of climate and the rise in the sea level are causing the coast to erode and the small ACP island states are particularly concerned because they are the most vulnerable in the global system of climatic changes . As their economic and social activities are mainly concentrated on the coastal regions , any small rise in sea level has a significant and profound effect on the local economy , on living conditions , sometimes even totally destroying infrastructures and houses .
This is because the aims of reducing greenhouse gas emissions , indicated in the EU contractual positions , by 15 % by 2010 , with an intermediate aim of at least 7.5 % by 2005 , are the absolute minimum acceptable and , in actual fact , we should be aspiring to a 20 % reduction by 2005 .
We therefore believe that a full discussion should be held next year on the various energy options , paying particular attention to nuclear energy , hydroelectric energy and other renewable energies not emitting CO2 .
I will conclude with the hope that agreement can also be reached at the Kyoto Conference with governments which take a diametrically opposed view .
Mr President , if I have understood what was said correctly , in Kyoto we will have a realistic objective , but the problem is whether or not we have partners - and indeed serious and reliable partners - who are in sympathy with this objective and the policies that go with it .
I therefore want to ask the Council and the Commission whether they have , or whether they think they have , the means to exert effective pressure on the United States , so that it is possible for a reliable and serious agreement to be reached on objectives such as we have heard here and on the corresponding policies .
If so , what are these means ?
Are you willing to use them ?
If these means do not exist , I would at least like to ask you if you are prepared to launch a large-scale campaign to inform and motivate the public regarding the seriousness of the issue , the proposals that have been put forward and the ways that exist to solve the problem , so that , at least at the level of propaganda , we can challenge the propaganda of the Unites States and other countries , which is being used to downgrade the issue and to ridicule efforts to change policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that we have to have an agreement on climate protection and reduction of greenhouse gases , in order to save mankind and the environment .
The essence of the Pimenta report is that we have come out in support of a 15 % reduction by the year 2010 , even if Kyoto fails to produce a binding agreement .
Madam Commissioner , I am very disappointed in you .
Did I correctly understand you to say that you do not support these measures ?
Is the Commission not prepared to take on a pioneer role ?
I think we can only be credible when we make it clear that we - regardless of what emerges from Kyoto - are ready to reduce by 15 % by the year 2010 .
If we do not do this we shall be hiding behind those climate killers , the USA and Japan .
I think that would be a declaration of environmental bankruptcy .
It would be a step backwards , were the Commission not to make clear that we want to advance realistically , that we are at last ready to accept that there is a global catastrophe , and that we are taking steps .
I believe the European floods have shown quite clearly that we are not far away from that global catastrophe .
Madam Commissioner , I urge you at long last to take on a vanguard role and to declare that we shall reduce CO2 emissions , so that we place other climate killers under pressure .
Mr President , there is an ever- continuing growth in energy consumption worldwide .
As a result of this increase , carbon dioxide emissions are increasing too , and will amount to as much as 8 % by the year 2010 .
The decisions we have taken on energy policy should be long term and lead gradually to a considerable decline in carbon dioxide emission levels .
It is vital that we get large countries at the Kyoto Conference , like the USA , Japan , Australia and Canada , to commit to targets after the year 2000 .
It is five years now since the Rio Conference on the Environment , so it is high time we got real commitments worldwide and established deadlines .
The problem of global warming will not be solved by an energy policy alone .
For example , increased traffic exhaust is the direct cause of the rise in greenhouse gases in our atmosphere .
We must also include the existence of nuclear power as a way of expanding our selection of energy alternatives and especially of reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
The production of energy cannot be based only on renewable energy resources .
Their role in the whole energy-producing scenario is only marginal .
The enhancement of forestry conservation worldwide is an effective way of tackling the problem of climatic change .
Trees absorb carbon dioxide .
We must ensure that felled trees are replaced , in one way or another , with new trees .
Finally , I would like to state that I can no longer believe in the idea of a new international climate agency .
Political support for the implementation of a climate policy is needed , but it will not come from reeling out a lot more red tape .
Mr President , limiting emissions of greenhouse gases is one of the great environmental challenges of our time .
Even if we do radically alter our policies today , we know that emissions are going to increase for decades to come .
This requires major and rapid changes in our transport and energy policies .
It also requires a very high carbon tax .
Our group naturally supports the Linkohr report , which is an excellent concrete report . Not least we support the proposals for monitoring and sanctions , which are very important .
Leading up to the meeting in Kyoto , the EU 's line and proposals are better than those of the Americans .
In spite of that the EU 's proposals are actually insufficient if you look at what nature is suffering .
After all , nature 's limits must be more important that the limits set by the USA .
That must also mean that the EU , regardless of the outcome of Kyoto , should go ahead and try to achieve the goals which have been set .
I therefore agree with Mr Eisma and Mrs González Álvarez , for example , who have suggested this here before .
I would also like to complain about the Swedish government 's position on this issue .
Sweden is one of the countries which callously expect to increase emissions of carbon dioxide in the coming years .
Mr President , my thanks to Mr Linkohr and Mr Pimenta for the reports they have presented on behalf of their two committees .
I attended the Rio follow-up conference in New York as one of two representatives of the European Parliament .
I praised the Commission at that time because it came out in favour of ambitious reduction objectives for Kyoto , even though we have to admit that , in view of what Mr Linkohr rightly said , these can only be a very first step and are not actually enough .
It is what is practical today , though , and for that reason we must support the Commission on this point .
The climate catastrophe will have many devastating effects .
That has already been said .
I would mention one point perhaps deserving of a greater public airing , and that is the effect on health .
Because of the changes in climatic zones we in Europe will become subject to tropical diseases hitherto unknown here .
I believe that when people fear for their own health they perhaps begin to think a bit more deeply .
President Clinton also mentioned this in his speech in New York .
It is most unfortunate that although that speech contained a few good points , the USA had to adopt such a restrictive position .
The reason for it is that industrial lobbyists there are spreading stories of a crisis scenario , a catastrophe scenario , if serious reduction objectives should be decided .
I believe the opposite is the case .
We can give many good reasons for that .
I shall cite one practical example , and everyone there in Kyoto should ask the Americans if they could not put an end to it . I am frequently told that people in many open-plan offices in the USA wear jerseys in summer because the air-conditioning is badly set .
I do not think it would have anything to do with a reduction in living standards if this were ended by using modern and more efficient technology .
We do not have to go back to the caves , but we must advance to better efficiency .
The Commissioner should do more in this respect .
Mr President , the Kyoto conference on our future climate is , in my opinion , an extremely important event .
As a citizen of the European Union , I am proud of the negotiating position which has been adopted , and which means a reduction of greenhouse gases by 15 % from the 1990 level by the year 2010 .
That is an ambitious target which I hope will influence others in Kyoto .
I am also deeply concerned about my own country 's efforts leading up to this conference .
In the past Sweden was the first country to set tough targets for carbon dioxide emissions in 1988 , entailing unchanged emissions from 1987 onwards .
We even managed to reduce emissions .
Leading up to the Kyoto Conference , we in Sweden have now been given permission to increase our emissions by 5 per cent up to the year 2010 .
The reason for this is the closure of two nuclear reactors in Barsebäck , both of which work very well and have a high safety standard .
If Europe followed Sweden 's example , the European Union might just as well forget about going to Kyoto .
It would make it impossible to go there with the current ambitious objectives .
For the EU to be able to live up to its goals , it is necessary to introduce financial instruments .
I hope it will be possible to introduce a carbon tax at EU level .
Sweden 's experience is that the tax has a significant effect .
There is a transition from fossil fuels to biomass fuels in lots of places in our country , which is largely due to this tax .
Vehicles are responsible for substantial emissions of greenhouse gases .
In Europe we have a rapid development of vehicles driven by alternative methods , such as electric vehicles and hybrid vehicles .
The City of Stockholm has just bought a substantial number of electric vehicles from Italy .
It appears that technical developments in this area are progressing faster than we think .
So there are grounds for considerable optimism .
Mr President , at this stage in the debate I think most things have already been said , and do not need to be repeated by me .
However , I do think it is important to convey the message that Parliament is going to support the position of the Commission and Council .
It is essential for the Community institutions to share the same objective , which will enable them to negotiate from a position of strength .
Having said that , and on the subject of the European Union 's internal policy , I think it needs to be pointed out that not all governments have achieved the targets they committed themselves to at the Earth Summit .
So our internal policy needs to make strict demands .
Complementary policies have not been developed either , as Mr Linkohr so rightly said .
Our Member States have to make a major effort , and we must of course call on the governments to reach an agreement about the distribution of the remaining 5 % of the commitment , in addition to the 10 % which has already been agreed .
Next , I think we have to make a clear distinction between problems caused by the emission of gases in general , on the one hand , and the overall phenomenon of climate change on the other .
There is much more to climate change than just gas emissions , and there are scientific phenomena which have not been analyzed sufficiently on a global basis , but which nevertheless need to be kept in mind : the influence of solar emission cycles cannot be ignored .
However , this phenomenon requires deeper scientific analysis .
As for negotiations with third countries , it is certainly very important for the European Union to convey the message that whoever produces the most pollution has to provide the most help . Therefore , we have to make the public understand that breathing costs money - that is also important for the European Union 's internal policies .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Commissioner , it is very strange that the same date and the same figure crop up twice in European Union documents : the year 2010 and the figure of 15 % apply both to the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions and to the contribution of renewable sources to the supply of raw materials for energy production .
This strange coincidence should make us stop and think , especially if we remember that , as Mr Linkohr 's report says , the Commission 's relevant Directorate-General predicts an 8 % increase in carbon dioxide by that same date .
The fact is , energy consumption is increasing all the time and nobody can stop it .
Nobody can prevent it .
No agreement can avoid it .
It is not just us : the developing countries are growing at the fastest rate - China , for example , with its coal .
So we need to find alternatives .
One of these , obviously , is nuclear energy .
Just as obvious , however , is the fact that people just do not want the use of this type of energy to be increased or extended .
That leaves only one choice : to rely increasingly on renewable sources of energy .
A lot of data was published recently in an article by a renowned specialist . For example : the wind industry is growing by 25 % every year ; in eight years , the world market in solar cells grew from $ 340 million to $ 900 million ; and the big energy companies are moving more and more towards this sort of energy .
Mr President , what we need is the political will . The Commission needs it and , above all , so does Parliament , composed as it is of the representatives of the people of Europe .
If we had that political will , then perhaps the Member States would too . At the moment , they do not possess as much of it as they should .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I first of all congratulate Parliament on this debate . Above all I want to congratulate you on your support for the Council and the Commission .
At Kyoto we will work with determination to negotiate an ambitious agreement .
After Kyoto , we will need to establish the necessary measures to achieve the reduction rates on which we will have agreed .
Various Councils will be responsible for the matter and we will take decisions on the basis of proposals from the Commission .
Allow me to make a number of comments on the points raised during this debate .
Firstly , regarding job creation in the environmental sphere , we must explore all possible paths .
Both the Commission and the Council are aware of the efforts necessary to create jobs in the area of the environment and reducing greenhouse gases .
Secondly , regarding harmonization and an increase in energy taxation , we must remember that unanimity is required within the Council to take such a decision .
It is a big problem .
The Luxembourg Presidency firmly intends to move in this direction , if there is unanimity .
An increase in the taxation of energy could be advantageously combined with a reduction in the costs imposed on labour .
I am sure that the President of the Council will do his utmost to obtain , at the Employment summit due to take place at the end of this week , a decision in principle along these lines : combining a reduction in the costs on labour with an increase in the taxation of energy .
Parliament has laid great stress , and the last speaker reminded us of this , on the issue of renewable energy sources .
It has to be said that we have at our disposal nearly all the necessary technology for the development of renewable energy sources .
We now need investment , not only from the governments and the Commission , but also from the private sector and we need to create conditions which will encourage industry to invest more in alternative energy sources .
We fully support the objective of increasing the use of renewable energy within the Community from 6 % to 12 % , as a proportion of all energy used .
There has been a lot of talk abut industries which are opposed to measures against greenhouse gases .
I recently had a similar experience in Luxembourg , with a large American multinational .
When you negotiate seriously with an organization of this size , a large subsidiary of an American company , you can come to an agreement .
This group said it was in agreement with testing for alternative products , not only in Luxembourg but also in the United States , because its members have very clearly understood that they could be the first to offer alternatives on the world market as soon as they have them .
Therefore I believe that if the political will to negotiate firmly with industry exists , we can also come to an agreement with the United States on this subject .
I would like to come back to a point raised by several speakers : the European Union proposals for Kyoto .
I can only confirm what the Commissioner just said on this .
The European Union proposals for Kyoto are not unilateral reductions but proposals in support of our position at the Kyoto negotiations .
So our objective at Kyoto must be to obtain an ambitious agreement on this point , and I agree with everyone in recognizing that the United States has a very important role to play in this respect .
After Kyoto , the Council has decided to raise the question of the transformation of negotiation proposals into unilateral reductions , but only after Kyoto .
This is in fact what the Council decided at its ordinary meeting on 16 October .
It will therefore certainly not be done before Kyoto , but perhaps afterwards .
I am not even sure myself , it is for the Council to decide .
In any case the Presidency has the firm intention of putting this question on the Council 's agenda so that there is a decision on this .
Mr President , I would also like to say thank you for the debate , which I feel has been very constructive , and I would just like to make a few remarks .
I would like to stress , as Environment Minister Lahure said in his last comment , that this debate today has been about how we can strengthen our position relative to the other players at Kyoto as far as possible .
I think it was Mr Bowe who said that the Japanese were certainly open to more pressure , and we hope that other countries are too .
The question is now very largely how we can put pressure on other countries so we can achieve the highest possible targets in Kyoto .
We will have an opportunity of discussing how we can do that later , and how we will achieve the results in the European Union .
And , as many of the speakers have emphasized , there are a lot of useful proposals .
I heartily agree with the comments which Mrs Granitz made on the possibility of linking this debate to the question of jobs as well .
I also believe ( as we have emphasized in our communication ) that a sensibly implemented policy offers some opportunities for jobs and not the opposite , as we sometimes hear , and it is true that there are still some unused opportunities in working with industry .
On the proposal for an international climate agency , I would like to say that , strictly speaking , something of the sort was established under the UN and based in Bonn , and it may well not be very sensible at this point in time to weaken this institution by trying to set up another one .
In my view , we in the EU , with the targets we have established and the supplementary policies which have been passed , are well equipped for the negotiations .
The only thing which amazed me during the debate was that some people have said that we in the EU do not have very ambitious targets .
It is true that , as many people have said , that when you look at the size of the problem , there was nothing to stop the targets being higher , but if on the other hand you look at what we have been met with from the other countries , there is no doubt that the EU has played a leading role here , and of course we also intend to play that role in the run-up to and at Kyoto .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the Linkohr report will be taken at 12.30 p.m. tomorrow .
The vote on the Council and Commission statements will be taken on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Customs union with Turkey
The next item is the report ( A4-0276 / 97 ) by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Decision on laying down the procedure for adopting the Community 's position in the Customs Union Joint Committee set up by Decision No 1 / 95 of the ECTurkey Association Council on implementation of the final phase of the Customs Union ( 5372 / 97 - C4-0081 / 97-96 / 0020 ( CNS ) ( Renewed consultation )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unlike many debates we hold on Turkey , here we have a task that is more concerned with technicalities .
It has to do with the fact that a Customs Union Joint Committee is to be established . The Joint Committee , pursuant to article 24 of the Association Agreement , has to advise the Association Council , consult internally - this relates to exchanges of opinion and experience - and make recommendations to the Association Council .
The European Parliament had already expressed its opinion at its sitting of 18 July 1996 on the proposal for a Council resolution to define the procedure , passing it by a large majority .
The Council resolved on 19 February 1997 to consult the European Parliament once more on the same proposal in accordance with article 113 of the treaty .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy examined the draft report at its meetings of 16 and 24 September .
At the latter meeting the committee adopted a draft of a legislative decision by 23 votes to one with one abstention .
We have examined the legal basis , i.e. , whether article 113 was the correct one .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities proposed the use of another legal basis .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , together with the Committee on External Economic Relations , which had also unanimously voted for it , resolved in the light of legal opinion to use article 113 , because article 113 is essentially for commercial agreements and is therefore perfectly appropriate .
An essential element of the legal opinion was that the legal basis became unimportant , once the Council accepted the recommendation from the European Parliament guaranteeing the right of Parliament to be kept informed .
In these circumstances the proposed new legal basis could be accepted , quite independently of the fact that it was in any case what we wanted right from the start .
I would briefly add that though we often discuss a range of problems during political debate , here we are dealing with the maintenance of a contractual regulation : the preparation of the Customs Union by the Association Council .
Finally , I should like to point out that in this matter of the functioning of the Customs Union we have in the past repeatedly stressed that the European Union has been the beneficiary of customs union .
With our unbelievably large export advantages we will gain goodwill from the fact that Turkey will import goods from the European Union with little formality , and it is our duty to do everything possible to establish a balance of relationships within the Customs Union between the European Union and that country .
I am sure we shall do our duty today during the voting , and I would ask you to agree with the large majorities on the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on External Economic Relations , and pass the resolution .
Mr President , as Mr Kittelmann has said , the issue is political , and there are technical aspects to it as well , with matters of regulations and a succession of decisions by both the Council and the Commission .
Mr Kittelmann touches on all these in his report and I would have no difficulty agreeing but for the fact that we must look at the matter politically and substantively .
First of all , this Parliament has judged the Customs Union with Turkey on the basis of promises that Turkey will comply with certain basic preconditions concerning issues of human rights , democracy , state of law , and cohabitation in accordance with international regulations as regards the Kurds , the Cypriots and Greek-Turkish relations .
Secondly , Parliament has agreed that an annual report will come before it so that it can monitor whether these conditions are being adhered to .
We may agree to any regulation on the condition that these two basic points are being observed , that is , Turkey 's compliance with the preconditions and parliamentary control based on the Commission 's report as to its compliance .
Anything other than this is sheer perversity and only serves the selfserving economic , commercial and politically strategic objectives of various large powers .
Mr President , a year and a half ago we stated quite clearly the conditions under which we would agree to a Customs Union , and because of that there has been a long drawn-out concerted action against us .
Now the Council wants to push through regardless an amendment to the basic law , and that without any debate .
We are to be kept retrospectively better informed , as far as Customs Union is concerned .
The concerted action against us was , it seems , just a pilot exercise .
Last year we insisted on being heard beforehand , but now that is all to be pushed aside .
I believe this amendment in favour of article 113 is simply not applicable , and in its opinion the Committee on Legal Affairs even spoke of dangerous prejudice .
Up to now the losers from Customs Union have been small and medium-sized businesses in Turkey , whereas EU exporters have been raking in ever-increasing profits .
This imbalance is ruinous for Turkey .
We have said right from the beginning that Turkey 's acceptance path into the Union should not be obstructed .
Turkey must be able to participate as an equal partner in the negotiations for the European Conference .
The prerequisite for that is , however , the democratization of Turkey , respect for human rights and a political solution to the Kurdish problem .
That includes also the cessation of all aggression in northern Iraq .
We shall unfortunately be unable to vote for this report .
Mr President , over and above its technical aspects , Mr Kittelmann 's report provides us with an occasion to take stock of our relations with Turkey and , above all , to evaluate whether the political objectives which were put forward to justify the need for a customs union have been , or are being , achieved .
The majority of this House had considered that the increase in prosperity which this agreement would entail for Turkey , and the political signal that it would give , would anchor Turkey for good in the camp of democracy , blocking the rise of Islam .
The reality has been completely different since hardly a few weeks after the approval , on this basis , of the Customs Union agreement with Turkey , the Islamic Party came to power in Ankara .
Another argument had been put forward at the time : the Customs Union was to substitute for Turkey not joining the European Union and would constitute the framework within which our relations with this very close neighbour would fit .
So , there is more ambiguity than ever .
Mr van den Broek indicated , when Agenda 2000 was presented , that Turkey felt it had a vocation to be a part of the Union , and Ankara is going to participate , against the wishes of many Member States , in the conference of candidate countries .
This continued ambiguity gives rise to illusory hopes and , for Turkey in particular , the hope of achieving a status to which it cannot lay claim .
I fear that disillusion and blackmail , today regarding the Customs Union , tomorrow regarding Cyprus , may deeply trouble our relations with this great nation .
If , at a time when a specific framework for cooperation that is adapted to the importance of our relations with Turkey is being clearly heralded , we prefer to persist in this deviation rather than follow up a fruitful cooperation , then we risk compromising the good relations which have been built up by several of our Member States and of raising artificial and dangerous antagonism .
I believe , Mr President , that it is high time to correct this direction and to base our relationship with Turkey on something other than ambiguity .
Mr President , most decisions of the Joint Committee are implemented under article 113 of the EC Treaty .
This relates in particular to the protection of free trade .
However , Parliament ' s Legal Department has shown , on the basis of Court of Justice precedent , that the Joint Committee should not limit itself to powers under article 113 .
Legally there is little to be said against the Council 's decision to apply article 113 to the position of the Joint Committee on the customs union with Turkey , instead of article 235 .
It is curious that the European Commission initially chose article 235 as the legal foundation without giving the reason behind it .
On the contrary , the European Commission itself indicated itself that the powers of the Joint Committee fall under article 113 .
Can the Commission explain why that illogical basis was chosen at the time ?
The Committee on Legal Affairs opposes the amended legal basis and in so doing refers to the decision-making procedures in the Committee for the European Economic Area and in the Association Council with Turkey .
That comparison falls short , however , as the Joint Committee deals with a defined , limited sphere , namely customs unions and certain provisions on intellectual property .
The Committee on Legal Affairs also fears that the change of legal basis damages the institutional balance in the Community .
That fear seems grossly exaggerated .
The proposal is about decision-making in a committee .
It is difficult to maintain that the Council should consult the European Parliament before every meeting of the Joint Committee .
Parliament has been promised an annual report on the decisions .
That is more than enough .
Clearly we are happy to agree with Mr Kittelmann 's report , which deals with this difficult problem in a lucid way .
Mr President , I would like to start by saying thank you for all the work the rapporteur and his predecessor , Mr Matutes , have carried out .
The proposal for a decision which has been discussed today , was drawn up by the Commission in January 1996 to enable the Community to establish its position at the EC-Turkey Customs Union Joint Committee .
It is clear that the outcome is article 113 of the treaty because the Commission took the view that a technical role which was involved , thus falling within the sphere of application of article 113 of the treaty .
The new report before the European Parliament today is about the legal basis for the proposal , which was amended by the Council after Parliament delivered its first opinion .
The Commission has no problem approving the new legal basis the Council wanted .
The approach on which it is based differs from that of the Commission , but it is also correct .
The Commission therefore agrees with the conclusions of Mr Kittelmann 's report .
In particular , the Commission believes that changing the legal basis in no way affects either how the Joint Committee works or the rights of the European Parliament , something which Mr Kittelmann 's report very much emphasized .
And , finally , I would like to add that it is important that this legislation is implemented as soon as possible , so that the Customs Union Joint Committee can operate effectively .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Higher education
The next item is the report ( A4-0358 / 97 ) by Mrs Heinisch , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Recommendation on European cooperation in quality assurance in higher education ( COM ( 97 ) 0159 - C4-0263 / 97-97 / 0121 ( SYN ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media we repeatedly stress the importance of mobility , not just for European integration , but in particular in preparing our young people at an early age for the demands of working life .
Globalization is going full steam ahead .
It is becoming increasingly important to learn languages , to become familiar with other cultures and to adapt oneself flexibly to the customs of other lands .
For these reasons I have very much welcomed the Commission 's initiative for the establishment of a European network for quality assurance in higher education .
But I do think the title of the proposal was an unfortunate choice .
The main thrust here is an opportunity to encourage mobility , rather than ensure quality assurance in higher education .
Of course it is also important to demand a certain quality level within all European Member States .
This should be a minimum requirement which must be met , and which guarantees that quality in our places of higher education does not decrease , but improves wherever possible .
It is only in this way that our universities can continue to withstand the pressure of international competition .
Member States point out quite correctly , however , that the detail of education does not fall within the competence of the European Union .
In my report , therefore , I have tried in the first part of the proposal - which challenges Member States to develop a system of evaluation - to emphasize quite clearly the independence of the universities .
The Commission 's proposal is primarily aimed , however , at giving students and teaching staff information about courses on offer , course aims , and diplomas available at universities in various Member States .
This is intended to facilitate the search by higher education centres for partner universities , and the individual selection by students of courses abroad .
This is most welcome , because I personally learn over and over again from students how often enthusiasm and interest in neighbouring countries is stifled by inadequate information .
The Commission 's proposal provides that it alone will undertake the construction of the European network .
I do not believe this is sensible and I understand why the Member States are opposing it .
The establishment of this sort of network can only take place on a basis of mutual trust and with cooperation .
It is hard to envisage a European network without national frameworks and the creation of national networks .
On those grounds the Committee on Culture supports my amendment for these demands to be addressed both to the Commission and to Member States .
The funding of the network remains a sensitive point .
The proposal foresees financing by the Socrates and Leonardo programmes , but without the joint approval of Parliament .
It has been said , however , that networks can be set up within the existing proposals for electronic networks in Socrates and Leonardo , and for that reason I welcome the proposal .
The proposal also deals with the first recommendation on education under article 126 .
I support this for its own sake .
In order slightly to reduce the obligations in the proposal , however , I have replaced some of the executive measures with less compulsory terms .
I am pleased that the Committee on Culture has accepted these .
Also accepted was my proposal for a definition of the term " place of higher education ' .
Let me just touch on a few points in my report which seem to me to be particularly important . I have suggested that the central and eastern European countries should become involved at once in the evaluation process and the creation of the network .
Obviously their specific problems and situations must be adequately taken into consideration .
It also seems to me to be important for research and training to be evaluated , as I am convinced that they are essential to our future knowledge .
Furthermore , I think we must work out a comprehensive and generally agreed definition of quality within the overall drive for quality assurance , so that all higher education centres can identify with it and so that it can be used for the evaluation of student courses .
Without such general agreement it will be exceptionally difficult to carry out evaluation which is applicable throughout Europe .
Unfortunately , this proposal was rejected by the Committee on Culture , but as it seems to me to be really important , I shall reintroduce it on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , and hope for the Commission 's support .
There is great deal to be said for this network , ladies and gentlemen , for transparency in the quality of places of higher education , and for mutually confident cooperation in this field between the Member States .
For this reason I hope that the Commission will accept our amendments and , with the support of Parliament , remove the obstacles to student mobility that still , unfortunately , exist .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Heinisch , on the work she has done regarding the Council 's recommendation aimed at guaranteeing the quality of higher education .
This recommendation invites all Member States to consider equipping their systems of higher education with mechanisms of evaluation and quality assurance .
The Commission starts from the principle that it is important , in order to evaluate the quality of higher education , to base it on European cooperation , on transnational exchange of experience and on the positive advice of experts .
I fully support this view , but I think that the objective is commendable precisely because it enables us , through this evaluation , to better comprehend the strengths and weaknesses in the educational systems of different European establishments .
But for all that , the creation of a European network of quality assurance must not be too hasty .
The idea of quality assurance is a difficult concept to define and , furthermore , I fear that we risk ending up with a hierarchical list of higher education establishments .
The amendments that I have proposed on behalf of the Group Union for Europe extend the thinking of the rapporteur .
We must not challenge the cultural diversity of European education systems , which is of real value .
We must also preserve the autonomy of establishments and , thus , of the policies of the Member States of the Union in this regard .
Furthermore , economic issues must not threaten the academic value of teaching as a whole .
The selective demands of the labour market must not mean that the greatest emphasis is put only on training oriented in this direction .
Vigilance is therefore called for .
The difficulties in tackling this subject stem from the fact that we are treating both universities and technical establishments of higher education in the same way .
Everyone knows that they do not serve the same purpose and they cannot therefore be judged by the same quality criteria , which will be difficult to define and of which the broad outlines must be clarified .
Mr President , progress in education is one of the EU 's main aims , but responsibility for school systems and educational content lies clearly at the national level , in other words , with the Member States themselves .
This principle must be borne in mind when discussing European harmonization in quality assurance in higher education .
Harmonization is meaningful if it brings something valuable with it and if it helps European colleges of higher education to do their proper job of improving research and the quality of the education offered .
This aim will not be fulfilled by creating a centralized , uniform European scheme of evaluation .
Itemized standards and rulings from the Community will not work if the variety and independence of colleges of higher education as well as the essential authority of each of the Member States are to be respected .
Fortunately , the Commission 's proposal has been improved through feedback on the part of Member States , and Mrs Heinisch 's report puts forward important improvements in the area of broader harmonization .
The goal of harmonization in education is to enhance European competitiveness and promote the movement of students and researchers .
For that we need still more information on the structure and content of education in other countries .
It is by means of fruitful harmonization that absolute trust can be built for an improved knowledge of systems .
We can learn of other practice and experience , although , at the same time , we also make a stand for the wealth that exists in cultural differences , which is visible , too , in our educational systems .
It is on the basis of these principles that the creation of a European quality assurance network can be given support .
And the main task of the network will be the exchange of knowledge and experience , as well as technical assistance to Member States in creating methodologies for evaluation .
It will be especially important to find ways to integrate graduates into the labour markets more effectively than now .
To achieve that , we will need very extensive dialogue on the subject of future needs and improved training to meet those needs .
Mr President , the idea of promoting a top class , truly European university is gaining ground .
Recently , in a French evening paper , two renowned universities stated their desire for its creation .
We must applaud such initiatives but , if the idea makes headway , we must not underestimate the distance to be covered , nor the obstacles to be found along the way .
That is why this recommendation from the Commission , as unambiguous as it is , comes at the right time and I would furthermore like to congratulate Mrs Heinisch on the quality of her work .
In fact , as she quite rightly emphasized , the independence of higher education establishments remains a priority that must not be put in jeopardy by a desire for rationalization .
Furthermore , university cooperation is today built upon a certain number of programmes which are the basis for European policy in the area of university education . I am talking about the Socrates and Leonardo programmes .
Above all else , they must be provided with sufficient financial resources .
For when all is said and done what is it that guarantees the quality of teaching ?
It is the Member States themselves perhaps , but it is also the recognition of the university community as a whole which , at a European level , authenticates it through exchange and cooperation mechanisms .
We must not lose sight of this idea , particularly at a moment when , within the perspective of enlargement , a certain number of CEECs are being included in our youth and education programmes .
Mr President , the mobility of students and scientists within Europe is still at far too low a level .
Particularly in the field of university education a process of integration should be developed , a process which is permanent and consists of many levels , and which can function without an expensive institutional infrastructure .
Cooperation between higher education establishments is currently hindered by a lack of knowledge about the higher education structure in other countries , about the quality and content of student courses , and above all about examination methods and final examinations .
Evaluation research could contribute here to valuable enlightenment and encourage mobility amongst students and scientists .
Greater mobility and a networked education would bring untold benefits to Europe as an economic entity .
The encouragement of quality assurance and cooperation between centres of higher education , however , can only function on trust .
Any apparently forced marriages , whether they be by the state or by the Community , must be excluded from the outset .
Cultural variety , which is expressed in the diversity of educational systems , must be respected .
The basic concepts of transparency and subsidiarity have particular importance in the context of the autonomy of higher education centres and the maintenance of their unique identities .
At a time when unemployment is first on the agenda of all European institutions , I think it is extremely important that this subject should also include employment policy arguments .
I have in mind , for example , the mutual recognition of diplomas , and the easing of the transition into working life .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I am broadly in agreement with the paper presented by the Commission and most certainly with the report by my colleague Mrs Heinisch and the amendments she has recommended .
I think all of us in Europe are now agreed that employment is a high priority and that we are going to help employment , in particular the employment of young people , by making the single market work well and by having a well-educated population .
This paper goes some way towards that .
There is still no easy acceptance across Europe of higher-education qualifications .
For example , in the Committee on Petitions we are still receiving petitions from citizens of Europe who find that their higher-education qualifications are not accepted in one country or another .
Involving foreign experts in the process of quality assurance would help us in very many ways to ensure that educational levels and provision in one country are accepted in another .
I would also endorse Amendment No 59 which states that all players must be involved and spells out who those players are .
Students have already been mentioned but we must not ignore the business community or professional associations .
They most certainly must be involved in quality assurance .
Finally , as one who has been involved in quality assurance in educational procedures in the United Kingdom , I urge the Commission and anybody involved in this to keep it simple : we do not want too much bureaucracy or a procedure where form-filling and record-taking are seen as important rather than delivering good education , which is what is called for .
If we work on this report we will help higher education , the single market and young people to get the employment that they need .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first and foremost to thank Parliament and the rapporteur , Mrs Renate Heinisch , for the speed with which they have dealt with this proposal on a very important issue but one which is also , as has also been emphasized , open to debate .
At the request of the Council , presented as part of its conclusions in November 1991 , the Commission initiated a number of pilot projects during the course of 1995-1996 to test different methods before it produced its proposals on the position .
Everyone who was involved in these projects , whether they were representing ministers , rectors , further education institutions , authorities responsible for quality assurance , all insisted that the Commission should do something to promote EU cooperation in this field .
It is worth noting that as we have entered the information society it has become of decisive importance for the citizens of the EU that the standards of quality in education are set very high .
To promote such quality education has now become the job of the Community .
It is a virtually impossible task to define what the term " quality ' means in terms of further education , given that the education systems within the EU are as different as they are , which is also apparent from the debate here this afternoon .
So we have not even tried .
How can we give a single definition of the different working methods , the different basic views and the different traditions which are indissolubly linked with each education system ?
If we follow this approach and follow the principles which should be the basis for the different assessment systems , this will create the necessary support in partnership between the universities .
So we hope that the lack of understanding and the resulting lack of support in the future will give rise to far fewer problems in terms of , say , recognition of examination certificates and hence the true freedom of movement of labour .
It should be noted that most of these problems are due to a lack of knowledge of what education has been received .
In view of this , establishing a European quality assurance network consisting of representatives of the authorities responsible and linking universities in the Member States could help bring about a better exchange of experience .
I would like to state that it is the Commission 's wish that this approach should be a useful tool for the players who are responsible for evaluating the quality of education .
By definition , this tool can be indicative or prescriptive , and it cannot be too specific .
I would therefore like once again to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Renate Heinisch , and the other members of the Committee on Culture who have produced the proposals for changes or indeed improvements and additions to the text without changing the tenor of the approach itself .
I am thinking here of the 17 out of the 38 amendments proposed which the Commission is inclined to approve .
The changes we have therefore decided to make are amongst others those which relate to the variety of the education system , the independence of further education institutions and the Member States ' wish to play an active role in setting up a European quality assurance network .
The Commission cannot accept the other 21 changes , amongst other things because they include what we regard as inappropriate additions , such as references to non-member states and even research .
Secondly , because they remove the reference to the Commission 's White and Green Papers , and those provide the basis for the approach explaining the connection between the needs of the labour market and society in general .
And thirdly , because they propose a summary presentation of the different stages of evaluation and of those involved in the individual stages , instead of the detailed , analytical presentation which the Commission has used .
With that , I want to thank you once again for the debate here this afternoon .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Amendment of Rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0345 / 97 ) by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on amendment of Rule 154 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure concerning the report for the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while technical in nature , this rule change has a certain symbolism , particularly when debated in this Chamber , which we are sharing with the Council of Europe at least until next year .
What is it about and which report was I responsible for ?
With the aim of making our regulations more legible , several months ago Mr Ford proposed deleting the reference to our relations with the Council of Europe .
There were well-founded reasons for this initial proposal ; in fact , Rule154 of our Rules of Procedure provides for the European Parliament to send the Council of Europe a report once a year , as if our MEPs were subordinate to an older brother from whom we are gradually being emancipated .
The historic reason for this is that in 1952 with the signature of the ECSC Treaty , a privileged relationship with the Council of Europe was established by a protocol concluded at the time , and the European Parliament decided to respect it by forwarding an annual report which has lost all meaning over the years .
We have had and continue to have relations , at alternate stages , which have not been intense but are still relations , not only with the authorities but also with the specialist Committees , presidential bodies , and so on .
There is no doubt that the enlargement prospects and an increase in the number of members of the Council of Europe ensure that this institution precedes the developments made by our institution at this new stage too .
Maintaining a formally closer link than that of the other European parliamentary bodies seemed important to the majority of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , although it was possible to take advantage Mr Ford 's resolution aimed at changing the nature of our relations .
The report I am presenting today consists of two motions which merely confirm the actual situation .
We are deleting the somewhat out-of-date reference to this moral obligation to present an annual report and we are restricting ourselves to providing in the Rules for the bodies of the European Parliament to maintain mutually beneficial relations with the Council of Europe recognizing , in terms of the Rules , the importance of our special relationship with the Council of Europe , if only because we share the same place of work .
Then we can delegate to the Conference of Presidents , which already has the institutional task , finally settlement of the matter with the other party involved in the Council of Europe .
So this is a minor amendment which essentially confirms an historic link with the Council of Europe , provided for in the treaties , delegating to the Conference of Presidents the regulation of these existing relations at an appropriate time , particularly with regard to human rights and other subjects of common interest . It is useful to maintain these relations without the outdated forms we are deciding to abolish with this report .
I hope you agree to the resolution and that the House will vote for it tomorrow .
Mr President , I rise to speak on the Dell 'Alba report on the amendment of Rule 154 .
I have to confess that it is all my fault .
As a Member of this House for the last thirteen years it struck me some time ago while sitting in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities that I had never seen Rule 154 ever used .
It moved me to table a question to the President of Parliament , asking him when Rule 154 had last been used .
The answer was 1969 .
This is a demand for an annual report , not operated now for almost thirty years .
So I followed the logic of the argument and tabled an amendment suggesting that Rule 154 should be deleted .
But I have to make a confession - rare in politicians - and say that I was wrong .
Richard Corbett , a man who has forgotten more about the Union Treaties than I have ever known - or will ever want to know - pointed out during a brief visit to the committee that this is in fact a treaty obligation .
I have checked the matter and it is .
It is actually in the European Community Treaties .
Article 2 of the Protocol on cooperation with the Council of Europe , an annex to the ECSC Treaty says the European Parliament of the Communities shall forward each year to the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe a report on its activities .
So , I am afraid we are rather stuck with it .
It intrigues me that seventeen Presidents of this institution have managed to ignore the Rule .
I am also interested that the Commission - the guardian of the treaties - has failed over the last 28 years to ensure that the rule is observed .
It should have been taking us to the Court of Justice , although I presume the Commission is also aware of article 4 of the same protocol which demands that the Commission engages in a dialogue with the Council of Europe .
I give the Commission notice that I will be asking it when it last did that .
These meetings of the Rules Committee must be really exciting !
Mr President , it is obviously quite fashionable for Labour politicians to apologize to the public for mistakes that they have made .
A yet more eminent one did so recently .
Mr Ford is following in eminent footsteps .
In my view the Dell 'Alba report is not formally in contradiction with the Treaty obligation to which Mr Ford has referred .
It would be wholly appropriate that the Conference of Presidents should be given the right - as Mr Dell 'Alba has proposed - to monitor and to control relationships between the European Parliament and the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly , and it would be up to them to decide whether quietly and discreetly the time had not come to honour in the breach rather than the observance this particular long-standing but not observed provision of the treaties .
I am not worried about voting for the Dell 'Alba report .
On a formal level there is no contradiction .
Politically it might be quite appropriate to move to this situation and the system that Mr Dell 'Alba is proposing .

Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Ford and Mr Dell 'Alba for finding such obscure articles in the Rules of Procedure that they have actually not been implemented for so long , and then to propose deleting them , but as Mr Ford has already pointed out there is a snag .
Article 2 of the Protocol annexed to the Coal and Steel Community Treaty actually makes it a legal obligation .
Why is there such a legal obligation ?
Mr President , any Vice-President of this Parliament other than yourself would actually of course remember that when the Coal and Steel Community was set up only six states broke away from the then 14 that comprised the Council of Europe and its somewhat larger parliamentary assembly .
They were going ahead as pioneers and this article symbolized the fact that they were leaving the door open to the others to follow later but keeping the contacts going : a very wise decision as history proved because the other states did eventually catch up with them .
It would perhaps therefore not be appropriate to delete such a symbolic procedure .
Even if perhaps we are not about to implement it we should not get rid of it .
Who knows when it might be appropriate to do that again in the history of European integration .
But in any case even if were not at such a juncture , respect of the treaties is fundamental .
The treaties are the constitution of the European Union .
They may be a bad constitution , they may not be very well codified , they may have all sorts of articles that people have forgotten about , but nonetheless they are the constitution .
They determine the field of competence of the Union , and the powers of the institutions and we ignore the treaties at our peril .
They are the very foundation of the powers of this Parliament and they cannot be blithely ignored .
So I would urge the Parliament , and all those who have come to listen to this debate , to support the amendment that has been tabled by Glyn Ford to this report which I think will render it just about compatible with the treaty provision and make sure that this Parliament remains within the constitution .
Mr President , very briefly , as rapporteur , I would like to thank those colleagues who have taken part in this rich and historic debate .
I would also like to say that I personally have always thought that the legal basis for this amendment lay strictly speaking in the treaty .
Article 230 of the Treaty on Union states that the Community shall use all useful means of cooperation with the Council of Europe .
Vice versa , and I put this question to the authors , while awaiting tomorrow 's decision , using a 1952 protocol as a basis which , among other things , recommends that the Members of our Parliament be chosen from the members of the Council of Europe , seems to me to be a little anachronistic .
We have this wording which helps us ; in my opinion , we have a treaty article devoted to cooperation with the Council : this seems sufficient to me .
I would like to point this out without picking holes in a protocol which quite frankly seems rather out-of-date to me .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.15 p.m. )
Mr President , yesterday a terrible tragedy took place in the Spanish city of Melilla , where a water tower ruptured and flooded whole sections of the city , resulting in the tragic deaths of nine people , with many others wounded , and substantial material losses .
I would like this Parliament 's sympathy to be conveyed to Mr Ignacio Velázquez , the President of that city 's autonomous authorities , together with our solidarity with the victims , and with those who have suffered such terrible losses .
Mr Hernández Mollar , that message will be passed on .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Wynn may speak .
Mr President , on item 8 of the Minutes , the order of business .
The agenda we voted yesterday says for yesterday evening at 7 p.m. " urgent committee meetings authorized by the President ' .
I attended two of those which were the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Both committees took items off their agenda because they were not considered to be urgent .
Can I ask you , Mr President , when you give authorizations for committee meetings in Strasbourg to be extremely strict in defining what is urgent .
I will be , Mr Wynn .
I heard you so it will be corrected .
Mr President , yesterday I tried to raise the issue of Roisín McAliskey and her continued detention in a secure psychiatric unit in England .
The purpose of the exercise , as recorded in the Minutes , was to bring to the attention of the British and German Members the iniquity of her detention .
You asked me to write you a letter on the matter which I will do .
But that precludes me from asking the British and German Members to request their governments to release Roisín McAliskey on humanitarian grounds alone .
I do not want to go into the details of her continued detention .
She is in a secure psychiatric mother and baby unit in England , and it seems to me that if the decent English people who fought hard for the release of Louise Woodward were to consider the inequity of the imprisonment of this young woman on very flimsy evidence , they would call on their government for her release .
Your letter will be sent to all German and British colleagues so you will achieve your objective .
Mr President , this is a comment on the Minutes , too .
My name does not appear on the attendance register , perhaps through a mistake of my own .
I attended other meetings yesterday , of both my group and my committee , and perhaps I forgot to sign myself in for the sitting in the Chamber .
Mr President , on page 14 , in the last paragraph , it says that the Scapagnini report has been postponed to the next part-session .
Yesterday I listened to the reasoning behind this and asked for the floor , but it seems I was unable to attract your attention .
I am taking this opportunity now because I can see it written in the Minutes .
It has , I see , been deferred until the next part-session .
No essential reason provided for in the Rules is given for this .
Mr Scapagnini and a certain group were simply not happy with the day and time agreed for the debate of this report .
The point , Mr President , ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Ephremidis , I could not give you the floor yesterday because the relevant provisions of the Rules allow only one person to speak against such a request , and somebody had already done so .
The House was fully aware of the issue at the time of the vote .
We are not going to reconsider the matter .
( The Minutes were approved )
Decision on urgency
Proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing , for the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 2000 , the fishing rights and financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea on fishing off the coast of Equatorial Guinea ( COM ( 97 ) 0522 - C4-0567 / 97-97 / 0268 ( CNS ) ) .
Fraga Estévez ( PPE ) , Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries .
( ES ) Mr President , I just want to say that the Committee on Fisheries is in favour of these three requests for urgent procedure .
I want to state the following on behalf of the Committee on Budgets . We have again agreed to the urgency , but we would like to point out urgently to the Council - at least through the Minutes , even if it is not present - that we have established in an interinstitutional agreement that a financial sheet is submitted at the right time with the relevant protocols .
But for all three protocols , it has only been possible to have the corresponding financial sheet supplied after more resistance by the Chamber .
This is an intolerable situation !
We insist that the interinstitutional agreement should be respected , and if that does not happen , this house must actually ensure that urgencies are rejected even if they are genuinely important .
It cannot be right that one side always gives way in order to push the urgency through , whereas the other side simply does not fulfil its own obligations !
Mr President , on a minor point of order .
Could you remind the House of the rule regarding mobile phones within this Chamber ?
It would seem that some people forget that we have a rule on this matter .
Thank you very much , Mr Thomas .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Annual report and statement of assurance by Court of Auditors for the 1996 general budget
The next item is the presentation of the annual report and statement of assurance for the 1996 general budget .
Mr Friedmann has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very grateful for the honour of being permitted to speak to you this morning .
I know that you have long night sittings behind you , and I value your presence all the more .
70 % of European taxpayers are of the opinion that fraudulent and incorrect dealings with tax money should be judged much more critically than tax evasion .
This means that the task which is set for the European Court of Auditors corresponds more than ever to the expectations of taxpayers .
I will start with the revenue side of the budget .
As you know , customs revenue , as the largest item in traditional own resources , represents an important source of finance for the European Union .
It is therefore important to all of us that this customs revenue flows into the European Union as fully as possible .
Even though this customs revenue is falling because of the GATT negotiations , it still funds about 15 % of the entire budget .
We have repeatedly pointed out in previous years that there is a considerable risk in transit trade .
You , ladies and gentlemen , therefore devoted the first committee of inquiry after Maastricht to this subject .
We are grateful to you , particularly to the chairman , Mr Tomlinson , for bringing such important results to light .
Here we are dealing with the risks which exist in free zones , which include most ports , and we are also dealing with active processing trade .
That there are too many customs failures here , and the existence of these risks is linked to the fact that current regulations are often not applied at all , or are often applied incompletely and above all inconsistently .
We should be concerned to ensure that this evil is removed , and incidentally I would like to point out that the Member States also lose tax revenue if goods evade customs duties .
So in our opinion this is an important area .
In this connection , certificates of origin have an important role to play .
About half of all imports to the European Union take place under tariff preference conditions , and it is therefore not surprising that precisely this fact repeatedly results in irregularities .
More than half of all irregularities which occur in connection with the European budget concern this area of tariff preferences .
For instance , we established that a third country exported three times as much orange juice to the European Union as it produces itself .
In another case , of textiles , we established that the certificates of origin were forged - it could be seen in the stamps , which were quite different from the originals .
In one case , even the name of the capital was wrongly spelt , and when we enquired , the country of origin still documented the correctness of these certificates !
So great care is needed here to secure Community income , and considerable amounts are involved .
For the period from 1986 to 1996 , we checked 700 cases , and that is 700 out of several thousand .
We established that in the 700 cases there were about ECU1 billion of subsequent claims because of irregularities , but very often the limitation period applies .
Even if the original determinations begin at the right time , the necessary subsequent surveys stretch out , so that the limitation period applies .
23 cases , which we checked from the point of view of the limitation period , resulted in losses of ECU 80 million to the European Union .
I now come to the output side , and start with agricultural policy .
As you know , within the McSharry reform the guaranteed price for cereals was significantly lowered .
The purpose of this action was to avoid giving an unnecessary stimulus to overproduction through prices .
Guaranteed prices no longer covered costs .
Of course farmers cannot survive on losses .
Direct , area-related assistance was therefore introduced .
That was all right as long as the guaranteed prices were very low .
However , meanwhile the supply of cereals within the European Union has dropped , because of the actions which were taken .
On the world market too , the supply of cereals dropped , partly for climatic reasons .
The result was that world prices rose steeply first , and consequently market prices in the European Union also rose far above guaranteed prices .
It was really no longer necessary to pay direct subsidies at that level , but the appropriate orders did not provide for reducing direct subsidies in such cases , and the result was payments of ECU 3 billion , which in our opinion were unnecessary .
I do not say that these payments were incorrect , but ideally they were unnecessary .
In future , in a new programming period , it will be necessary to ensure that variations downward and upward are possible .
In the field of agricultural policy , we again considered the tobacco and wine sectors in the last year , after we submitted special reports in 1993 .
Then as now , European tobacco cultivation does not satisfy the taste of European smokers , so these tobaccos are mostly exported .
It is worrying that four-fifths of producer income consists of subsidies .
Even bearing in mind that there are many jobs in the tobacco industry , on the other hand we must recognize that smoking kills people .
It is also difficult to see how the European Union can finance a campaign against smoking and at the same time encourage tobacco cultivation .
In the case of wine-growing , we came to the conclusion that neither the grubbing-up nor the distillation premium met expectations .
Admittedly the supply of wine fell , but this was essentially related to climatic conditions .
Wine is still being produced especially for distillation , and that was never in the mind of the inventor .
To that extent , we must declare our reservations .
In the field of structural measures , things have improved to the extent that both commitments and payments were put into effect to a large extent according to what was provided in the budget .
98 % of commitments and 95 % of payments took place to budget , but closer inspection reveals the commitments and payments mostly took place in the last quarter , and two-thirds in December .
This means that many advances were paid , and advances do not mean that the intended measures were put into effect .
An example of this is given by the programming period from 1989 to 1993 , which is long over .
Three-quarters of all measures which fall into this programming period are not yet concluded .
We must still complain that the necessary evaluations in the structural field are not done .
To the extent that reports exist , they are rather state descriptions , but particularly now , when the new programming period from 2000 is being negotiated , it is important that appropriate evaluations should be available .
As you know , structural assistance is always opposed to some extent to competitive conditions .
The European internal market is based on the principle of competition , and in general subsidies interfere with competition .
Article 92 / 93 of the EU Treaty therefore provides that such subsidies may only be given with the approval of the Commission , and only over a limited period and for specified purposes .
We have here pointed out some cases which in our opinion do not sufficiently follow the regulations .
In the field of structural assistance , we obviously also checked on the social fund .
It can be established that in the case of the social fund resources have sometimes been paid out to people who were not at all entitled to receive the money .
Sometimes the expected cofinancing did not materialize .
In other cases , no preference was given to small and medium-sized companies .
The field of structural assistance includes encouragement of small and medium-sized companies .
We have not yet been satisfied with the way that this occurs through the Commission .
Our opinion is that small and mediumsized companies are particularly important from the point of view of employment - incidentally this is surely a subject for the employment summit next week - and that in this context they must be encouraged more strongly .
Yet the Commission cannot even state the exact amount which is given to these companies .
There is still not even a definition of what is considered to be a medium-sized or small company .
We checked a sample of 33 so-called small and medium-sized companies , and established that only 11 were really small or medium-sized .
The other two-thirds of the selected companies belonged to groups .
In one case , even a company with 2 , 000 employees was defined as a small company .
That cannot be right !
The Community initiative for small and medium-sized companies , which is to be controlled by the Commission itself , is also not functioning properly .
ECU 910 million were provided in the budget for this Community initiative , but until now only ECU 140 million have been paid out in advances .
Only one State , Germany , has submitted one expenditure certificate , for only DM 3 million , and even that was only an advance .
This means that the European Commission must develop more activities in the field of small and medium-sized companies .
Structural assistance also includes fisheries policy .
We came to the conclusion that the desired goal is still not being reached .
The fishing fleets of the Member States still fail to show the necessary adjustment of capacity , nor does their structure conform to expectations .
In the field of structural policy , I must also mention the Phare and Tacis programmes , which are also structural programmes .
We must continue to complain in connection with these two programmes that the flow of resources is too small .
Nevertheless , there is certainly a good deal to be said for these programmes .
For instance , by using the resources which are provided in the programmes , the administrations of the states of central and eastern Europe can learn to work with the Member States of the EU and the Commission .
These are states which previously cooperated within COMECON .
This is certainly an important education process , but there are absorption difficulties for the administrations of central and eastern Europe , which is incidentally an important point for the coming expansion negotiations .
It must also be seen that , in the field of agricultural policy within the Phare and Tacis programmes , the goal has not yet been reached by a long way .
As long as the ownership structure in these states remains unclear , as long as there is no land register and thus no basis for security for credits , privatization of agriculture is hardly possible , because new private agriculture is based on credit .
In this respect , it is important to continue working in this field , and I also think that Phare and Tacis must be used more intensively in connection with the expansion to central and eastern Europe .
In our assessment , the finances must be organized more strongly than before for this purpose .
We also examined the field of development aid .
As far as cooperation with the developing countries which do not belong to the Lomé Convention is concerned , we established that in at least one case a bank which was not particularly successful in this field was involved , so that in our opinion ECU 1 million were wrongly paid .
In the context of the development fund , in other words the Lomé Convention , we also checked public order placing for the period from 1988 to 1993 .
There is much to complain about , because , for example , the most-favoured-nation clause was not applied , tax regulations were not observed and tenders and invitations to tender did not agree .
As you know , we also had to prepare an auditor 's certificate for the whole budget .
The Treaty of Maastricht provides for this .
We are submitting the third auditor 's certificate this year .
This time , the auditor 's certificate is part of our report , as Volume II .
As far as the general budget is concerned , we came to the following conclusion . The financial statements of the Community reflect correctly the income and expenditure , and thus the financial state , of the Community , apart from insignificant exceptions .
The events on which the income is based generally correspond to the principles of legality and adequacy .
The same applies to commitments .
However , with reference to the events on which payments are based , in our understanding there are far too many substantial errors .
We came to the conclusion that in 1996 5.4 % of the events on which payments were based were associated with serious errors , and we point out that the error rate in the field of structural assistance is above average , and in the field of agricultural policy it is below average .
I would also like to establish one thing . This 5.4 % does not mean that only cases of fraud are involved .
It also includes other cases such as application of a wrong exchange rate in the social fund , and so on .
For instance , on on occasion our auditors could not carry out an audit because an angry farmer set vicious dogs on them !
We also come to the conclusion that there are 4.3 % of so-called non-opinion cases , in which we could make no judgment , perhaps because there was a strike in the state concerned , or the public prosecutor had seized documents , when we wanted to take the audit .
In the field of formal errors , our opinion is also that there are far too many , but for us formal errors are those that do not have a recognizably adverse effect on the budget .
Regarding the Lomé Convention , for which we give a separate auditor 's certificate , this year we come to the conclusion that all the categories which I have indicated in the case of the general budget are in order , so that altogether , apart from a few exceptions , we can say that our auditor 's certificate for the Lomé Convention is positive .
Allow me to make a few quick remarks about the effect of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which is not yet ratified .
As a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the European Court of Auditors has now become the court of auditors for the whole Community .
It is thus made formally equal to the other Community institutions .
We must now report on irregularities , the treaty says . An appropriate clause was inserted .
However , here I would like to define our role .
Our primary task is prevention , that is , contributing to ensuring that irregularities do not occur .
We do not believe that we are police or the public prosecution service , but if we come across irregularities or even fraud while carrying out our normal tasks , we follow it up and then involve the appropriate authorities .
We see our task as making our contribution in the context of budgetary control as I said , not as a police force or public prosecution service .
The treaty also provides that we should work in close cooperation with the national courts of auditors .
The treaty further provides that we should audit the European Investment Bank within the framework of the existing Tripartite Agreement .
Even when the agreement is no longer in force , our right of audit continues .
The time for which I was allowed to speak to you is over .
Let me thank you for your good cooperation .
These thanks apply to the Committee on Budgetary Control and its chair , Mrs Diemut Theato .
We are grateful for the exchange of opinions which we always have in your committee , and we know that this time too you will surely make the necessary decisions on the basis of our work .
We also thank the Committee on Budgets under Mr Detlev Samland , in which our work is debated with great expertise .
I also thank the chief rapporteur , Mr James Elles .
Thanks for his trouble !
I would also like to thank the Commission , particularly Commissioner Liikanen .
I would like to recognize that much of what we report is taken up by the Commission .
The reform efforts of the Commission concentrate on SEM 2000 .
It is already possible to recognize that the resulting administration and information system allows improvements to be expected .
We also recognize that the new settlement procedure in the field of agricultural policy allows positive results to be expected .
We are also grateful that the Commission shares our view .
A new budget order is due , we have already made the appropriate contributions to it , and we are grateful that in the structural field too , definitions which may prevent irregularities have been made .
Mr Liikanen , hearty thanks to you , also representing your colleagues .
I thank you for your attention .
( Applause )
Mr President , the annual report and the statement of assurance relating to activities in connection with the general budget for the financial year 1996 identifies a list of shortcomings in the use of Community funds .
In key areas it will help the Commission make progress towards fulfilling its joint responsibility for significantly improving the impact of Community funds in achieving the Union 's objectives .
First of all , the Court observes that a generous allocation of budgetary appropriations may discourage rigorous financial management .
Such a potential risk is clearly reduced for the 1998 budget .
However you measure it - in terms of growth rates , margins below the financial perspectives or in relation to the own-resources ceiling - the forthcoming 1998 budget is rigorous .
The Commission , like the Court and Mr Friedmann , has identified overcompensation of cereal producers in the context of the 1992 agricultural reforms .
The Commission has made a proposal for a partial correction .
To its great regret , this has not been adopted , either by the Council or the European Parliament .
The Commission therefore will come back to this question in the context of Agenda 2000 .
As far as the common agricultural policy in general is concerned , all observations of the Court are valuable for the clearing of accounts , and the Commission will make full use of them .
I have also noted with interest the conclusion of the Court that for the EAGGF guarantee section there are indications that the new financial arrangements for clearance of accounts are having some beneficial impact .
With regard to the structural funds , the number of significant errors affecting payments remains too high .
This is the area where the most important decisions were taken in 1997 .
The rules of eligibility were agreed last April .
In October the Commission adopted a regulation on minimum standards for financial control by Member States .
These minimum standards apply to those operations which are cofinanced by the structural funds .
Last month the Commission also took note of the internal guidelines on application of net financial corrections .
I reported on the measures taken to Ecofin yesterday .
The support of the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament for this process has been vital .
It has not always been easy .
Attention now shifts to framing regulations for the next programming period .
This must permit a qualitative leap towards enhancing cost-effectiveness .
Concentration , simplification , decentralization , combined with more stringent checks and verification of results , are the leitmotifs here .
The discussions on the Court of Auditors ' 1996 report and the discharge procedure coincide with the Commission proposal and will make it possible to draw the best possible conclusions for the next period .
Here I would like to make a plea to the Court of Auditors .
It would be valuable if , with the additional resources for the statement of assurance , the Court could in the future provide more sectoral information .
This would help identify the source of the problem and the responsibilities , and this , in turn , would allow us to target the reform activities better .
Briefly , some other observations .
This report reinforces the conviction that in many areas of the Community budget there are too many projects which are too small and have too many objectives .
Concentration and simplification need to be pursued throughout the Community budget .
In several chapters the Court criticizes the management of Community subsidies .
In line with the observations of its own Inspectorate-General and the continuous insistence of the European Parliament , the Commission is working towards general standards in this area .
It will adopt an interim report later today , and I will inform the Committee on Budgets of the European Parliament about this report next week .
Finally , the Court has convinced the Commission of the advantages of a general overhaul of the Communities ' financial regulations .
The Commission should be able to provide a first reflection document in the first half of 1998 .
In conclusion , let me assure you that the Commission will carefully follow up all the Court 's remarks in the 1996 annual report .
The future presidency has also indicated its particular commitment in this respect .
The reform of the management of Community finances is a continuous process .
A number of reforms have been decided , as I informed you .
Their implementation must be persistent and rigorous .
Improving financial management is a continuous process .
It is our duty and also the duty of the Member States .
Only in this way will our efforts bear fruit , improve the regularity of Community spending and increase value for money .
I congratulate Mr Friedmann on this annual report .
The Commission is fully committed to working with the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , the rapporteur , Mr Ellis , and all parliamentarians involved to draw the required conclusions .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
We now come to the debate on the report , and I would ask you to keep your questions concise please .
Mr President , I have four questions .
My first is a general one : to what extent are we talking about fraud , Mr Friedmann , as opposed to mismanagement of funds ?
Can you give us some idea of that ?
The next three questions are all on the DASS .
Paragraph 19.30 of the report talks about substantive errors - which you also referred to in your speech - where the EAGGF guarantee funds are below average .
Does this mean that we have a positive DASS for agriculture ?
Does it also mean that we only have a negative DASS in the structural funds ?
In paragraph 19.27 where the Commission talks about limitations to their work , we are given two areas : one concerning public storage and one unforeseen legal and physical circumstances .
We are not told what these are in the report or in the Commission 's response .
Could you explain what they are , Mr Friedmann ?
Finally , in the response to paragraphs 19.28 to 19.36 the Commission makes a statement which I seem to have seen now for the third time .
It says it believes that because of the degree of uncertainty inherent in any statistical method and because it will be some years before the DASS has required sufficient maturity , the Court 's findings must be interpreted with caution .
What is your response to that ?
Mr President , Mr President of the European Court of Auditors , first cordial thanks for your explanations , for a constructive report which the Commission will also follow up , as we have just heard from Commissioner Liikanen .
We too are interested in protecting tax revenue , and will therefore go constructively to work .
However , there are some points that obviously cause us great concern , particularly in the field of cooperation with the Member States .
When I hear that nine out of ten errors happen in the Member States , as you showed , that is very disturbing .
My question concerns the field of customs , which you addressed .
Do you see similar risks in the case of VAT and also of the fourth income source , GNP ?
Could the necessary controls be carried out more effectively , even if we still have no country of origin certificate , but the VAT is levied in the other countries ?
I also have a question on small and medium-sized companies : do you have any recommendations on how fragmentation could be avoided , and above all how the information deficit , which obviously exists , could be made up ?
We would be very pleased !
We have little time , so I am being brief .
Finally , however , I would like to emphasize that we are now getting to work very energetically , and counting on cooperation with the Court and the Commission , as we do every year !
Mr President , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , with regard to individual programmes , in particular Phare and Tacis , last year you emphasized the difficulties of both monitoring use of funds and underutilization of open accounts .
I believe the work of the Court of Auditors will be particularly useful when the time comes to develop financial procedures for the Agenda 2000 budget aimed at countries who are candidates for membership .
But I would like to ask your opinion on a subject which particularly concerns me , as I am the rapporteur for the budget .
It relates to the reconstruction of former Yugoslavia .
Mr President , have you any particular information concerning the utilization of funds for this purpose ?
Can you , in particular , tell us if you have effective ways of ensuring with certainty that the open accounts for rehabilitation and reconstruction are not being used for other purposes ?
Lastly , given that management responsibility has been largely delegated to the World Bank , can you give us any information regarding your relations with this organization and , in particular , with regard to way in which control is exercised in the award of contracts ?
Mr President , once again , the Court of Auditors has severely criticized the way in which the Community 's resources are managed , and for example the Economic and Social Committee has been severely criticised for fraud in connection with travelling expenses refunded without proper documentation , and the meeting lists are not reliable .
I would like to ask the chairman of the Court of Auditors when we will actually get an investigation into the European Parliament ?
How come we did not get a report on the situation in Parliament long ago , so we can sort out our own management of resources and hence , ladies and gentlemen , also sort out our image , because presumably the Court of Auditors is not negotiating with the President of the European Parliament on whether there should be a review of Parliament at all ?
My second question , Mr President , concerns the ruling by the Court , where I think we are still not answering the question of why there are so many errors in the payments .
We are failing to have it clarified whether it is actually the Court of Appeal 's method which is at fault , whether it is the Commission 's system of controls which is at fault or whether it is simply the Member States .
Who is responsible for the way things are , and how large a margin of error does the Court of Auditors think is acceptable in the first place ?
Mr President , I refer to line 1426 , former Yugoslavia .
You state in the Court of Auditors report that up to July 1997 a total of 1.3 % of the resources which we provided in December 1995 for reconstruction in Yugoslavia had been used .
Two weeks ago , we transferred ECU 100 million for 1997 , which were provided for reconstruction , to fisheries and elsewhere , because DG 1a is unable to pay these funds !
I have asked Mr Westendorp to come to the Committee on Budgetary Control next week and explain this fact to us , because we are not getting any detailed information from the Commission about what is going on .
My question to you is this : if you say that your work is for prevention , and if you say that the Commission has shown itself to be capable of learning to respond to your stimuli , how then do you assess the ability of DG 1a to learn something for 1997 or 1998 and following years from the mess of 1996 ?
Mr President , the report on the 1996 budget exercise is extremely rewarding , as were the previous years ' reports .
Unfortunately , I doubt that much follow-up will be devoted to it .
On the eve of the European Summit , in which the European Union envisages attacking unemployment by making a substantial financial contribution which will benefit SMEs through the intermediary of the EIB , I would like to give a topical example , that of chapter 6 , which deals with SMEs .
The report points out that , within the context of the ERDF , there are no defined regulations for SMEs , there has been no inventory of the numerous actions benefitting SMEs , nor a statement of the amounts allocated to financing them .
It notes that SMEs still have difficulty in gaining access to capital and in obtaining loans and that the SME initiative , provided with ECU 1 billion for the period 1994-1999 , has not enabled more coherence to be given to the cohesion or to the strategy of aid . The procedures do not make it possible to ensure respect for the rules of cumulative aid and the Commission has carried out few analyses of the socio-economic impact of concrete actions benefitting these enterprises .
Where they exist , these analyses do not prove that the overall creation of real jobs is due to the actions financed .
So my question is : does the Court of Auditors envisage recommending that the Commission urgently rationalize and optimize the use of these Community instruments designed for SMIs and SMEs before it and Parliament release millions of ECUs , which we know in advance will not be of any use ?
Mr President of the Court of Auditors , you have dedicated a chapter to general subsidies , in which you note numerous anomalies in their distribution .
There are only a few hundred of these , while the various chapters of title B of the budget cover tens of thousands of subsidies .
My question is therefore the following : do you envisage widening the study that you have made on the general subsidies of title A-3 to cover the chapters of title B of the Community budget , so that we will be able to understand them better ?
That is my general question .
I also have a more specific question to put to you .
Still relating to this chapter , you quote two particularly important anomalies . One relates to a subsidy of ECU 400 , 000 aimed only at internal usage , but without stating the beneficiary organization .
Do you not think that in the interests of greater transparency the offending organization should have been named ?
Mrs Kjer Hansen has briefly talked about the issue of travel expenses of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions which was not mentioned by the President of the Court of Auditors .
Investigations by the Court of Auditors are based on random sampling .
My question is : would it not be sensible to complete the inquiry , both into the number of members and into the time that those members have spent on the Economic and Social Committee , to give the Council , which is politically responsible for the appointment of the members of the Economic and Social Committee , the opportunity to take the necessary action ?
Secondly , the Court of Auditors clearly refers to an undervaluation of the commitment to the sum of several hundred millions .
In other words , Mr President , it is really more a question for the chairman of the committee . The impression is created that the European Commission attaches more importance to the opinions of the European Council than to those of the budget authority and to the financial regulations .
Mr President , I am glad that the President of the Court of Auditors and Commissioner Liikanen are both here , because my questions concern their lack of communication with each other .
I should like to put three specific questions .
The first question is about substantive errors .
It seems that the two of you have different ideas about what constitutes a substantive error , and what the budgetary impact of these substantive errors is .
This is quite important , because it affects , among other things , the amounts you query , for example in such important areas as the structural funds .
Could your communication with each other be improved ?
My second question concerns the rules of eligibility .
From the Commission 's replies , I assume that the common rules of eligibility for all the Member States have now been worked out .
Has the Court of Auditors not been informed of these rules of eligibility ?
The third question , Mr President , concerns the national monitoring institutions .
It is clear that there is still a lack of cooperation between these institutions and the Court of Auditors .
Does the Court of Auditors think they can perform their task of inspection without such collaboration ?
Mr President of the Court of Auditors , in your report you mentioned that there are formal defects in the management of the structural funds , which amount to violations of the law .
Four-fifths of those defects arise from the structural and institutional shortcomings of Member States .
Those States , however , administer 80 % of European funds and the European budget .
How , Mr President , do you suggest that this complicity or default on the part of Member States can be eradicated unless there are real changes in the criminal law and , in short , crime ceases to pay in Europe as it has paid up to now ? That is what needs to be done .
Why does the Court of Auditors not accuse and indict those Member States which are not operating correctly , instead of just recording the fact ?
Mr President , I have a question about overpayment of income supplements in agriculture .
Mr Friedmann , if I have understood correctly , are we only talking about the year 1996 , or has he also included the previous years ?
And in that case , has he taken into account the monetary aspects , the fluctuation in green rates ?
Another question : have the regulations been wrongly applied ?
Or have they been applied correctly and were they incorrect from the outset ?
Had it been assumed that there would be a 5 or 10 % fluctuation against the guaranteed price ?
This is important in connection with overcompensation .
And then my last question , also in connection with Agenda 2000 : these income supplements were set for six years ; does he think it is reasonable that halfway through the game the rules are changed , and does he think it is credible in the light of the proposals the Commission is making in this context ahead of Agenda 2000 ?
Mr President , Mr Friedmann said there were around 5.3 % irregularities in the EU 's budget .
My question is : what does this look like in comparison with the budgets of the Member States ?
Are the irregularities as large in the Member States ' own budgets as in the EU 's budget ?
Or is it the EU which has difficulty in keeping track of its money ?
As far as tobacco subsidies are concerned , these are very regrettable .
I agree that tobacco subsidies should be revised and completely abolished , because it cannot be reasonable for the EU 's taxpayers to pay four-fifths of the tobacco growers ' income .
My last question concerns the Commission .
The European Commission has 17 , 000 employees .
However , I can find very little in the documentation about how the Commission deals with its internal situation , that is , how much corruption there is among the EU 's employees .
It cannot be only the Member States who have difficulty in keeping track of the EU 's money ; it must also be difficult for EU employees .
Mr President , I should like to ask two questions .
First of all , will the Court of Auditors accept that the threat to own resources shown in the annual report cannot be tackled at Community level alone ?
Member States receive 10 % in a payment for collection of traditional own resources and they must , therefore , accept a high level of obligation with regard to this payment , particularly as it coincides with their own self-interest .
The annual report , for example , of the United Kingdom customs and excise published yesterday shows a £ 1 billion shortfall in tobacco receipts alone .
Secondly , will the Commission itself note and accept a paradox concerning the tobacco regime .
While the Commission is trying to ban tobacco companies from using their post-tax profits on sports sponsorship , the Commission is supporting by over ECU 1 billion a tobacco regime as if it were a healthy agricultural pursuit .
Will the Court of Auditors make sure that the Commission fully understands the criticisms of the existing regime and point out to the Commission that they are only in a position to take the moral high ground if they stop the support for the regime ?
Mr President , this presentation merits more time but its brevity should not stop us from congratulating the Court and thanking it for this very good report .
I just want to ask three questions .
In chapter 15 the Court discusses the failings of the Community 's decentralized bodies .
Will the Court please look early at the proposals from the Commission , which the Committee on Budgetary Control is now considering , to see if , in the Court 's view , they will meet the problem .
Chapter 1 draws attention to the problems of revenue loss in the free zones .
Could we please , at some time , have an estimate of the loss of revenue in those zones ?
Thirdly , regarding the sentence quoted by the Commissioner on overprovision of resources in various areas , I would remind the House that this overprovision happens in the compulsory expenditure chapters .
It lends weight to Parliament 's argument that the compulsory side of the budget should disappear .
Mr President , I read the Court of Appeal 's report with pleasure this year , because I cannot see Denmark mentioned in the report as we were in other years and that is pleasing .
I would like to support my colleague , Eva Kjer Hansen , in her proposal that we should have an investigation into Parliament 's travel expenses , so we can improve our image .
But there is one thing on which I would very much like to have an answer from Mr Friedman : is it the case that we are pumping a mass of EU funds into the Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund without us having any way of seeing what the money is used for ?
The report says that people will not cooperate , and I believe this is the problem we need to take up .
Finally , I would say that , until I came down here , I used to read an incredible number of detective novels , and now that I read our annual reports I find that my need for excitement is satisfied .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for the interest you bring to the report .
Mr Wynn , you asked first to what extent we are talking about fraud .
We generally talk about irregularities , and it is clear to us that fraud is a part , a subset of irregularities , because until now there have been criminal law definitions of fraud in connection with European Union money in only three states of the European Union .
You then ask why we have not given a positive auditor 's certificate for the EAGGF field , when this is below average .
As stated , the average is 5.4 % , but we have to supply a global DASS .
We therefore do not distinguish individual policy fields in the quantification of the DASS .
You then asked about the uncertainties in the statistics and the reservations of the Commission about the auditor 's certificate .
I believe I can say that we have come a long way in the development of our auditor 's certificate regarding the method , and also in the discussion with the Commission .
Mrs Theato , you refer to the risks concerning VAT .
Your question is well-founded , because with VAT in the internal market system we have a similar situation as in the customs field .
As long as the destination principle applies , the goods on the way to the destination country are outside VAT and therefore subject to risk .
You asked how it looks with the Gross National Product component .
The problem is that the methods of calculation in the Member States still do not entirely agree .
We are dealing with this subject , and have also brought in outside experts .
What about small and medium-sized companies ?
Can we give recommendations ?
The MEP also addressed this subject .
In general , I would like to say that from the point of view of employment , small and medium-sized companies have an important part to play .
We have established that if money is given to large groups , they immediately rationalize and remove jobs , which can be commercially sensible .
But each small and medium-sized company which is newly created means a new job every time .
The small and medium-sized companies therefore have an outstanding job to do concerning the current problems within the Community .
I was asked about the Phare and Tacis programmes and former Yugoslavia .
You mentioned yourself how low the percentages of these resources which are put to use are .
I know the difficulties between the Member States and the Commission .
I myself recently telephoned the responsible Director-General .
I am not satisfied with the situation .
When you think that winter is now beginning in Bosnia , and work on houses which need repair cannot be started although the money for it is provided , that is more than depressing !
I have tried to answer Mrs Müller 's question .
Mrs Kjer Hansen , you spoke about the Economic and Social Committee .
Indeed , we had to criticize that committee sharply .
We criticized it for irregularities in the refunding of flight tickets , irregularities in the accumulation of day and session money , and some other things .
We have indicated the percentages of irregularities in this connection which we determined last year and the previous year .
They are remarkably high .
We have noted that the Economic and Social Committee has now informed us that it has introduced the necessary counter-measures , and will demand the return of money which was paid unlawfully .
You ask about auditing in the European Parliament .
This audit is in progress .
We are having discussions with your president and responsible representatives of your Chamber .
We will submit the result of the audit during the next year , after consultation with you .
Mr Le Gallou , you ask why we did not name the association which you have criticized and we also criticize .
We are cautious about mentioning names in such cases .
We have just been sued in the European Court in a case for ECU 1 million in damages , because we named a private company in a context which the company thought was unfavourable .
So it is always a problem for us , how far we should go in naming companies .
Also , in general we cannot write everything we know in the report , particularly if parallel investigations by the public prosecutor are in progress , because otherwise we would warn the other side too early , on the basis of the prescribed cross-examination procedure .
This applies , for instance , to the special report on tourism .
Mr Dankert , you also mentioned the Economic and Social Committee .
I have already replied to Mrs Kjer Hansen about it .
Mr Garriga Polledo , you ask about the consequences of the rates of error .
I spoke before briefly about SEM 2000 , where very promising work is being carried out , and I also state that in the Member States they are preparing more and more for the consequences .
You must consider that our DASS gives the direction .
If the fraud report of UCLAF states that in country X so many cases of fraud occurred and were reported , that simply confirms by example that the rate of errors which we list is justified .
So we give the rate of errors , individual cases of fraud are then the proof that our estimate is broadly correct .
You also ask , if four-fifths of all irregularities take place in the Member States , what is the result ?
It is true that on the one hand , the Commission is responsible for executing the budget .
The Treaty of Amsterdam again provides this .
But in practice four-fifths of the budget is executed by the Member States , and to this extent , in connection with this criticism , the Member States are also in the pillory .
( Applause ) In general , if the Community is criticized again and again because the percentage of irregularities is so and so , it must be remembered that no more people are employed by the Community than by the administration of a medium-sized city .
The expenditure programmes of the Community are put into effect by the Member States .
As a general rule , how properly the money of the European taxpayer is handled depends on their quality .
( Applause ) Mr Mulder , you asked whether the estimate of ECU 3 billion , which in our opinion was overpaid in the field of agricultural policy , concerns one year or several years .
This estimate concerns the agricultural year 1995 / 96 .
Yesterday , in the debate with you , I noted that in the first years of the programming period there was a different situation .
What we are putting on the table is perhaps important experience if this policy is to be continued in the coming years , and new regulations must then be created .
Mr Holm , you ask , if there are 5.4 % serious errors , what about the Member States ?
You must consider that the Community budget is almost exclusively a subsidy budget , and therefore highly liable to irregularities .
Whenever someone is given money , his human spirit becomes inventive .
The part of national budgets which is associated with subsidies is equally liable to irregularities .
It is therefore much more important to develop mechanisms which make fraud unattractive , perhaps by using cheap loans rather than subsidies , and above all if profitable investments are involved .
I think we must continue to think hard together along these lines !
( Applause ) Mr Tomlinson , you pointed out that in the case of own resources it cannot be the fault of the EU if so much is lost .
You are quite right !
The income from customs belongs to the Community , but it is raised exclusively by the customs administrations , which are national .
Customs officers are national officials .
It is utterly deplorable that , as you yourself have already said , the customs administrations of the Member States work together abominably , and that they make far too little use of new information technology !
That is all the more annoying because the Member States are paid 10 % of the customs revenue for their work .
The Member States should finally understand that when customs duties are not paid on goods that also means a loss of tax revenue for the Member States .
We must convince the Member States more strongly so that these customs evasions no longer occur to this extent .
Mr Kellett-Bowman , some of your questions were addressed to the Commission , but you also mentioned the subject of free zones .
These are mostly ports , where goods arrive and are exported again free of customs .
Sometimes the necessary evidence is not supplied , so that one just does not know whether it really happens as the legal regulations provide .
Mr Blak , you say that this time we do not mention Denmark .
That need not be so !
Europe is big enough .
Obviously , Denmark is included in the overall figures , like all other countries .
As far as the European Investment Fund is concerned , you are quite right .
We have only a one-third share of it , and can therefore not audit as you would like , and so would we .
I would be grateful if you would create the appropriate political pressure , so that we perhaps advance some way together , because after all this is about the Community 's money !
Thank you for your attention .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr President !
The debate is closed .
BSE
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A4-0362 / 97 ) by Mr Böge , on behalf of the Temporary Committee to follow up the recommendations on BSE , on the European Commission 's follow-up of the recommendations made by the Committee of Inquiry into BSE ; -16 oral questions to the Council and to the Commission ( Â4-0525 / 97 and Â4-0526 / 97 , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , Â4-0714 / 97 and Â4-0715 / 97 , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Â40716 / 97 and Â4-0717 / 97 , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , Â4-0718 / 97 and Â4-0719 / 97 , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , Â4-0720 / 97 and Â4-0721 / 97 , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , Â4-0722 / 97 and Â4-0723 / 97 , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , Â4-0897 / 97 and Â4-0898 / 97 , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , Â4-0899 / 97 and Â4-0900 / 97 , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations ) , on the report of the Temporary Committee to follow up the recommendations on BSE .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , on 23 April this House decided to set up a Temporary Committee to follow up the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE .
Its task was to monitor the handling by the EU Commission of the 70 recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry , and to report to the Conference of Presidents about it at the beginning of November .
So we were not a new committee of inquiry , although there was sometimes a temptation to open the books again .
Our work was based on the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry and the progress reports from the Commission , which were submitted monthly .
Anyone who compares the Commission 's first progress report before the summer break with the final Commission document can see that a good start has been made .
BSE was indeed no act of God , as certain people tried to tell us at the Committee of Inquiry , but a bizarre mixture of wrong behaviour , mismanagement , wrong assessment and ignorance , and these mistakes demanded that we should draw conclusions from them .
Summarizing , I can say that wherever what mattered was to draw conclusions which were important to the consumer , and to drive the decision forward , we are on the way .
Either the expressed recommendations have been put into effect , or a start has been made , or the Commission has promised to do so within a firm timetable .
These , Mr President of the Commission , are bills of exchange on the future .
Redeem these bills of exchange , because , as in business life , if you do not redeem bills of exchange , you are no longer in business !
I add that wherever we went in the undergrowth of the treaty or treaty interpretations , there really were problems .
Even knowing the very varied legal interpretations of the services of Parliament and the Commission , I say that here we would have liked the Commission to be more courageous and more on the offensive .
On the other hand , we recognize fully that the Commission has acted on some difficult issues right up to the last minute - I remember the promises to change the status of officials , and also the very clear promise from you , Mr President of the Commission , to put yourself on the side of the Parliament during the renegotiation of the interinstitutional agreement .
Let me list some positive examples where we have made a good start .
Obviously , reclaiming the costs of BSE , disciplinary measures , administrative proceedings against the United Kingdom , proceedings because of the nonappearance of Mr Hogg or the vote of no confidence against individual commissioners are so to speak the negative examples which have not been worked out .
We consider as particularly positive the successes in efforts for more transparency and openness : access by Parliament and the public to the bases of the scientific advice , new members of the scientific committees , stronger participation by experts in human medicine .
We demand here that the same principles of openness , clarity and information must also apply to international scientific bodies , otherwise we shall reject these opinions as a basis for business in future .
We consider as positive the reorganization of departments , the separation of lawmaking on the one hand and scientific advice and control on the other .
Even the supplementary budget is now finally on the way .
But I also say here that if the Commission had acted collectively , the necessary jobs could have been created long ago by switching free jobs .
And please ensure that the open question of the veterinary inspection department is settled on the principle of efficiency , not by location .
This is also a subject which concerns the Council , Mr President-inOffice .
Indeed , the actions and control activities of the Member States and the Commission , in the context of the possibilities of the internal market , were badly coordinated and inadequate .
Here there is a series of good suggestions for improvement which have been promised to us .
Spot checks in the country of origin , physical checks on the borders combined with improved information about the destination country , independently of BSE , can show a way to the future here .
I expect here from the Council that it should declare itself ready to make the results of veterinary inspection accessible to the public .
The pressure of public opinion and the pressure of markets would then have much more effect than the initiation of any breach of contract proceedings by the Commission .
Mr President-in-Office , the negligent behaviour , sometimes contemptuous of Community law , of some Member States must be finally brought to an end .
I am thinking in particular of the unbelievable events and lax behaviour about putting the appropriate directive about sterilization of animal meal into effect .
We can therefore only say that the Commission must start breach of contract proceedings much more quickly in future .
It must apply more boldly than before for interim injunctions by the European Court of Justice , and essentially , follow-up controls must become the rule when deficiencies are identified , and the costs must be charged to the defaulting Member States .
In the spirit of transparency and openness and citizen involvement and with the support of the Commission , it was possible in Amsterdam to put through the extension of the codecision procedure to the fields of animal health and plant protection .
This is positive , but at the same time we expect the Commission , where there is room for interpretation regarding the legal basis , to undertake always to exploit it in favour of Parliament .
We have talked for a long time about compensation for the victims of this crisis .
After long hesitation , the Commission has declared itself ready , in the spirit of solidarity , to provide money from the Community budget in addition to the resources provided by the Member States , if the Member States introduce corresponding initiatives .
We see the promised support of the organization which is active in this field as the first step in the right direction , and invite the British government and the Commission to consult with the organizations about suitable support actions , and to report to us .
It is quite clear that the root of the whole evil was the completely crazy use of insufficiently sterilized animal meals , which were also fed to ruminants .
We have thoroughly investigated and clarified this question during an international conference of scientists and experts .
You will find the results in the report .
A truly functional recycling system can only be sustained if three safety keys are in place in future : clean base materials , slaughtering waste only from animals which are permitted to be used as food , the highest possible processing standards , and never , never , feeding to ruminants !
The behaviour of the Member States here is really a scandal .
If a Member State completely refuses to put this directive into effect , it must be put in the pillory !
The prohibition of movement which the Commission declared was correct , but came very late .
I will add that , regarding the problems of the risk material decision of the Commission of 30 July , we as a Parliament are giving the Commission as well as the Council a real helping hand with this report , on how to escape from the dilemma : step by step removal of the export prohibition on the clear conditions which were agreed in Florence , filling in the gaps in the decision of 30 July regarding pharmaceutical products , and many other open specialist questions .
Read the report very carefully !
I believe we have made good proposals to you .
It is clear that the staffing and disciplinary actions were not sufficiently put into effect .
Mr President of the Commission , we are pleased that you have reorganized your staff , that there has been a reorganization .
We regret that you have refused to take disciplinary action .
We maintain our position but the promise to change the status of officials in the light of this recognition is also a bill of exchange on the future , which we explicitly welcome .
Mr President of the Commission , we also welcome your promise , which you have again made clearly , to strive , in the renegotiation of the interinstitutional agreement with Parliament , to ensure that in future it should be obligatory for members of national governments to appear .
It is clear that if the Council does not come , responsibility is put on the Commission , so it is in your self-interest that this should be changed for the future .
Let me finally say , Mr President , that agriculture , rural economy on the principle of sustainability and thinking over generations must be our motto , the need for an agriculture adapted to its location , observing the precautionary principle in improving efficiency and using hormones , and the development of a code of good agricultural practice .
I believe that in the last 16 months Parliament has tried , with the Committee of Inquiry and dealing with the recommendation , to recreate a front rank position for protection of health and the consumer in the internal market .
I also warn the curious that Parliament is now able to reopen such a procedure .
Therefore , let the past be a lesson to us all !
I would like to ask the Commission to remain the committed ally of the European Parliament in the future , when what matters is to put precautionary consumer and health protection at the centre of the internal market effort !
( Applause )
Mr Böge , I have allowed you to exceed your time , which was the least reward that I , as President , could give you for such a brilliant piece of work .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you and the whole of the committee under the chair of Mrs Roth-Behrendt for an exceptional piece of work undertaken over the last nine months .
Mr President , it may be necessary for me to appeal to that generosity too , but I hope that the time I have been allocated will be enough and I will not have to go on longer .
Ladies and gentlemen , in his report Mr Böge has given a very accurate and excellent presentation of the credit and debit sides of the European Parliament 's demand , as we in the Committee of Inquiry stated it , and today we have a very detailed list of achievements and failures in relation to what the Commission has done in the last halfyear .
I must also say very clearly at this point that we are talking about the Commission , and I have never hidden the fact that I would much rather be talking about the Council !
And as we all know , if we thought and are still thinking about a possible vote of no confidence , the Council would have deserved this vote of no confidence .
That must be said quite clearly , and I would be the first person to support such a vote of no confidence .
But if we as the European Parliament , out of all the institutions , can only speak about the Commission , and evaluate what the Commission has achieved in the last half-year , the assessment which Mr Böge has also given shows very clearly that things are moving !
Suddenly movement is there , suddenly transparency is there , suddenly an effort by the Commission can be recognized .
Effort !
That is a word we never heard in the early years , since 1987 / 1988 , in connection with BSE .
Where once there was cover-up , now there is transparency .
There could not be a bigger contrast .
And suddenly the efforts are achievable , to an extent that no member of the follow-up committee , in any group , had believed possible six months ago .
We would never have believed that we would get to where we are .
All the committee members said that they did not trust the Commission to move in this way .
Neither did I , to be honest !
That it took the threat of a vote of no confidence to get the Commission moving or to put it under pressure , is regrettable on the one hand , but gratifying on the other , because it shows what a Moloch like the Commission can achieve if it has to .
Nevertheless , I have few illusions that there has really been a change of heart in all Directorates-General , and I doubt very strongly that the speed and intensity of the change would have happened without the coordination of Commissioner Bonino and her Directorate-General .
And if you ask me for my personal opinion , I say to you very clearly , I do not believe it !
There are still unfulfilled demands of the European Parliament , perhaps few , perhaps not the most important .
For instance , a few weeks ago a compensation fund for family members of CreutzfeldtJakob victims could only be squeezed out by pressure from the European Parliament .
Mr Böge pointed out that jobs in the Commission which have long been unfilled apparently cannot be brought flexibly and quickly to where they belong , that is , in Directorate-General XXIV .
That all shows that what the Commission rightly wrote in its fourth progress report is urgently necessary .
It hopes , or at least I understand it as a hope , that the European Parliament will continue to be a determined ally of the Commission .
Yes , we certainly will be , but I add , as so often , a determined yes , but above all a watchful yes .
We will be very watchful !
Our colleagues in the follow-up committee have shown this watchfulness in their intensive work in the last few months , and it is now up to the standing committees of the European Parliament to ensure that the Commission , on this path of new openness , new transparency and new mobility , does not again become sleepy or careless .
I say this with a slight undertone of warning , I do not say threat , but warning .
The half-yearly reports which the Commission has promised in its first progress report will certainly be a reminder for the Commission , and I can assure you , Mr President of the Commission , and I think also all colleagues , that we shall look at the content and quality of these half-yearly reports in great detail .
Finally , allow me to thank the services of the European Parliament for the speed and support that we received in the committee , for the flexibility about meeting times and meeting rooms , the uncomplicated facilitating of unscheduled meetings , which is not to be taken for granted even in this Parliament .
I would like to thank the services of the European Parliament , particularly the translation services , and the secretariat of my committee , for their very hard , precise and quick work , without which it would not have been possible to achieve what we have achieved .
Above all , I would like to thank Mr Böge and all our colleagues in this Temporary Committee for working together very fairly , as colleagues should , which enabled me to enjoy being in the chair , and I hope I was a fairly tolerable chairperson !
We could only do this work by working together as colleagues should , and as we have for the last half-year .
I am glad that it has ended , but I am also glad of the time when we were able to move the Commission slightly , and when we could all work together !
Mrs Roth-Behrendt , I would like to join with you in thanking the services of Parliament ; sometimes they really do carry out their duties in an exemplary way and it is wrong not to give them a mention and some praise from time to time .
I would also like to thank you personally and to congratulate you on the work of your committee .
On the basis of your report and the questions to the Council and the Commission , we have accepted eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 , paragraph 5 , of the Rules of Procedure .
Voting on these will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Mr President , I wish to begin by issuing , on behalf of the Socialist Group , a great tribute to the work of the Temporary Committee and , in particular , to its rapporteur Mr Böge and its chair , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , and also to all Members who took part in what has been an exemplary piece of work .
It is important because it signifies that now the European Parliament has come of age in terms of its monitoring , investigation and control of the Commission , which is one of our fundamental roles .
We are now demonstrating that we are carrying this out .
So my group wants to thank the Members concerned very warmly .
No one who has read the report can be left with any doubt as to the seriousness with which the task has been tackled .
It is the same quality of work which we saw coming from the first Committee of Inquiry which resulted in the recommendations which the Temporary Committee have been seeing through .
The combination of that Committee of Inquiry and the follow-up work of the Temporary Committee bodes very well for the future in our role in this respect .
It is a matter of some personal satisfaction that one of the very first actions of the new Minister of Agriculture in the United Kingdom , following the general election on 1 May , was to offer to come here to this House and talk to the Temporary Committee , in contrast to his predecessor who refused to do so .
In coming to this House he acknowledged the responsibility of the British Government for this whole BSE crisis .
That has changed the tone of the debate with the British Government and I welcome that .
I recognize the huge commitment of the Commission to the work needed to fulfil the recommendations of the original Committee of Inquiry .
I pay tribute to Mr Santer and his colleagues ' openness in the discussions .
Mr Böge and Mrs Roth-Behrendt have made comments about what still needs to be done and I am not saying that everything is fine .
We recognize that there are still shortcomings , in particular , the five areas where work still needs to be completed .
Although , I am sure that the Commission did not expect us to say everything is wonderful , it is right that we pay tribute to the commitment it has shown in work with the Temporary Committee .
There are still shortcomings and my colleagues who will speak later will deal with these .
But that 70 recommendations have been dealt with is no mean feat and we should recognize that .
We in this Parliament have watched and will continue to watch what goes on - in the way the Commission responds to the recommendations of the Temporary Committee and the original Committee of Inquiry through our standing committees .
It is now their role to take up this work .
If there is one major deficiency - and Mrs Roth-Behrendt has already referred to it - it is that in our resolution we have made no criticism of the Council .
Clearly in some areas where the Commission has tried to carry through the Committee of Inquiry 's recommendations , the Council has not been helpful - in fact , quite the opposite .
We should be making that case here .
Mr Böge made the case that national governments are not carrying through their responsibilities .
We are not giving a completely clean bill of health to the Commission and we retain our criticisms .
But , given the progress made in 70 of the recommendations , it is my group 's view that the Commission has responded and , as far as we are concerned , should not be subject to a motion of censure on this occasion .
Mr President , the vote of no confidence on probation has proved itself .
The Commission has moved , but what is also very important is that the European Parliament has reminded itself of its duties .
In the short history of the European Parliament , there is no precedent for how legislative control was exercised in this case of BSE .
When our chairman said that suddenly there is effort in the Commission , suddenly there is openness , and suddenly there is effort , that has to do with the fact that we in Parliament , through this gentle pressure , but also through insight in the good work of the BSE Committee of Inquiry , have forced the Commission to accept Parliament 's demands .
One of these demands was that there should be a separation of the legislative work of the Commission and the control activity .
That happened , but we must not forget that true legislative control starts with Parliament .
I would like to emphasize that what has now happened in the Committee of Inquiry and the Temporary Committee is basically the normal work of a proper parliament .
I therefore ask this Parliament to remember its duties , and to perform the role of Parliament in future less with radical utterances outwards - I say this to my group and also to the Socialist group - and more with consistent demands inwards and consistent work .
Then the Commission will move .
Thanks to Commissioner Fischler , Commissioner Bonino , Mr Reichenbach - it was good work together .
I believe we have all benefitted , and that we all start from the assumption that we will not fall back from the standard we have achieved , and that we will together historically force back this historically unique Council , which is executive and legislative at one and the same time - Montesquieu would turn in his grave - and arrive at normal parliamentary work and lawmaking , where we all have our due responsibilities .
Mr President , we find today that it was right to set up a monitoring committee .
It gives us an insight into what the Commission has done and what it has not done .
We can say that roughly two-thirds of Parliament 's demands have been met .
This is in fact more than we expected .
I would like to name some of them briefly .
We have made the fight against BSE more transparent , we got a comprehensive information policy so that we could spread information on the results of research in this field , which was very important .
We also reinforced the national inspection authorities for veterinary and human health , which also proved to be highly necessary .
We developed better systems for transporting fodder in the Union , but these have not been completed yet .
Even if the Committee 's work is over , we have to note that BSE is not .
But there are signs that the disease will fade over the next four to six years , provided the programmes put in place are followed .
Now it is often the case that people only do something about an epidemic once it is upon them , and that reduces the interest in fighting it .
People do not take so much notice any more .
So it is vital that the rules we have laid down are followed so that there is no such weakening of interest in combatting BSE .
We have a tradition in the Union of being better at regionalizing epidemics than combatting them .
I would therefore call on the Commission to follow the demands we have made on it in the committee , to try to regionalize BSE so that areas where there has been no BSE and which meet the rules on identifying cows and calves are declared BSE-free for the simple reason that this will encourage areas where there is BSE to step up the fight against the disease .
It is my wish that this demand should be met so that we can continue this tradition .
Finally , I would say that I regret to some extent that it was necessary to set up this committee , but on the other hand I have to admit that , when you have an organization which is as heavy as the Commission , it is sometimes necessary to attack it to get it to do its work better .
You can dismiss governments or put pressure on them , but the Commission is a peculiar hybrid of a legislative and administrative body .
So it has also proved necessary to put pressure on it to get it to do its work better , and that has succeeded for the moment .
I hope there is no need to set up another committee of inquiry in the near future .
Mr President , after one year of intense , continuous work on the part of the committees of the European Parliament with regard to bovine spongiform encephalopathy , the time has come for us to see what has been achieved and if there has been any real progress on the issue of the protection of public health and of consumers alike .
In particular , we can make the following observations , which must not be forgotten in the future .
First , there is no doubt that the European Parliament , with its resolution of the 19 February 1997 , has succeeded in consolidating its position and today is able to exercise real control over the actions of the European Commission .
Secondly , it has been ascertained that the conduct of the Member States and of the Commission with regard to the internal market was inadvisable and so they were unable to guarantee effective protection of public health .
Thirdly , it is absolutely essential , Mr President-in-Office , for the Commission 's veterinary inspection services to be organized as efficiently as possible , and we must ensure , in the future , that they operate appropriately and effectively , as regards their responsibilities , the flow of information , the guaranteeing of timely , effective action at both a legislative and a political level , and also compliance with the treaties .
Fourthly , Mr President-in-Office , effective coordination and cooperation between the various services and the Member States is the real basis on which the protection of public health and the protection of consumers must be supported , as also the mapping out and execution of the necessary Community programmes and strategies in this area .
Fifth , it is not possible to use slaughtered animals that are unfit for human consumption in the production of cattle feed .
Sixth , the production of cattle feed must take place in strict compliance with regulations concerning safety and handling .
Seventh , in the future , Mr President-in-Office , the Commission must aim , on the basis of scientific facts , at the highest possible protection of public health and consumers , especially in the area of food production and nutrition .
Eighth , it is essential that the Commission should actively monitor the transfer and implementation of Community law within the Member States and submit proposals for improving the system of control and export of meat and other foodstuffs , since the effective protection of consumers can only be safeguarded when measures are taken beforehand , rather then afterwards , when the damage has been done , as in the case of BSE .
Ninth , the Commission has of course complied with many of the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry but not always in the same satisfactory way .
There were five recommendations that were not taken into consideration at all .
For example , the recommendation concerning the investigation of the activities of certain of the Commission staff , the recommendation concerning compensation for the damage caused by bovine spongiform encephalopathy , and the recommendation concerning administrative action against the United Kingdom are three of the recommendations of the European Parliament , in connection with which the Commission has done absolutely nothing .
It must be added that , once the Committee of Inquiry had completed its work , the findings showed that there is a close link between bovine spongiform encephalopathy and new-variant CreuzfeldtJakob disease .
This disease is extremely serious , it has tragic consequences for the families of the victims and of course we do not yet know the total number of deaths the disease will cause , given the fact that there are people in whom the disease has not yet manifested itself .
Mr President-in-Office , I would like to remind you of the commitment that you made that every piece of legislation , every regulation , directive or programme that is brought before the European Parliament in connection with the protection of health , will go forward under the codecision procedure .
Finally , I would like to stress that , from this dramatic crisis , which has brought about human tragedies and has had social repercussions and economic consequences for the internal market , and which has led to responsibilities for the Council , for the Commission and for the United Kingdom , we must move definitively towards taking effective action , not just uttering fine phrases .
Mr President-in-Office , these actions must be based on the principle that the protection of the health of the citizens of Europe is the greatest priority of the European Union and , as a result , is of much greater significance than other aspects of the internal market .
Mr President , we have been able to appreciate how seriously Mr Böge took his role as chairman of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE , and he has today presented us with an excellent report on behalf of the Temporary Committee for which I congratulate him whilst at the same time regretting the fact that my group , the European Radical Alliance , was left out of this committee through some ignominious procedural wangle .
Six months ago , the Committee of Inquiry highlighted some serious malfunctions in the way the crisis had been handled .
There were 118 of us who felt that this justified a motion of censure .
That path was not followed - such is democracy - and today we therefore have to draw the political and institutional conclusions of Mr Böge 's report .
Much has been done , it is true , but the facts show that much remains to be done .
At the request of Parliament , the European Commission initiated reforms which represent considerable progress .
However , consumer fears persist , and recent cases of fraud in Belgium demonstrate that this affair is not over .
The European Union still does not possess the necessary instruments to enable it either to stand up to such a crisis or to avoid it . So there is an inevitable risk that such a crisis will occur again .
It is upstream that the Commission must provide itself with effective mechanisms for risk management in general , and we note its sincere efforts in this direction .
But many questions remain unanswered and many answers are insufficient .
Where are the potentially contaminated masses of unrefined meat-and-bone meal ?
Are the storehouses safe ?
Do the controls offer real safety ?
Why do we continue to recycle sick animals ?
Why are certain Member States still not implementing Community legislation ?
Who will compensate the victims ' families ?
Why are those responsible , who have been identified , not prosecuted whether they be Member States or government officials ?
This crisis has brought in its wake another , that of the lack of confidence of European citizens in Members of this Parliament .
The European Union has just been shaken by a serious crisis , but will it be the Union that has to pay rather than those responsible ?
It is our duty to ensure that the Commission follows through its work .
If this were not the case , I would hope that the politically correct consensus which seems to be current here would finally be weakened and that Parliament , which has begun to take itself in hand , would be able to take decisions which the interests of our citizens call for , otherwise the ultra-liberal machine would be able to lay down its own laws .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I should like to congratulate Mrs RothBehrendt .
It has been a pleasure to get to know her through the work in the committee . I also want to congratulate Mr Böge , whom I had already had the pleasure of meeting , when he chaired the earlier Committee of Inquiry .
I also want to pay tribute to my colleagues for their fine work .
Finally , I should like to mention Mr Reichenbach , who represents the participation and collaboration of the Commission - that is , the participation and collaboration of all his colleagues , who regularly assisted us with our work .
We need to evaluate jointly the work done by the Committee of Inquiry and the Temporary Committee .
We must remember that since the Committee of Inquiry completed its work , clear evidence has been obtained that new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is linked with BSE . This has increased the seriousness of the responsibilities identified by the Committee of Inquiry .
Furthermore , the violation of the ban on UK beef and veal also came to light after the Committee of Inquiry had published its report .
In this respect , the Temporary Committee did not have a mandate to investigate new responsibilities nor to modify the judgements made by the Committee of Inquiry .
The recommendations which have been followed have to be considered as encouraging rather than satisfactory .
There have certainly been steps in the right direction as regards consumer protection , and new administrative units have been created .
However , for the moment my group can do no more than entertain well-founded hopes that the arrangements will all work adequately .
There are indications of the distortions which can arise in the decisionmaking process , and also of problems with implementation .
Of the recommendations which have been put into effect , there are several whose implementation has been only partial , or consists of no more than promises from the Commission .
I think this House should seriously consider a method for the monitoring and evaluation of these aspects .
As for the recommendations which have not been followed , they share a common feature which needs to be pointed out : they are all either institutional in nature , or the obstacles preventing them from being implemented are institutional in origin .
Among the recommendations which the Commission has not observed , I should particularly like to mention the lack of disciplinary measures for serious mistakes made by certain officials . Speaking for myself as a Member of this House , this does not mean we are taking an inquisitorial attitude about punishing such mistakes - quite the contrary .
In any case , it is clear that not all the recommendations made by the Committee of Inquiry are equally important .
Several of them are extremely important in a legal sense , concerning precautions about risk materials and monitoring , but have still not been implemented to any great extent .
For example , there are still shortcomings in the use of risk materials in the pharmaceuticals industry .
I must confess that during my time on the two committees ( the Committee of Inquiry and the Temporary Committee ) my attitude has changed . I used to be far more critical of the Council , whereas I am now critical of the behaviour of the Member States .
However , the Council should be far more aggressive in forcing the Member States to comply with Community guidelines .
It is clear - and I am just finishing - that a lot of the progress which has been made has been due to pressure from this House .
It would therefore be a very good thing if the usual relations between Parliament and the Commission could be made completely transparent from now on .
My political group is hopeful , and we wish we did not have to be critical , but we think that in order to resolve this contradiction , next year the Commission should honour all the promises which it has made .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Böge , both for the work he has done and also for his willingness and availability to listen to the members of our committee .
Regarding the report of the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE , our group proposed a very short motion for a resolution , of only seven paragraphs .
It is sufficient in order to define our position and to show our determination .
In the first place , we want to support fully the rapporteur 's proposals in his conclusion regarding the need to ensure transparency within the Commission .
In fact , throughout this affair , as we all know , the essential problem has been a desire to suppress the so-called mad cow affair in order to avoiding delays in both the completion of the single market and the process of ratification of the Maastricht Treaty , and perhaps also , regrettably , to satisfy many other shameful interests .
Regarding the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE , we can but regret that our Parliament , by refusing to give our Temporary Committee the status of a Committee of Inquiry , did not opt for a more efficient procedure .
To put it clearly , I fear that our conclusions may not have the necessary and essential legal scope to oblige the Commission to modify its manner and its way of working .
The third paragraph of our resolution denounces the modifications to the Amsterdam Treaty - which , may I remind you , is in the process of being ratified - regarding article 100a . The new wording gives clear priority to the single market , to the detriment of European consumers ' health .
And I would like to remind you that it is thanks to the action of the French Minister for Agriculture at the time , Mr Philippe Vasseur , that we were able to achieve the implementation of an embargo on British beef .
In its new version , article 100a , paragraph 4 , we would no longer be able to apply this method without incurring the wrath of both the Commission and the Court of Justice of the European Community .
The fifth paragraph of our resolution specifies that we would like to know what the consequences of the development of the new CAP are , as described in Agenda 2000 , as well as those of international agreements , especially agreements concluded within the framework of the COM , for the quality of agricultural and food products to be provided to consumers .
In fact , everything is pushing European farmers in the direction of improving their productivity even if , deep down , they do not want to do so .
They have a business to run ; this business is very often the one and only source of income for them and their families .
Finally , Mr President , I will conclude by saying that our group reserves the right to propose a motion of censure during the November 1998 part-session , that is in a year 's time to the day , if the Commission does not respect the conclusions of our two reports , that of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry and that of the Temporary Committee to follow up the recommendations on BSE .
I would like to remind you that at the beginning of this affair , our former colleague , Philippe de Villiers , had already threatened the Commission with a motion of censure .
Some months later , you will have noted , it was lodged .
We keep to our word ; our credibility is at stake as is , of course , Mr President-in-Office , your own .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Luxembourg has always been convinced of the key role of the European Parliament in Community life and has therefore not spared its efforts , each time it takes the Presidency of the Council , to maintain an intensive and constructive dialogue with your Parliament .
This seems to us all the more important today as the subject of debate is particularly important and sensitive .
In my speech , I will endeavour to draw up a balance sheet , necessarily brief but at the same time as complete as possible , of the Council 's deliberations with regard to the problem of BSE , particularly since the resolution you adopted on 19 February this year concluding the work of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry .
I will also take this opportunity to reply to the various oral questions which have been put to the Council .
In general , I believe it is appropriate to note that , beyond taking into account the legitimate economic and social concerns raised by a considerable number of those who depend on the survival of the beef industry for their living , the Council has constantly acted and continues to act , within the context of its legislative jurisdiction , by basing its action on two principles .
Firstly , the protection of human health must be guaranteed and thus regulations must be established which enable the quality and safety of food products to be ensured .
Secondly , all actions must be based solidly on the best and most up-to-date scientific proof .
The Council agrees with the European Parliament and with the rapporteur , Mr Böge , in recognizing that it is by acting with transparency , clarity and responsibility that we will contribute to the restoration of the confidence of European citizens in the way our institutions function and , consequently , to the reassurance of consumers within the Union and in third party countries as to the gravity of measures taken at European level to protect their health .
In addition to the need for legislative action with regard to the quality and safety of food products , the Council also recognizes the considerable importance of effective controls , particularly in the fight against fraud .
Furthermore , it is clear that beyond the different veterinary and phytosanitary legislations , action in the fight against BSE must be extended to research into , and prevention of , the different forms of BSE .
Since BSE appeared , and above all since the recent scientific discoveries which highlighted the possible link between BSE and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , the Council 's actions within its different fora have included all of these aspects .
Let us start with the Agriculture Council , which adopted a series of measures in the food , veterinary and phytosanitary fields , along with regulations relating to animals .
Amongst the principle results obtained , two decisions are worth highlighting in particular .
Firstly , the adoption by the Council of the regulation on the system of identification and registration of bovine animals , and on the system of labelling of beef and beef products which will ensure , in particular , the traceability of beef products and thus a very efficient control mechanism .
Secondly , the decision adopted by the Commission last July following the Council deliberations , which aims to ban the use of specified risk material , particularly in human and animal foodstuffs .
The principle of precaution played a determinant role in this decision .
Furthermore , and without claiming to be exhaustive , I would like to remind you of the different measures such as the ban on hormones and hormone derivatives in livestock farming , the certification of animals and animal products , the protection of calves and sanitary policing of intra-Community trade in cattle .
By adopting these different legislative acts , the Council has largely heeded the European Parliament 's position .
With regard to the embargo on exports of British beef , you are aware of all the decisions taken by the Florence European Council .
Within the Agriculture Council we are regularly informed of the development of the situation and the work relating to the British certified herd scheme .
The time has not yet come for the Council to give an opinion on a possible relaxation of this embargo .
We will do so when the Commission considers the conditions are right and when it provides us with a clear proposal .
On this subject , I can confirm that the decisions taken by the Florence European Council regarding the criteria to be used and the procedures to be followed will be fully respected .
The question of controls , and above all the flaws that recent fraud cases have highlighted , is a serious subject of concern for public opinion , for the European Parliament and also for the Agriculture Ministers who are looking into this question under my presidency .
Of course , we all know that it would be illusory to hope for the total eradication of a criminal activity whose suppression is the responsibility , primarily , of the judicial authorities .
However , the Agriculture Ministers were unanimous in confirming their firm will to do everything possible , both at national and Community level , to fight fraud energetically .
That is why , apart from adopting stricter national measures , we have given our full support to the Commission in its desire to strengthen the existing control mechanism .
With regard to hormones , the Council fully supports the Commission 's action within the framework of the WTO , for we consider that the Community has the right to set the level of protection of human health that it judges appropriate and consequently , to ban the use of substances considered dangerous for human health .
In the field of research , an important result for the improvement of the cooperation and coordination of research into BSE has been obtained with the common decision of the Council and the European Parliament regarding the report of the expert , Professor Weissmann , which aims to allocate a further ECU 35 million to research into transmissible spongiform encephalopathies , vaccines and viral diseases within the context of the fourth framework programme for research and development .
This decision brings to ECU 50 million the funds allocated to research .
With regard to the Health Council , I will limit myself to reminding you that its conclusions on the question of BSE highlight the need to give the highest priority to the protection of public health and to take all appropriate measures to eliminate the risk of the transmission of BSE .
The Health Council agreed to continue detailed listings of cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and to collect together and analyze all the statistics at a European level .
It will make sure that the cases of BSE are reported in the appropriate manner .
Furthermore , it intends to return to all of these questions during its meeting on 4 December this year .
Ladies and gentlemen , we heard of the Commission 's communication regarding consumer health and food safety with the greatest of interest , as well as the Green Paper on the general principles of Community legislation .
The Luxembourg Presidency has clearly stated , in its action plan , that it would give food safety a high level of importance .
That is why it asked the Council to participate fully in the debate on the Commission 's documents .
Before the end of the year , they will have been examined by the ministers in charge of agriculture , the internal market , consumers and health .
The ministers responsible for agriculture and consumers have already begun to study them and in particular have recognized that the protection of human health and research at the highest possible level into the safety of foodstuffs should remain the top priorities of European legislation .
Mr President , the mad cow crisis is an event which deeply marks not only public opinion but also ourselves as decision-makers and which can raise questions concerning convictions and behaviour .
If there is one lesson we can and must learn from this crisis , it is that there can be no effective protection of human health or development of lasting agriculture without permanent research into the harmonious integration of agricultural activity and nature .
Restricting and damaging the latter is inevitably the same as endangering agriculture itself .
This realization , which is being increasingly confirmed every day , is inspiring the deliberations of the Ministers of Agriculture on Agenda 2000 .
Today or tomorrow , we will have to adopt common directions regarding the future of the CAP .
In this context , we intend to confirm and defend a European agricultural identity for the future which will , in particular , be in a position to take care of the countryside , to support the natural spaces and , above all , to respond to the concerns and demands of the consumer with regard to food safety and quality , environmental protection and the defence of animal welfare .
Our objective is to ensure lasting agricultural production processes and the production of reliable , healthy food products .
By confirming this European agricultural identity , which it hopes to consolidate and develop through the reforms to be undertaken , the Council also wants to send a clear and unequivocal message to countries which are candidates for membership of the European Union regarding the directions their agricultural policy should be taking in order to facilitate membership .
The Council furthermore wanted to underline the need , within the perspective of future multilateral WTO negotiations , to adopt an offensive strategy intended to protect Europe 's chances of developing an agricultural sector which meets these extremely high quality and safety standards .
Finally , Mr President , and to reply to the oral questions raised by the different political groups , you will understand that it is not possible to take a position today on the conclusions of the report of the Temporary Committee to follow up the recommendations on BSE as , due to lack of time , it has not been possible for the Council to study this report .
I note , in general , that the European Parliament and the Commission have carried out excellent work and that the Council largely took account of the European Parliament 's position in the context of its deliberations devoted to the Commission 's proposals following your recommendations of February this year .
I have no reason to doubt that the case will be the same for the proposals that the Commission will present following your conclusions of today .
Personally , I have taken note of the recommendations made by honourable Members of Parliament within the context of the inquiry into BSE and I will take note of the observations that you will make during the course of today 's debate .
I shall not fail to draw the Council 's attention to the recommendations and conclusions of your debate .
Before finishing , I would like to touch on two aspects relevant to the relations between the Parliament and the Council .
At the end of the work of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE , your Parliament had demanded a strengthening of its powers , particularly regarding agricultural policy which affects or which could affect health protection and food quality .
Important progress has also been made in this area , and you have highlighted this .
The Amsterdam Treaty has , in fact , considerably modified the legislative role of the European Parliament , including in this sector which is particularly close to your hearts .
Thus article 129 has been modified to take account of your requests .
In particular , the codecision procedure is anticipated , notwithstanding article 43 , in the adoption of veterinary and phytosanitary measures with the direct objective of public health protection .
The Luxembourg Presidency is extremely happy with this development , which it judges to be very positive .
We are convinced that it will contribute to the even greater improvement and development of Community legislation relating to the protection of human health .
Regarding the participation of the Council and Member States in the work of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE and the concerns expressed on the subject of cooperation between Member States governments ' , I would like to emphasize that the Council and the Member States have made great efforts to contribute to the work of this Committee of Inquiry .
As far as the Council is concerned , let me remind you that it provided all the information required of it by the Committee of Inquiry with regard to its deliberations on the subject of BSE .
What is more , Mr Yates , President-in-Office of the Council , replied positively to the Committee of Inquiry 's invitation and personally participated in its work , providing extremely complete and detailed information on the approach followed and the measures adopted in the past by the Council .
I myself addressed the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE to inform them of the package of measures adopted since February 1997 .
In addition , in compliance with article 3 of the interinstitutional decision of 19 April 1995 , the Council appointed a senior civil servant from its secretariat with authority to appear before the Committee of Inquiry .
Furthermore , I would point out that it is not for the Council to give an opinion on the follow-up given by Member States to the invitations of a Committee of Inquiry in compliance with article 3 , paragraph 2 , of the decision of 19 April 1995 .
I would like to remind you that the interinstitutional decision of 1995 expressly anticipates the possibility of a revision to take into account experience gained .
This possibility is defined in article 6 of the aforementioned decision .
On the occasion of my appearance before the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE , I believed I understood that the Members of Parliament wished to bring up this issue within the framework of the trialogue .
I have already informed the chairman of the General Affairs Council of this wish , which I personally consider to be a possible way of clarifying this question and of improving understanding between the institutions .
Mr President , the debate today once more brings out clearly the fact that in the areas of public health and food safety , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council have shared responsibilities and common duties .
It is therefore a question of uniting efforts and forces and of cooperating closely in this sphere .
I repeat the desire of the Council to encourage this cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you will be giving your opinion , during this sitting , on the report of the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE .
Nearly ten months ago to the day have passed since I came to Parliament to participate in the debate on the report of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE .
On that occasion , on 18 February , I shared with you the concrete conclusions that the Commission had already drawn from this major study .
We have acted without delay in order to rectify the weaknesses noted in the report .
Thus you will recall that the Commission decided , as from February , that an unprecedented restructuring of its department in charge of public health should take place .
This restructuring is not a simple administrative operation , but it corresponds well to the birth of a new political idea .
At Community level , all the players are now aware that the protection of health and food safety must figure amongst the highest of our priorities .
The Commission has put them at the heart of its programme of work for 1998 . And the Council has organized debates within four different fora .
On this occasion I would like to pay tribute in particular to the members of the Temporary Committee , especially its chairperson , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , and its rapporteur , Mr Böge .
An immense amount of work has been accomplished and an intense cooperation has taken place between the Temporary Committee and the departments of the Commission .
The results have been extremely fruitful and I am convinced that the mutually beneficial relations which have developed in response to this difficult issue have contributed significantly to the enhancement of dialogue between our two institutions .
Mr President , Mr Böge 's report , which is now submitted to you , is an indication of the work accomplished during these last months .
It is for you to measure the progress achieved .
As President of the Commission , however , I can but rejoice to note that an ambitious and fundamentally necessary objective has been achieved .
Anyone who has read the report can but note that the Commission has achieved virtually all of more than 70 recommendations and is committed to respecting precise deadlines for the implementation of those that the brief period of time given has not enabled it to accomplish .
I will not go into details regarding all of the measures that have been taken or are anticipated by the Commission .
They are numerous .
They are given in detail in the final report on the implementation of the recommendations on BSE which the Commission adopted on 8 October last .
They are influenced by a completely innovative and essential desire for transparency in order to reestablish citizen and consumer confidence . For consumers wish to be informed , to understand and to choose knowledgeably .
Mr President , more than 20 people have been victim to the new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .
Their families deserve our solidarity .
The Commission has decided to back the concrete support that your Parliament has agreed to give them .
We are confronted by immense expectations from our citizens .
Their fears relate not only to BSE , but also to other questions to which we must give clear responses .
On the basis of the Commission 's new approach , in-depth work has been carried out by the departments concerned in the areas of consumer health and food safety , with the aim of improving our capacity for action .
Let me give you the most outstanding examples .
We have undertaken an in-depth overhaul of the system of scientific advisory committees , governed by the principle of transparency , independence and excellence .
Legislative measures to fight against BSE and the new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease have been adopted .
Methods for monitoring respect of BSE legislation have been strengthened .
A good number of infringement procedures have been initiated following the inspection missions in Member States .
We have gone in a number of directions in order to ensure better effectiveness of control systems .
In this respect , I am committed to the fact that the proposals should be drawn up before February 1998 .
The research programmes of the Commission give a predominant place to research into transmissible spongiform encephalopathies .
Two large conferences have been jointly organized with you , the conference on meat-and-bone meals , and the conference on food laws .
Their results will be translated into concrete initiatives . Some measures have already been taken .
Thus we proposed the inclusion of agricultural raw materials in the directive governing liability for products .
The Agenda 2000 proposals contain important reforms of the common agricultural policy which move in the direction of an agriculture which is more respectful of human health and of the environment .
Mr President , we are today at the end of a first stage .
We are here to draw up a balance sheet and to talk about the future .
You are expecting the Commission to share its future intentions with you regarding the recommendations of the report of the Temporary Committee on BSE and , in particular , regarding those which , in the opinion of the Temporary Committee , have not been implemented or have been implemented insufficiently .
Your Temporary Committee has identified five specific recommendations which it considers have not been implemented .
Five out of more than seventy .
I would now like to concentrate on each one of these .
The Commission has not adopted measures to make , and I quote , " the authorities which have allowed the disease to appear and spread responsible for the financial costs of BSE ' .
In fact , I hope you will understand the reasons for not adopting such measures .
The crisis has led the Commission , as well as the Council , to take a series of legislative measures involving financial support to the eradication of BSE and to the economic consequences of BSE for the producers .
At the Florence European Council , solidarity was emphasized by the Heads of State and of Government .
This solidarity must remain intact , in particular when we are faced with major and complex crises .
Should we now initiate a financial exercise , independent of all consideration with regard to the legal capacity of the Commission , in order to attribute these charges to those responsible ?
How possible is it to name those presumed responsible ?
The exercise would not match up to the objective of solidarity that characterizes our Community , a solidarity which was furthermore underlined by the European Council of Florence in its conclusions .
I come , in this context , to another recommendation of the Committee of Inquiry .
This concluded that it was necessary for the Commission to bring immediately administrative proceedings against the United Kingdom for repayment of all sums allocated for the purposes of eradicating BSE .
This administrative action can only relate to control of the correct implementation of legislative decisions taken by the Council .
Consequently , within the context of the audit of the EAGGF accounts , the Commission will not fail to draw the financial consequences if the United Kingdom has not respected the Community regulations at issue , in accordance furthermore with the rules applying to all Member States .
It will do this with regard to controls on implementation of programmes to eradicate the disease .
This brings me to a slightly different subject .
What has happened to the financial sanctioning of companies who participated in the illegal trafficking of British beef ?
Let me remind you that the Member States are responsible for the notification of any company which has committed irregularities to the detriment of the Community budget .
In this case , most of the fraudulent transactions in British beef were destined for third party countries and have benefitted from the restoration of exports .
In September , we asked for reactions from Member States concerning companies having , to the knowledge of the Commission departments , participated in this traffic and we will draw the consequences of this .
I now come to another question .
Parliament has asked the Commission to institute proceedings in the European Court of Justice on account of the failure of Mr Hogg , UK Minister of Agriculture , to appear before the Committee of Inquiry on the basis of the interinstitutional decision of 19 April 1995 .
The Commission , as you know , did not do this .
Legally , according to our interpretation , such a recourse would have no chance of success . But we are agreed with you in theory .
To make our support of your request more concrete , I wrote to your President on 5 November indicating that the Commission fully supported your demand for obligatory appearance by government members of Member States before Committees of Inquiry of the European Parliament , following the example of members of the Commission , and that the interinstitutional decision of 1995 should be revised to take account of this .
It seems to me that this is a matter , if not of a legal obligation , then at least of a political one .
Furthermore , I must note that relations between the Council and Parliament seem to have improved .
Thus , the British Minister for Agriculture , Mr Cunningham , has appeared before your committee , and today , I am pleased to note the presence here of the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Fernand Boden .
This was not the case , you will recall , on 18 February .
We now come to the functioning of the Commission 's departments .
The Committee of Inquiry recommended individual disciplinary measures against Commission civil servants .
I would like to start by saying that since 1995 this Commission has been involved in an exercise of reform and global modernization of its administration .
In this respect I would particularly refer you to the SEM 2000 and MAP 2000 programmes .
Furthermore , the College will adopt , this very afternoon , here in Strasbourg , a new and important document regarding good and sound administrative and financial management .
In this document , the different possibilities for improving its ways of working are analyzed as far as professional shortcomings , financial irregularities , fraud and corruption are concerned .
Also , within this context the Commission anticipates the possibility of modifying its status .
More directly concerning the departments responsible for the fight against BSE , as I have already mentioned , we have completely restructured these departments .
This measure was necessary because the handling of the BSE affair had revealed a certain number of gaps and structural shortcomings .
With regard to possible disciplinary measures against individual staff members , after carefully examining the situation - and as you know I never refuse to accept disciplinary measures - the Commission came to the conclusion that there were not sufficient grounds for commencing disciplinary procedures , even if certain misjudgements were clearly made .
I would also like to emphasize that the work of our staff was certainly not facilitated by the existence of an inadequate system and by the extremely complex nature of the issue .
I would lastly like to mention the recommendation of the Committee of Inquiry regarding the possibility of a motion of censure being brought against individual members of the Commission .
My reply will hardly surprise you . We have , furthermore , pointed this out to the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Commission would not want to abandon the essential principle of collective responsibility . It is the guarantee of the independent exercise of the Commissions ' responsibilities in the general interest .
Any sanction of the Commission , just like its responsibilities , could only be collective and collegiate .
Furthermore , the Intergovernmental Conference shared the Commission 's point of view on this .
Mr President , together we have come a long way .
The work of the Temporary Committee is now finished .
I would like to reiterate the Commission 's full commitment to continuing the fruitful cooperation which this work has given rise to .
We will continue this cooperation within the context of the work of the permanent committees of Parliament .
With regard to this , I am also happy that the codecision procedure will from now on be applied to veterinary and phytosanitary questions , with the objective of protecting public health .
A great deal has already been achieved .
We have laid new foundations , healthy new foundations , and the real work starts now .
The Commission will present , twice per year , a report of activities regarding BSE to the European Parliament and to the Council .
We have additionally arranged a meeting with you for the end of 1998 .
A big conference on consumer health , organized jointly with you , which will give us the opportunity to measure the distance covered together and I am confident , along with the Council and Member States , for we firmly believe that only a close collaboration between the three institutions and the Council will succeed in restoring citizen and consumer confidence beyond the crucial question of protection of health .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , thank you !
What you have said today agrees to a large extent with what we have said , and I think it is unnecessary today to discuss differences between you and us or between you and the committee .

I will only make one short remark about what you said : the fact that Mr Cunningham , as British Minister for Agriculture , and Mr Boden , as President of the Council , appeared before the committee is not something I would call remarkable , however pleasant it was .
It should be taken for granted - excuse me , Mr President of the Commission - that ministers appear before a parliamentary body .
At this point , I would like to pass on immediately , and turn to the Council , because I have been able to negotiate with the Commission often enough in the last few months , and I make it clear that I am no longer speaking as chairperson of the committee , but on behalf of my group , the Party of European Socialists .
Mr Boden , I listened to you carefully , and I am convinced that you mean what you say .
The only problem is that you are one minister for agriculture out of 15 , and I am not sure that with all your goodwill you will find a majority in the Council .
I listened to you when you said that until now the Council has had no time to discuss many questions which were dealt with , for instance , in our oral questions .
This amazed me somewhat , because we have said nothing in the Temporary Committee that we had not said before in the Committee of Inquiry , and I would have expected that the Council , at each of its meetings , whether started by you or another President of the Council , would have as the first item on its agenda : BSE , the fight , consequences and what we have done wrong !
I do not hear you asking - and I am now saying this to you as a representative , I am sorry , Mr Boden - I do not hear you asking : what have we done wrong ?
You say that consumer and health protection must be considered , fine .
Why do not you say that we have neglected consumer and health protection , and now we want to consider it ?
That would be the correct formulation , Mr Boden .
I say again that this is said to you as the representative of the whole Agriculture Council , because you are now its President , and I would much rather say it to the German Minister of Agriculture , for instance , or other ministers of agriculture .
For instance , why do I still have the feeling that those with responsibility have understood nothing ?
Mr Boden , you said that the labelling of beef products is now new grounds for creating trust .
If that is so , and if you really seriously mean to create trust in this way - and I hope you mean it seriously , but I do not believe the other ministers do - if that is so , why could not you agree to the change of the legal basis , which Parliament and the Commission decided on together ?
Why did you have to depart from that and again choose the soft formulation of article 43 , which gives you the most power , which offers you a free ticket ?
Why , Mr Boden ?
Just tell me .
Tell me also why I still have the feeling that the crow syndrome rules in the Council .
One crow does not peck the other 's eyes out .
You said that people must be protected , including people who make their living from cattle .
I can understand that farmers must be protected , but I can also understand that the vast majority of the people of the European Union must be protected , and they are many more than the farmers !
You failed to do that in the Agriculture Council .
Why was it that the meat market and support for the market used to be more important than protection of health , and why should we believe that this has changed ?
Can you tell us ?
For instance , when Mr Santer 's Commission made a modest attempt in Agenda 2000 to decide on a change to agricultural prices , and to change the subsidy scheme , for instance , why did not you agree and rejoice about it ?
Why have I heard bleating and moaning and great fear from every minister for agriculture ?
We all know that the basic evil of what we are now experiencing , BSE and much more , including crime , lies in this subsidy scheme .
Why did not it come from you , why did not you say : we must make a clean break and change everything , we as ministers of agriculture will show that we have understood something .
Mr Boden , I am sorry that I must say that so sharply .
The Commission certainly has understood something .
How much it has understood we shall soon see .
I do not think the Agriculture Council has understood anything , or that the ministers of agriculture , except yourself , have understood anything , and we should monitor them all the more closely !
Mr President , in the interests of transparency can I declare an interest in that I am a beef farmer .
Few people in this Parliament will have any appreciation of the enormous amount of material that this temporary committee has looked at in detail over the last few months and great praise must be given to rapporteur Böge and the chairman for the way in which they have handled it .
The close scrutiny of commissioners , veterinary officers , scientists , ministry officials and many others who gave evidence has quite clearly shown that in the early days of this dreadful BSE epidemic there were mistakes at all levels , both at Commission and European level .
I stress European because , although the bulk of this problem has hit the United Kingdom , there is no doubt that there have been problems in other European countries .
It is a pity that we did not have a uniform European standard policy towards BSE from the start .
With the tonnages of contaminated material which were exported to mainland Europe from the United Kingdom , it was quite obvious that a few cases would appear .
I am delighted , Mr President , that Commissioner Fischler has taken a strong stance to create a European policy and get the same high standards in other European countries that we have been bound by in the United Kingdom .
Nor should we forget the huge knock-on costs to other industries such as transporters , renderers , slaughterhouses , which are now crippled by a devastatingly low market for beef animals and beef products .
That is looking back .
To look forward it is quite obvious from the statistics that , having had a peak of 37 , 000 cases three years ago and only 3 , 000 cases this year in the United Kingdom , the efforts of the last government and the present one have had a dramatic effect on the reduction of this disease .
But British hill farmers are being devastated and we must as soon as possible bring in a certified herds scheme , whereby farms can be declared clear and then , by a process of tagging and identification , make sure that meat can be traced from the animal to the butcher 's shop .
Mr President , can I support both the report from Mr Böge and the resolution .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , as a member both of the Committee of Inquiry and of the Temporary Committee to follow up the recommendations on BSE , I would particularly like to congratulate Mr Böge for all the work he has accomplished .
Mr President , unfortunately the fact that we are today bringing the work of the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE to a close does not mean we are going to stop talking about the so-called mad cow affair .
In fact , Mr President , I would like to underline the importance of information and transparency .
Throughout our work we have noted that for a long time everything possible has been done to get the issue forgotten , or rather to stifle it .
The European institutions will not remain credible unless transparency is the rule .
The European Parliament must remain vigilant on this point , for not only is the mad cow affair not finished , but there is nothing to say that other problems of a similar nature will not present themselves as well , be it hormones , GMOs or any other badly controlled new technology .
I must explain , Mr President , that I am of course not against technological developments , but the citizens of the Member States of the European Union must have confidence in these developments .
They will have this guarantee if they know that there is real transparency at the level of decision-making .
Both from the point of view of this report and of the development of the Commission structures , I note with satisfaction the creation and development of DG XXIV , under Mrs Bonino 's responsibility .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the need to preserve a balance between the different Directorates-General .
Let us take care that we are not robbing Peter to pay Paul ; I am thinking particularly of DG VI .
I would like to remind you that its mission is important and vast . We must preserve the necessary means to enable it to fulfil its task .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to remind you that I was one of the signatories to the motion of censure which was rejected by this House , and emphasize that , in this capacity , I will remain particularly vigilant with regard to this affair and with regard to the way in which the Commission implements my recommendation .
If I see that the issue is being buried , I will know how to jog your memory when the time comes .
Mr President , I also would like to agree with those , who are congratulating the members of the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE , the chairman , the rapporteurs , and the members , on the work they have done .
It is a good example of how this Parliament works and how things should be done in an Committee of Inquiry .
Thankfully the European Commission has acted upon most recommendations , and that means that as far as we are concerned , the sting has been taken out of the debate .
We are pleased with the fact that every six months the Commission will be reporting on the state of this dossier .
This will mean that we will be able to look into the situation regarding the quality of our food .
We think that is extremely important .
We also think it is important for the Commission to raise in international fora , because I find it increasingly difficult to explain to European farmers what they are or are not allowed to do for this or that reason , while this does not apply to farmers outside Europe .
Agreement on these issues needs to be reached in an international framework .
Regarding the appearance of ministers before committees of inquiry , I understood from Mr Santer that it is legally impossible to force ministers to do so .
I think that all possible resources must be used politically to do just that .
It is unacceptable that a certain parliament ratifies a Maastricht Treaty that makes this type of committee of inquiry possible , and that same parliament then endorses certain ministers not appearing .
To my mind that logic is unacceptable .
One of the issues which needs to be resolved as soon as possible is the extent to which animal meal can be used in animal feed .
I assume that sick animals cannot be used , but what can be done with other animal meal ?
That needs to be sorted out as soon as possible .
One last point .
Participation by Members of this Parliament as observers at scientific committees is a good thing , because openness is good .
Nonetheless , I favour a separation of powers .
Parliament can never take responsibility for the decisions of these committees before they are made .
There is no doubt that first the Committee of Inquiry into BSE and then the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry demonstrated serious shortcomings in the assessment of risk , control and application of the Community regulations both by the Member States and by the Commission .
The European Parliament chose the conditional motion of no-confidence as a means of creating a new relationship of cooperation between the European Parliament and the Commission ; in some ways , this choice has borne fruit , as indicated in previous speeches .
However , many problems still remain unresolved and the speeches made by the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission do not seem to have dispelled all doubts .
For this reason , the Green Group intends to strongly oppose the need to satisfy all those requirements pointed out by the two Committees on BSE , to ensure consumer protection and to protect the health of the citizens and the animals reared .
I would now like to touch briefly on several aspects requiring further commitment and further cooperation between the Member States and all the institutions of the European Union : the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
First of all , we should recall that other cases of this disease will occur owing to negligence and omissions in the policy of combatting BSE and we should be prepared to intervene in these cases , avoiding a repetition of what happened in Belgium , where an infected animal carcass was converted into animal meal .
Just as there will be further cases of BSE , there will also be further cases of the Creutzfeldt-Jakob variant , which is now at the incubation stage , because the scientific connection between the pathogenic agent of BSE and the new Creutzfeldt-Jakob variant has unfortunately been established .
We therefore need to adapt our monitoring and actions to the safety and screening of citizens .
With regard to what President Santer said , we also need the means to make a financial contribution in solidarity with families affected and to provide compensation for the sick and their relatives , with the involvement of the Member States as well .
Drawing the necessary conclusions from all of this , we can say that we need to establish a new policy of controls right down the line , from company to table , and to apply the principle of precaution adequately .
From this point of view , we need to remember that the BSE affair is symbolic and should serve to improve the entire consumer protection policy and lead to a system of farming that is compatible with the environment .
We will soon have to deal with new problems : revision of food legislation , on which a Green Paper has been drawn up but leaves room for serious doubt , particularly with regard to the policy on hormones , antibiotics in animal feeds , novel foods , the introduction of genetically modified organisms into foods and the future of veterinary salmonella .
For all these reasons , we hope that this year , with the half-yearly reports from the Commission and joint monitoring body , the various institutions of the European Union will find adequate answers that satisfy the requirements of the consumers and citizens of the Union .

Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Party of the European Radical Alliance , I would like to express my simultaneous satisfaction and disappointment at the situation and the way the BSE question has been handled : first my satisfaction , as an MEP , at the very important role played by Parliament in dealing with this issue and stimulating the Commission ; and my satisfaction at seeing how the Commission has in many ways responded to the legitimate expectations of this Parliament , which is also an expression of European public opinion , by curbing the risks of the mad cow affair , carrying out inspections and not repeating the mistakes of the past .


But I am also disappointed to see that not all our recommendations have been followed by the Commission , which has perhaps been too timid , President Santer , with regard to the accompanying measures , the reorganization has been good , the work carried out so far has been very good , particularly that of the Commissioner responsible for this sector and by the Commission as a whole , but in my opinion it is a pity not to have had the courage to go right to the end , as Parliament requested , both internally and with regard to measures against the state which , I have to say , was at the origin of this crisis .
I am also disappointed with those MEPs who relied on slaughter and called for a mass cull , thereby giving us and the Commission an inappropriate image .
It is just as well that those threats were not followed up and that the proposed censure motion did not materialize ; Parliament will vote seriously on a critical wording but naturally cannot fail to recognize that a lot of good work has already been done .
Mr President , I also wish to join with those who have congratulated the chairman of the committee and the rapporteur on doing a very fine job .
I certainly welcome this report as a basis of ensuring that we are never again faced with such a serious or difficult problem as BSE has been to us .
Beef farmers in the United Kingdom have had to bear the maximum pain because of the short cuts taken by the meat and bonemeal industry .
We must learn from our mistakes of the past and ensure that they never again occur .
Yes , we need transparency and greater openness , and we must restore to consumers confidence that the food they buy in the shops is of the highest possible standard .
We must now look to the future .
I welcome the present approach of Mr Cunningham , because since he came to office he has certainly transformed the relationship between the Temporary Committee and the UK Government .
I was pleased that the report was able to avoid some of the more extreme views held by a minority of people .
As I say , we must now move on .
I also believe we must end the witch-hunt that has existed against Commission officials and , indeed , to a large extent , against the United Kingdom Government .
It is important to build confidence and return to the highest standards in production of all of our food and ensure that the food imported into the European Union is of the same high standards as that produced by farmers within the European Union .
In future we must base our decisions on totally scientific facts and not hyped-up misinformation put forward by the media and the press .
I wish to congratulate the Commission on the positive way it is facing up to the recommendations made to it by the Temporary Committee and I would like to put on record my tribute to both Commissioners Fischler and Bonino and their staff for the help , assistance and the responsible way in which they have approached this problem and for the way in which they have faced up to their responsibilities .
I would like to say , as I come from Northern Ireland where our beef farmers have suffered greatly from the export ban on UK beef , that I hope that both the Commission and the Council will face up to their responsibilities .
I hope that when the Florence commitments are achieved , as I believe they have been achieved in Northern Ireland , the ban will be lifted immediately , and there will be no foot-dragging or drawing back and that the increasing demands we are making will be met .
I look forward to that .
I wish you well in the future .
I hope that we never again have to return in this House , on any similar occasion or at any similar time , to such a problem .
Mr President , Mr Böge has presented us with a report from the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations on BSE , which has amazed all of us .
Cows continue to die in Belgium , France and Great Britain , but everything is fine .
Even if this includes cows born since the banning of meat-and-bone meal , and even if one Belgian cow finds its way into 1200 tonnes of meal , it is not serious !
There are 21 official cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .
As long as all this does not affect the Commission , it does not matter .
Scientific proof of transmission from animals to human beings is presented , and that is not worrying .
Meat-and-bone meal continues to circulate , to be produced , to be consumed . What is needed is transparency !
In the name of transparency , Mrs Green removed the non-aligned and the European Radical Alliance MEPs from the Committee - 10 million voters do not have the right to transparency : they can die !
So in exchange the Commission has offered us a few crumbs about internal reorganization , the ruling on the withdrawal of specified risk materials from the food chain , a small crumb of ECU 50 million for research , a slight improvement in the treatment of animal waste meals , but the most important thing has not been done , Mr President , Mr Commissioner . There have been no disciplinary measures against those responsible for serious errors .
Only poor Mr Mansito had to go into retirement . Mr Hoelgaard , from Denmark , has been promoted to director of vegetable products so , after poisoning the animals , he is now in charge of the vegetables .
Mr Meldrum has been pensioned off , that is the only punishment , and nothing at all has happened to Mr Marchant .
And as for that wheeler-dealer McSharry , he is clearly doing alright .
Neither the responsibility of the British government , nor of the De Mulder brothers has been considered . The British government has not apologized , if not for this crime against the bovine species , and I do not know whether it is indictable or not , then for the crime against the human victims , because seeing your herds destroyed is no negligible psychological tragedy for the breeders , nor for the crime against the taxpayers , if you believe Mr Tillich who , in his general report on the 1998 budget clearly told us the costs of these measures : ECU 2.2 billion in 1997 , and a billion more indirectly .
I thought the European Commission was supposed to defend the financial interests of the European Union .
Furthermore , there remain discrepancies . It is true that carcasses continue to be processed as meat-and-bone meal for non-ruminants , specified risk materials which are banned in the European Union are nevertheless being imported from the United States of America , such as hormone-treated meat .
The cows will probably be labelled , but in the year 2000 !
For two years , no labels , no controls at Dover , no controls on the embargo !
But worse still , Northern Ireland - the last British colony along with Gibraltar , now that Hong Kong has disappeared - has become a Trojan " cow ' .
This is a little of what has essentially been done - smoke screens , technical smoke devices .
It is true , Mr President of the Commission , that the only effective measure would have been the banning of free movement , but to tell you that is the only effective measure would be to strike at the heart of European construction !
Mr President , I would like to say a few words on how I feel at this stage in the debate .
First , I want to underline that what we have been doing together over the last six months is part of a process which is not yet completed , it is simply one stage of a process which must be followed .
It is clear that we could not sort everything out in six months .
This is why we have told you about a whole series of measures to be taken in a given period of time .
It must be clear to us , between ourselves .
We are at an important stage , not the final point .
It is not a question of now relaxing the pressure or putting an end to reciprocal controls , to dialogue between Parliament and the Commission .
The contact will probably no longer be through the Temporary Committee , but I think that we must at least continue to inform and involve the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , as we have done over the last six months .
Thus , ladies and gentlemen , the issue must not be reduced to the two reports and the conference to be organized at the end of 1998 for this debate to be fuelled ; relations of a permanent nature must be continued with the Committee responsible for consumer protection .
Furthermore , I think that this period has shown us that in such difficult situations there are no ready made answers , things are not always clear .
We , too , would like it to be that way , for then everything would be clearer for us .
But unfortunately that is not how things are .
Virtually every day , every week , science is making new discoveries on this very subject .
And we have experienced this together , drawing up legislative proposals only to have to change them in the light of scientific advice which has moved in an opposite direction .
So that is where we are , that is what has been done in a dynamic process .
In such a complex context , I think a positive factor has been the cooperation between the Commission and Parliament over the last six months , which has demonstrated that it is possible to make progress , admittedly not always peaceful , sometimes in a climate of confrontation , but in a spirit of dialogue which is the most suited to helping us .
As far as we are concerned , we think we will soon be able to complete the structure responsible for control .
The scientific advisors are already in place ; the scientific committee has its procedure , which everyone knows .
As regards the control structure , we think that it will be operational by the end of 1998 , with around one hundred inspectors .
There is a third factor I would like to emphasize here .
Everyone is very pleased with the separation we have been able to establish between the legislative powers and the control structure ; I would however like to point out to you that this is not the methodology followed by the majority of Member States .
This is therefore another very complex aspect of a situation in which legislation , controls and scientific advice are separate at Community level but not at national level .
This leads us to feel that more efforts must be made to strengthen dialogue between Member States and to encourage them to improve their way of doing things as well , given that primary responsibility for control will continue to fall to Member States .
We will perhaps have the opportunity of talking about all of these factors by the end of the debate , and we will see that these are the three factors which - it seems to me - are the most obvious in this affair .
This issue is not black and white , it unfortunately also contains a lot of grey and a lot of grey matter and that should encourage us to observe the principle of caution , whilst obviously taking into account the fact that even this principle has aspects that would be interesting to analyze in depth .
I would like to thank all those who have joined in the debate .
I am sure that the Council will be more cooperative from now on .
In any case , we can always hope .
The reception is different , of that there is no doubt .
Thank you for your presence here today .
We felt more isolated a few months ago .
Like the President , I would like to emphasize that this fact alone is proof that you wish to rise to your responsibilities .
That is all I can say to you at this stage , although I would like to leave time to answer any further questions a little later on perhaps .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to restrict myself to a few aspects of the Böge report for which I am directly responsible .
First , food safety and quality , and at the same time improving the competitiveness of European agricultural products .
As you know , these are primary aims and leitmotifs of the agricultural part of Agenda 2000 .
I therefore welcome the clear , relevant conclusions in the report , and I am grateful for the support of the European Parliament for introducing social and environmental support criteria into the future formation of the common agricultural policy , as I proposed in Agenda 2000 .
However , we shall have to do a lot of work together to convince the Member States .
I also welcome the desire for locally adapted measures , and the demand for regional or local consideration of the optimum specific degree of intensiveness .
I consider this demand to be much more reasonable , and I am grateful for the further development of this position by this Chamber .
To this extent , increasing the flexibility of Order 20 / 78 is a logical consequence .
I am very sympathetic to the idea of linking compensation payments to a code of good agricultural practice in the sense of sustainable farming husbandry .
I hope that the President-in-Office will be able to back me this afternoon when the Council of Agriculture Ministers will define its attitude to Agenda 2000 .
However , I see a certain contradiction to the demand of the European Parliament , as listed further up , for an increase in cultivated areas and encouragement of extensive agriculture .
But we shall certainly go more deeply into this point as the occasion arises in Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture .
As you know , the Commission has appealed against the WTO panel on hormone meat .
There is no divergence here .
However , it seems important to me that you should use your parliamentary contacts , particularly to the USA , to make clear to our trading partners that we will not give way on the hormone question .
Now let me go into some points of the report .
The aim of ensuring high standards for the protection of the health of consumers must be achieved through legislation , but also through implementation and monitoring by the Member States and implementation on site .
We shall therefore have to continue checking systematically whether our legislation meets this requirement , and where revision and adjustment are required , they must be carried out .
Additionally , we shall use the updates of existing legislation , which take place regularly to adjust to technological novelties , as an opportunity to carry out a thorough check on these regulations .
We must be clear that we are facing a work programme which , as my colleague Emma Bonino has said , is a continuous process to be dealt with on a permanent basis , and its effectiveness also depends on the available resources .
As the first point of this programme , my departments are working on an improvement of the Community system of controls in the veterinary field .
Another field in which there are several unanswered questions is the use of animal and bone meal to feed animals .
The Commission is following the only possible path by basing its policy on the principles of safe sourcing , safe processing and safe use .
You indicate two specific problems in this connection in the parliamentary report , the question of what should happen to dead animals and the question of whether we should feed animal protein to herbivores at all .
We must have a serious debate about both questions .
As I announced at the meat-and-bone meal conference , these questions will be discussed in the context of a public consultation .
The appropriate consultation paper has been prepared and sent to Parliament , and since 14 November it has also been available on the Internet .
Research is also subject to permanent further development , and the list of research priorities is becoming longer and longer .
We now have to deal with a new kind of disease , and the research requirement is enormous .
The Commission is trying to coordinate the research activities of the Member States in this field , and to provide money for research projects .
To ensure sufficient interest in research by the scientists , particularly about questions of applied BSE research , we should consider , together with Parliament , whether we should also follow new paths .
You say in your report that in future the Commission should take action promptly , as early as possible , in the health field .
I agree with you entirely .
However , I would like to clarify that this is only possible when , among other things , the necessary resources are available .
BSE has faced the European institutions with a unique challenge to overcome a crisis of European dimensions .
Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry and the subsequent committee have shown new ways to formulate our policy in the field of health and consumer protection , but also of agricultural policy .
I would like us to take this path of cooperation between Commission and Parliament .
Thank you !
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to respond briefly to the questions and comments which have been made to the Council .
I note that you have appreciated the presence of the Council at this debate and that you have confidence in its president , but it seems to me that you lack a little confidence with regard to the Agriculture Council .
I would like to tell Mrs Roth-Behrendt that she is wrong and that this mistrust of the Agriculture Council is not justified .
Furthermore , this Council has interrupted its debate on Agenda 2000 , on which a decision must be taken before tomorrow evening , to highlight the importance it accords to this debate and the problem of food security .
I will also try to show , during this speech , that the Council , and in particular the Agriculture Council , has not been idle in its efforts to improve the problems of health and food safety and that it has tried to follow the recommendations and proposals made by the Commission in this regard .
I would also like to say that , in our deliberations , priority is not given to social or economic considerations , although they are important for a number of farmers .
I have emphasized that the Council has always acted by giving overall priority to the protection of public health .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt reproaches the Council for not having taken the article proposed by the European Parliament as a legal basis for a regulation on the labelling of beef and veal and the registration of cows .
On this issue I would like to say that the choice of an appropriate legal basis , in accordance with consistent legal practice of the European Court of Justice , does not depend on political considerations but must be based on the content of the act to be adopted .
Regarding the regulation on identification and labelling , the Council considered , again following European Court of Justice precedent , that given the current clauses of the treaty , article 43 was the appropriate and sufficient legal basis since this regulation concerns the production and marketing of agricultural products listed in annex II of the treaty and it contributes to the achievement of certain objectives of the common agricultural policy stated in article 39 .
Of course , if the Council did not follow the Commission 's proposal regarding this legal basis , which was modified virtually at the last minute following a debate in the European Parliament , it should still be recognized that the Council carried out specific and very rapid work and that it tried to bring into force an essential regulation , for we all know that registration of animals and cast-iron traceability of their movements are essential to be able to eradicate these diseases effectively and rapidly .
It is a precondition for all reliable and controllable labelling of meat and meat products .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt also criticized the Council for not having approved the proposals for price reductions proposed by the Commission .
On this subject , I would like to say that the Agriculture Council is of the opinion that farmers ' incomes are not high enough for them to be reduced any further .
The Council is of the opinion that , given the Agenda 2000 proposals , we must now insist on defining and confirming an identity for European agriculture , an identity with an image of which the European Parliament would approve , a multifunctional agriculture , enduring , spread over the whole of Europe , which respects the environment and animal welfare and which offers products of a safe and reliable quality .
I hope that , when we recommence the work of the Agriculture Council this afternoon , my colleagues will be unanimous in affirming and defending this European agriculture identity , both inside and outside the Community .
If this is the case , I believe we will have taken a step in the right direction , which the European Parliament also wants , in order to promote an agricultural sector which respects health and safety .

Mr President , I too welcome what my colleagues have been able to do in the committee and I salute the real heroes of this report - Mr Medina , Mr Böge and Mrs Roth-Behrendt - for the major work they have done , and also those in the Commission who have interacted with us in an extremely positive way over the past six months .
BSE and CJD have been a nightmare for Europe for some years .
Many have lost their livelihoods and some have lost their lives .
The Medina report and its follow-up have shown that the European Parliament can take an appropriate initiative by itself in this matter .
It is another form of co-decision , except that here we were not responding to proposals that came to us from the Commission or the Council but taking a view because of the absence of such proposals at an earlier stage .
The criticisms of the Commission during the debate on the Medina report were made in that spirit .
We should acknowledge quite properly that the Commission has made considerable advances , in particular through DG XIV , in the last six months .
Because of that , by far the majority view in my group and in others as well , is that a vote of censure would be inappropriate .
There are many things which still trouble us .
One is the somewhat dilatory attitude to disciplinary procedures within the Commission itself but that is no ground for a vote of censure .
We said at the outset that while we were concerned with issues of public health and safety , we are not a committee of public safety in the French revolutionary sense , calling for heads , calling for show trials .
We simply want to make certain that the lessons with regard to internal discipline are learned as effectively as some others .
We also feel that the Council was lethargic early on in its response to the Commission 's very necessary proposals for health and safety and the treatment of risk materials throughout the Community .
The whole of our committee , in particular on its visit to the United Kingdom , was moved by the plight of the CJD victims and their families which was eloquently expressed to us by Mr and Mrs Churchill .
The whole committee wanted to express solidarity with the victims of this terrible disease and their families .
We know that this must be material sympathy and support , as well as mere moral support .
It must involve the Member States as well as the Commission , and we look forward to initiatives on both sides in that regard .
Speaking for myself , an inquiry into the origins of CJD in the UK is long overdue and I shall do all I can to try to bring it about .
The argument in principle is settled and there should now be no unnecessary delay over the details .
The UK Government welcomes this report .
This time there is none of the spiteful criticism that was directed at Mr Medina 's earlier report .
When he came before the committee the minister , Dr Cunningham , made it perfectly clear that the committee would be right to call him and that he would always attend .
It is better to lay some stress on the positive aspects of that , rather than go into the legal quibbles of what is or is not requested or permitted or demanded under the Interinstitutional Agreement .
The United Kingdom has been at the centre of the BSE epidemic from the beginning but , with the precautionary measures which have now been put into effect , it is entitled to be seen as setting an example in health and safety standards , including the safe storage of rendered carcases .
A number of people have referred to this .
I would simply point out that whilst everything has been done to meet the conditions of the Florence agreement , it is absolutely the essence of health and safety that rendered carcases - in the form of meat and bonemeal in which they are stored - should be kept in conditions of absolute security and safety until they can be safely incinerated .
We should not be demanding that the whole stockpile be put up the chimney at once .
We believe that all Member States should now be prepared to join in precisely the same preventive measures which have already been implemented in the United Kingdom .
Recent events in Belgium have shown that BSE can occur in states which felt they were free of it and that mistakes can be made in analysis and in the final destiny of the carcasses concerned .
I do not say that in any spirit other than one of sympathy and - to use the word that the President himself used today - solidarity with any country anywhere which finds itself affected by BSE in the way that we in the United Kingdom have been .
The answer is not to clamour for BSE-free regions or zones but to recognize that throughout the European Union we are a single zone which needs total security , safety , traceability and vigilance as the soundest basis for consumer confidence and for beef to be traded once again throughout the Community on its merits and in a market where that confidence has been restored .
My final point is just to say that in the future this process of scrutiny must continue and I look forward to the information campaign on food safety which DG XXIV is planning for 1998 .
I hope that campaign will be launched during the British Presidency with full backing from Member States and consumer groups .
From all of this , after so much distress , much good can come for both consumers and producers in the Community .
Mutual trust between them and a proper regime of health and safety has to be the outcome of the BSE crisis .
Mr President , this Parliament is often reproached for acting somewhat irresponsibly .
Against this reproach , which is not always unjustified , it can be said that where it truly has power this Parliament acts responsibly and also achieves something .
We in this committee have achieved something .
We have promises that in future health , the environment and consumer protection will be treated as more important than the other aims of the internal market .
We have promises that our agricultural policy will be changed in such a way that dimensions , quantities and areas are not the most important criteria , but we put our bets on quality , class , health and sustainable economics .
We have also achieved something on democratic politics .
Work in the Commission today is organized differently from a little while ago .
Transparency is something which we have experienced in the last days and weeks .
The relevant legislation will in future take place with the responsible cooperation of Parliament .
At least we hope so , and we hope so at the latest on the basis of the changes of authority which the Treaty of Amsterdam will bring with it .
We have not achieved everything .
We have not really sanctioned any individual responsibilities .
But in this connection we have the promise of the President of the Commission to ensure by a new disciplinary law that in future we shall have an appropriate legal basis if irregular behaviour occurs .
We have no real compensation for the victims , but at least we have starts in the right direction , and we expect that solutions for the future will be found by cooperation between this Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
We have not achieved everything , and therefore we must continue to work together in the coming months , so that the consequences of the BSE scandal are appraised and that we all profit from the work of the two BSE committees .
Mr President , for the food sector , food safety and quality must surpass all other considerations .
Profitability cannot be at the expense of consumer rights and welfare .
BSE has been an expensive lesson for Europe and one that cannot ever be repeated .
The human tragedy can never be forgotten .
I very much appreciate President Santer 's acknowledgement this morning of that human tragedy .
He treated it in a very sensitive manner .
In supporting the report before Parliament , it is to the credit , I believe , of the Commission that regulations were quickly put in place to address both the eradication of BSE and , more importantly , measures to prevent a recurrence .
In this regard I have to say that the work of the special committee and the views of Parliament were also significant .
I am pleased to say many of them were taken on board by the Commission .
I want to say in relation to BSE that farmers were the innocent victims of circumstances beyond their control .
Farmers are not normally involved in compounding feedstuffs and when they purchased their animal feed they were not always aware of the actual protein content .
On the question of food security and food quality , we must ensure , and I think this is important in the context of the next world trade talks , that the European Union commitment to consumer protection does not place our consumers at risk or place our industry at a competitive disadvantage .
We have faced up to the importance of food security and food quality and we must also ensure that our consumers are fully protected in the broader world trade .
Mr President , I would like to look at the deficit of political responsibility which has become so clear through this case .
It is quite clear that where economic interests and massive promotion combine with subsidies , outrages are almost compulsory .
There we should fill in the institutional gaps .
One is the absolute demand for parliamentary responsibility for European agricultural policy .
There we will not let go !
The second is political responsibility against officials .
Something has been promised by the Commission , we shall wait and see what comes .
We have established a Commission political responsibility .
That has been good and helpful , and we shall maintain it .
But one point is not fulfilled , and that is the political responsibility of the national governments .
It is a scandal if a government breaks the law , and can actually do it without any political sanction !
Here we , as the European Parliament , must work together more strongly with the national parliaments , particularly the oppositions .
Final point : it is intolerable that such wrong behaviour has no financial consequences !
We must demand that if a government , a state , burdens all the others with such massive costs , these costs can then be demanded back from that government .
This is an absolutely central demand which we shall pursue further !
Mr President , I will try to be brief .
I want to concern myself with what the President-in-Office said here .
That seems to me to be very near the truth .
Mr Boden , you ignore the fact that the Member States have a very poorly developed awareness of Community law , particularly in the case of BSE .
States can declare that they do not think about applying the standard which should be applied to animal meal , for instance .
The Commission has to fall back on lengthy breach of treaty proceedings .
What matters here is that we in Parliament enable the Commission to react faster , to take the appropriate actions for people 's health .
It is also necessary , and you said nothing about this , for the veterinary controls within states to be made effective .
In Germany , for instance , they must become independent .
Inspectors have a link there , either an employee relationship or a fee relationship , so that they depend on the slaughterhouses .
What matters here is that we should decide on independent veterinary control , and that must also be put through by Parliament and the Commission .
I would have criticized the Commission much more if I had not heard your speech .
For instance , you mentioned labelling .
The only point on which you were unanimous was the rejection of Parliament and the Commission !
In this matter you have made compromise after compromise , and what came out of it was what the Commission submitted and Parliament 's proposals for improvement !
That is a scandal !
Excuse me , Mr President , I would love to speak for ten more minutes , to give the Council a real rocket at last !
Mr President , very briefly , of course .
There is an additional problem with regard to the entire BSE dossier , namely that the entire investigation is threatened with collapse as the result of an additional situation , and that is why I find the report somewhat incomplete .
Indeed , in addition to the BSE dossier , there is organized crime , which has made use of this file to transfer food products illegally and on a massive scale from Great Britain to countries within Europe , and also to other countries outside the European Union .
This is a case of fraud which we have raised repeatedly in other temporary committees of inquiry , and I would request that this dossier is in any case taken on board by the Committee on Budgetary Control , and that is why we have tabled a number of amendments on this matter in order that this dossier , which in addition to the ordinary BSE dossier is pending , will also be given a chance .

Mr President , when at 9.15 a.m. this morning the President asked Members to leave the chamber as quickly as possible , that happened en masse . Nonetheless I am glad that most colleagues have returned in the meantime .
As far as BSE is concerned , the rapporteur points out that the European Commission has followed up most of the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry , or at least a start has been made .
I do not believe that trust in the European Commission has been affected .
The fight against BSE and against CJD requires guaranteed safety of animal materials intended for human consumption .
The European Commission has therefore quite rightly introduced new standards for the processing of meat-and-bone meal as from 1 April this year .
That as many as ten Member States have not implemented them is a serious omission .
I would like to be told the Commission 's position regarding the processing of hazardous cattle organs in gelatin and tallow .
The decree of June this year aimed at zero risk .
There was every reason for that , considering the recently proved link between BSE and CJD .
Yet the Commission appears to be abandoning the ban on the processing of risk organs in gelatin and tallow .
That such a ban endangers the availability of medical drugs , I beg to doubt .
Australia , New Zealand and European companies as well are able to produce gelatin according to European standards , in other words without organs .
Does the Commission not give in a little too quickly to the commercial policy pressure of the United States ?
Although it would have been better if the British minister , Mr Hogg , had appeared in front of the Committee of Inquiry , I think it is an over-reaction to want to compel the members of the governments of Member States to appear at a Committee of Inquiry of the European Parliament .
Governments are answerable to their national parliament ; the European Parliament is overplaying its hand on this .
Improvements of veterinary controls in accordance with the working programme is a good thing .
The European Commission will never be able to take the place of national control systems .
The European services fulfil an additional role .
Cooperation and coordination with the national control bodies will remain necessary .
Mr President , I welcome the submission of the report .
It shows clearly what actions the Commission has taken during the BSE crisis - taken late , but taken - and what actions it has neglected to take .
This means that many of Parliament 's demands have been put into effect , and some have remained open .
The rapporteur , Mr Böge , has spoken of a bill of exchange on the future .
But first I put the question whether the Commission can be released from its political responsibility .
I would like to suggest a comparison .
Austrian criminal law recognizes the concept of making good the damage , so that if the accused is only slightly guilty , he can be acquitted .
Let me now stay with my image and discuss how the Commission is making good the damage .
The efforts of the Commission to make good the damage can be clearly recognized in the report .
It speaks of a new openness , the responsibilities of the Directorate-General for Consumer Policy and Health Protection were extended , and actions to restore the function of the market were taken .
The Commission has thus attempted to make good the damage .
But in the end this all happened only because of the massive pressure from Parliament and an indignant public , and unfortunately it happened far too late !
The EP drew attention to the BSE problem as early as 1990 .
For far too long , the Commission let itself be led by the nose by individual Member States in carrying out its duty of control , without doing anything about it .
I know that the Commission itself is not directly responsible for the individual Member States ' lack of will to carry out the controls , but it should have fulfilled its role as guardian of the treaties long ago .
There lies the politically guilty behaviour of the Commission .
I come back to my image .
Is acquittal of the Commission by Parliament justified ?
Unfortunately , article 144 of the treaty only provides for a vote of no confidence against the entire Commission .
As long as this threshold exists , it will continue to be difficult to demand political responsibility in future .
I regret this , and the citizens of Europe will not understand it !
The debate will continue at 3 p.m.
Votes
I wish to inform the House that due to a technical error in the tabling of amendments to the Linkohr report , for which the vote was due to take place today , an amendment tabled by the Green Group has not been translated and distributed .
The vote on the Linkohr report is thus postponed until tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon , to enable the rapporteur and the Members to become acquainted with the text .
May I furthermore remind you that the vote on the Resolutions regarding the Kyoto Conference on climate change will also take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , on a point of order under to Rule 24.2 of the Rules of Procedure , which states that a reply to a written question should have been given within 30 days .
Well , Mr President , I put a written question to the President of this Parliament in December last year .
It was question 3 / 97 about the report of the Vice-President of Parliament , a report dated 18 November 1996 , on the installation of 128 extra shower cubicles for Members of Parliament in Brussels , at a cost of 90 million Belgian francs .
Everyone who can add up knows that 90 divided by 128 makes 703 , 125 Belgian francs per cubicle .
The answer normally has to be approved by the Bureau .
This answer was already on file at the Bureau of Parliament as far back as May .
Twice I have written to ask for an explanation .
Up until today I still have not received an answer ; it is now eleven months after the date the question was put .
The Bureau is meeting today , and I am asking for this be put on the agenda today , so that I will receive an answer after eleven months .
Mr Vandemeulebroucke , please be assured that this very afternoon your question is going to be submitted to the Bureau and you will receive all the necessary explanations .
Mr President , on a point of order , I want to raise a matter concerning a statement today in one of the Irish papers - The Star - attributed to an MEP , Ms McKenna , where she makes an accusation : ' Concerning the new building in Belgium there are people in Brussels getting massive financial backhanders for the buildings .
There is serious racketeering going on for this . '
In addition she makes a false accusation ...
That is not a point of order .
I must therefore ask you to stop .
Mr President , on a point of order : is it possible for you to make clear that the socalled Herod premium is hidden behind this order ?
It is about slaughtering mere calves , and this has rightly fallen into disrepute .
The animal protection organizations have rightly fought against it .
We have submitted an amendment to insert that , so that it is also clear in the Chamber , and so that people know what they are voting about .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , all the Members have read this document , which is without debate .
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
The undersigned will vote against all reports concerning the slaughter of calves unless they include bans or restrictions on the production of so-called white veal .
Colino Salamanca report ( A4-0330 / 97 )
Owing to the nature of the Portuguese sugar industry , and in order to keep it viable , we consider it essential to maintain national subsidies to Portuguese sugar-beet producers in addition to the framework laid out by the Commission .
Sugar-beet is an agricultural option which is economically viable . It facilitates crop rotation and in some regions it is contributing to an increase in agricultural production .
Against this background , we should not forget that the quota was increased not long ago to make the Portuguese sugar-beet conversion unit viable .
Furthermore , the Sturdy report on sales of agricultural products has already predicted a gradual decrease in subsidies to Portuguese sugar-beet producers up to 2001 , and the present proposal by the Commission is going down the same road .
So we cannot accept the cancellation of national subsidies after 2001 , as proposed by the Commission .
We also think that it is premature to reach any conclusion on the subject before the reform of the COM on sugar , which should take place before the 2000 / 2001 marketing campaign .
Apart from that , because sugar-beet growing is a Portuguese speciality , those subsidies should continue in order to support a profitable form of agriculture in one of countries most seriously affected by the CAP .
We therefore support Mr Colino Salamanca 's proposed alteration to article 2 of the Commission 's proposal , and thus we vote in favour of the report .
Mr President , I would like to ask you to have my voting machine checked .
It failed to function several times during the voting .
I therefore ask you to put into the minutes that I wanted to vote for the Greens ' amendment about the Herod premium .
Heinisch Report ( A4-0358 / 97 )
We did not vote against this report because it concerns a technical change of the legal basis , but we do consider it appropriate to underline Turkey 's major deficiencies with regard to human rights .
We demand that Turkey respects and improves human rights , strengthens democracy , creates a non-military solution to the Kurdish question and a peaceful solution of the Cyprus question .
, in writing . ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the proposals on Turkey and establishing the Community 's position on the Customs Union Joint Committee .
The proposal is merely of a technical nature and concerns the procedure for establishing the Community 's position .
We are in no doubt that the European Parliament 's influence on this subject has already given democracy strength in Turkey .
The Danish Social Democrats believe that conditions in Turkey are such that quite simply there should not be any financial assistance from the EU at the moment .
To get public assistance , Turkey should observe human rights , accept and follow the rules of democracy and developments in the country should be monitored by a supervisory body .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Mr President , I should like to ask for your permission to make a brief personal statement under Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure .
In the course of lunchtime today I received a telephone call from a prominent radio station in my constituency which attributed opinions and behaviour along the following lines indirectly to myself as a Member of this Parliament in relation to our new building in Brussels : ' there are people in Brussels who are getting massive backhanders , there is serious racketeering going on , the procedures in Parliament have not been properly followed and Parliament has gone against its own Rules in the matter of its buildings policy . '
This is not only a slur against myself - and it was put to me in these offensive terms - but a slur against the work and function of the Bureau and , moreover , a slur against officials of Parliament who cannot come here to answer for themselves .
Mr President , I invite you to ask the presidency to contact the Member who made the allegations and who has been quoted - Mrs Patricia McKenna , of the Green Group - and to ask her to substantiate these allegations or have the decency to withdraw them .
Mr President , I would like to agree wholeheartedly with the questions which have been raised just now .
This afternoon we agreed with the Group of the European People 's Party 's Bureau members , that all these accusations before us should be submitted to the Bureau of Parliament , and that we , as Members of Parliament must have an answer about these matters as soon as possible .
When it concerns fraud , when it concerns the misuse of expenses , travel expenses , and so on , the Members of this Parliament - and I tell you , Mr President , that is 95 % of this Parliament - think it is important that things are clarified as soon as possible , so that accusations cannot be made out of the blue for others to consider as well , and which we have nothing to do with .
I ask you , Mr President , to tell Parliament tomorrow morning what the reply should be to questions about shower cubicles , travel expenses , fraud , and the rest .
We cannot start a debate on these matters now . They are on the agenda of the meeting to be held by the Office of Presidency this afternoon .

So I would ask Mr Cox to summarize what he said in his speech a short while ago and send that comment to the President , either through me or directly .
The Office of Presidency will meet at 5 p.m. today and the agenda includes the appraisal of a Dutch television broadcast acknowledging that two of our colleagues had made at least two mistakes , may extend the discussion to the fact reported by Mr Cox as well .

BSE ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on BSE .
Mr President , the mad cow affair has shaken consumer confidence , shown the limits of an internal market which has no serious rules of consumer protection and revealed that this market can only function if the Commission and Member States work in close symbiosis .
The work of the parliamentary inquiry and the political pressure exerted on the Commission have shaken the latter and made quite a few things move at Community level .
The European Parliament recognizes this in the Böge report , adopted virtually unanimously in the Temporary Committee to follow up of the Recommendations on BSE , and in the impossibility of getting enough signatures together for a motion of censure .
That is a political fact .
However , the point of my comment here is primarily to denounce the attitudes of Member States , because they are still lagging behind .
Not only are ten of them indicted for having infringed the rule on animal meat-and-bone meal , but I wonder what national MPs are doing as far as their ministers for agriculture and consumer protection are concerned .
As well as the national MPs , the national level professional organizations have an enormous responsibility in this respect .
For example , they would do well to examine how effectively the veterinary controls function in their respective countries .
In this respect , I think a strengthening of veterinary controls is required throughout Europe , and a standardization of these controls , both qualitative and quantitative .
It is not acceptable that there are several thousand vets in a big country , and the same number , more or less , in another smaller country .
This is therefore clearly one of the great responsibilities of Member States .
Everything must be done to respect public health and to protect our consumers .
I am in complete agreement with Mrs Bonino who this morning said that the inquiry and follow up work of the European Parliament , just like the work of the Commission , is a long cleaning up process that our Parliament must undertake , together with the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , the BSE crisis has created winners and losers .
Amongst the losers I would certainly like to mention those who are affected by CJD , but I would also like to mention the farmers and all those who are dependent on them , and who have run great risks financially and who have seen their operating profits decline considerably over the past year as well .
The winners are the consumers , I hope , Mr President , in the long term .
Winners , why do I say that , because as part of the Treaty of Amsterdam we have been able to give public health and the consumer greater priority .
Also because in the fight against BSE - and this was already happening in a number of Member States - something was getting increased attention , namely the integral chain management from producer to consumer .
This means that in Europe the consumer has become the winner in this BSE crisis , although I am not forgetting the losers .
The report produced by the Committee of Inquiry and the Temporary Committee is excellent .
The issue has been tackled very systematically .
All points raised by the Committee of Inquiry have been taken up .
I also think that from here , from this position , I should sincerely thank the rapporteur , Mr Böge , but most certainly the President of this Committee , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , for the way in which they have listed all the points and tackled everything in such a systematic fashion .
The Committee , too , Mrs Bonino , Mr Fischler , and certainly Mr Reichenbach , is due much gratitude .
Much has been learned , including by Parliament .
I wonder nonetheless if this greater knowledge has led to more concerns .
The concerns I have personally , are international concerns .
How can we make sure that the European concerns go on to be translated internationally ?
How can we make sure that the Member States follow up European concerns on an international level ?
I would like to ask one more brief question : what are we going to do with gelatin and medical drugs ?
I understood last week that , at the request of the Netherlands , a decision by the European Commission would be withdrawn .
What exactly is going on ?
Could you please give me clarification on gelatin and medical drugs ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to agree with my colleague , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , when she spoke on behalf of the Socialist Group , and was critical of the Council .
I am very appreciative of what the committee has done up until now , and I also appreciate that people are present at this late stage of the debate , but I think the Council needs to make a more determined start .
I am not all that satisfied about what has happened between the final report of the Committee of Inquiry and now .
I would like to mention , as others have done before me , the illegal transit of meat , for example in Flushing harbour , and I would also like to mention the infected cow in Belgium which was turned into bone meal .
I think that what appears in the six monthly report will also be crucial in preventing these kind of things from happening .
I would like to make an urgent appeal for the British minister to give a personal report next year during the British Presidency .
Finally , I would like to agree with Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's question regarding the use of medical drugs .
Mr President , as rapporteur for the report which was approved by the European Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry , I should first like to congratulate the chair of the Temporary Committee , Mrs Dagmar Roth-Behrendt , and the committee 's rapporteur , Mr Böge , for all their hard work in finishing what was started by my report , and what was approved by Parliament at the time .
At this stage , I think it is fair to say that the mad cow affair is an example of chaos theory .
A small detail , certain omissions or lack of care in the transformation of animal remains into proteins for animal consumption , has led to a terrible tragedy in the agriculture sector , and to consequences for human health which are still relatively unpredictable .
I feel that this crisis has led to a reaction from the Community - a healthy reaction from the Commission above all - and also from certain Member States ( such as the United Kingdom ) and from Community institutions such as the Council .
In the last analysis , I think this has just been the first example of what can happen in an internal market which is dominated exclusively by economic considerations .
It makes me think that there are limits to economic activity and to the extent to which market forces can be allowed to regulate every situation within the internal market .
If the European Union is nothing more than a mechanism for economic harmonization , then we will encounter this type of difficulty from time to time .
In other words , the European Union has to be more than just a sort of referee of market forces , and I think we made some progress during the Amsterdam Conference along these lines . It is unimaginable that the European Union should continue to function on the basis of the sovereignty of the Member States , with a totally free interaction of market forces , and a lack of effective Commission powers in health and other areas which are important for the welfare of its citizens .
Mr President , when the safety of food is in jeopardy , firm action needs to be taken , irrespective of whether the cause is malfunction of institutions , laxity , or the pursuit of financial gain at the expense of everything else .
One cannot be careful enough with food .
Let that be the lesson that the BSE crisis has taught us .
The BSE issue has also taught us that the shortest route to the solution of a problem is not always the most negative .
If we had closed down the committee in February , we would not have been able to present the same result today .
It is by showing what should be done ourselves , and by using the vote of censure as a driving force , that we have succeeded in setting in motion fundamental changes , including a new policy culture .
The BSE crisis has confirmed the need for parliamentary control .
Without the work of this Parliament , and particularly with Reimer Böge and Mrs Roth-Behrendt as central players , we would never have achieved this result in this time .
We should ask ourselves , however , if we as a Parliament have sufficient instruments at our disposal to carry out this control duty continuously .
Mr President , the state of affairs today shows that democracy has been vindicated , that we can be satisfied about our own work , and about the constructive and cooperative reaction from the Commission .
But while the European Parliament may have controlled the European match , we are by no means through yet .
There will soon be a world championship . And on the WTO and Codex Alimentarius pitch it will not be an easy match .
We can be satisfied , but should not be triumphant .
The disease has not been wiped out , we cannot remove the suffering of the families and the farmers , even with a lot of money .
Not all recommendations have been turned into action , not all measures have been implemented yet , and finally , Mr President , we should ask ourselves whether it would not be a good idea to keep all animal products which are suitable for human consumption out of the cattle feed circuit .
Mr President-in-Office , your continued presence today in the European Parliament does you great honour and underlines the seriousness of the problem .
However , Mr President of the Commission , although I have followed the debate I have not yet understood who is to blame .
I have not yet understood who will take some responsibility for the situation that has been created .
The Council has , in a very elegant way , disclaimed any responsibility and has loaded all the responsibilities onto you .
You have told us that you have found no evidence against your staff and so you have not punished them . You have also said that we , as the European Parliament , rejected the generous increase in the 1998 budget funds for research , controls , and for the infrastructures of the veterinary service .
I also listened with great interest to what you said about the continuing illegal trade to third world countries is continuing .
However , I would like you to tell me in your reply whether this illegal trade is continuing not only to thirdworld countries - although it makes very little difference , people live there too - but also to countries of the European Union .
Five weeks have passed since I submitted a question in writing to the Commission and I have not yet received a reply .
I would like to know , Mr President of the Commission , if this illegal , contaminated meat has gone to countries of the European Union and to which countries .
Mr President , what have we learned from the BSE scandal ?
We have learned , and the learning was bitter , that he who puts the market before health precautions loses .
We have learned that keeping policies secret behind closed doors or failing to admit mistakes results in people losing trust , and that great damage results , damage of which we can still not say exactly how great it is and how long we shall need to make it good .
But we have also learned that to change can mean to win , that transparency , as we now have it , for instance , in the field of scientific advice , as we want to have much more of it in the initiation of legislation and the decisionmaking process , can instil trust back into people .
We have learned that if we give priority to precautionary health and consumer protection , and if we practise sustainable agriculture in earnest and not just in Sunday speeches , this change can regain people 's trust for us .
I would like to thank Commissioner Bonino in particular , and of course her staff .
Mrs Bonino , you have demonstrated just how much really good and important work the right woman in the right place can achieve !
We have learned a great deal .
We shall see how it goes .
We shall look very carefully at the half-yearly progress reports which we discuss in the committees , and we shall check very carefully , Mr President of the Commission , on how the proposal for a new interinstitutional agreement is shaping .
This will be submitted early next year , and we must debate it . It is very important .
In my opinion , it is the Member States which have learned too little , and the President-in-Office has regrettably shown that again today .
Over 25 years ago , Willy Brandt won an election with the slogan ' Dare more democracy ' .
We too must dare more democracy in this Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , along with all my colleagues , for all his work both on the follow-up committee - as we have just been discussing - and also on the earlier committee .
I was a member of both .
It is obvious to everyone now that many mistakes were made in the past .
Some of these mistakes were made through ignorance of the disease , which we should all accept was very new at the time .
Some mistakes were also made for political reasons .
Much of the criticism of the handling of the BSE crisis made within both committees of inquiry centred on the failure of Commission staff involved .
I do not support this criticism .
My experience of dealing with Commission officials over a long period of years has been one of great satisfaction .
They have always been cooperative and competent and they would often have liked to go much further and do much more than they were allowed to do .
I believe we should concentrate our criticism , if criticism is needed , on those responsible : in other words , the political masters of the officials concerned .
The officials acted or did not act as a result of the direct instructions of the commissioners responsible at that time and the then Council .
We all need fully to recognize this .
I do not think it has been recognized well enough .
The biggest scandal surrounding this tragedy was the British decision rightly to ban the use of contaminated meat and bonemeal in the UK but , at the same time , allow and even increase the volume of infected feed which was exported to other Member States , with disastrous consequences for innocent farmers including specifically in my own country , Ireland .
Both committees have done excellent work .
The present Commission has now acted responsibly and satisfactorily on the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry .
We are now at last making good progress under the direction of Commissioner Fischler and Commissioner Bonino .
So what more have we to do ?
Research must be intensified as quickly as possible .
The risk to human health must be established scientifically .
Whatever the level of that risk , it can only be removed through the eradication of the disease .
We must push that forward with all speed .
Mr President , we have been justifiably shocked by the failure of both the Member States and the European Commission to manage public health and by their response to the outbreak of mad cow disease .
The shock has been heard here in this House and through the Committee of Inquiry ; in a number of Member States , especially in the United Kingdom , there have been some changes , as well as in the European Commission .
The achievement of the rapporteur and the chairman of the committee and its members , has been to put the European Commission under permanent pressure and to push for more transparency , more clarity .
On several fronts some things have started to move .
There remains , Mr President of the Commission , dear Commissioner , one major drawback : the lack of disciplinary measures .
Mistakes have been made , and the European Commission is not succeeding in taking the necessary disciplinary action .
I can only regret that .
As far as we are concerned there is not one single reason for complacency .
Only for vigilance and permanent parliamentary pressure to set the measures in motion .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this stage in the BSE debate virtually everything of importance has already been said by those who have spoken before me .
However , I should like to emphasize Mr Böge 's efforts , and I want to congratulate both him and Mrs Roth-Behrendt for the fine piece of work they have done , for the rigorous and responsible attitude they have shown , and for the way they remained calm throughout the whole process which , believe me , was not easy .
Since certain aspects of the matter ( such as meat-and-bone meal , inspection , evidence from ministers , and so on ) have already been adequately covered by the debate , I should like to say that the Commission seems to have indeed realized that consumers ' health is more important than anything else , and that in everything which touches on this matter , it should therefore act with transparency , speed and responsibility . That is how it should be done , and that is what people are demanding of us .
The Commission was slow to react , but it has reacted .
That is the first step down the long road we have to travel .
As to the reorganization of services , I think it should be speeded up . It ought to be working already .
The public does not understand that the inspections are not fully implemented because of staffing problems .
Speed up the recruiting process .
There are a lot of empty posts in the Commission , and they are provided for in the budget .
So there is no excuse .
You can and should do it .
So do it !
Research in this area has been promoted , provided with funds , and coordinated .
But I am going to say the same thing again : do it now !
We cannot eradicate this disease until we have found the missing piece in the jigsaw , and this has to be done by the technical experts - the scientists - by means of those research programmes , for which they should be given adequate funds .
As for the question of responsibilities , I have just a small comment to add .
Once it has been confirmed that demands are going to be made , they should be applied across the board .
We have not made much progress on this point .
Finally , I should like to make a request to all the European institutions : please do not make us wait for another BSE to break out before you respond - attentively , vigilantly and cooperatively - to the European Parliament .
This should be the normal approach - this House 's standard method .
Interinstitutional collaboration should be the trademark for constructing the Europe we all want .
Mr President , I would like to take my turn in thanking Mr Böge and Mrs Roth-Behrendt for the work that they have done , enabling us , within nine months , to arrive at a point where we are now debating this issue in this pleasant atmosphere .
Of course , I do not think that this pleasant atmosphere , indicating that we have found a common language , prevails in the beef market .
The consumer remains wary , there is a lack of confidence in the beef market , which means that whatever half-hearted steps we have taken towards transparency need to be speeded up in the future .
Mr President-in-Office , it would be good if you showed greater decisiveness on issues concerning your officials and their competence and responsibilities .
I think that a little more courage is needed as we must make up lost ground .
Of course , I want to be fair .
The lack of trust in the beef market is not only due to the mistakes of the Commission . It is also due to the Council , and the unfortunate thing is that , even today , the Council , while showing some good will , has not answered the questions put to it by the President of the Commission and by all of us .
I believe that , if we wish to be honest with the consumer , we must tell the truth today .
We have begun our efforts , there is a long road ahead of us , and there will be no success if we do not manage to coordinate the action of the Commission , of the European Parliament - because we have not been generous in the budget for research into this disease - but , chiefly of the Council .
Because , at this moment , market controls are not in the hands of the Commission ; cross-border controls are in the hands of the Member States and in this we see that market logic still reigns .
They have not learnt their lesson .
If they learn their lesson , the unfortunate thing is that the lesson will be learnt not only by the Member States , but much more harshly , I am afraid , by the producers .
For this reason , Mr President-in-Office , please push forward all the measures against the United Kingdom that we call for in Mr Böge 's report .
Presidents , ladies and gentlemen , everything which has been said today is important and right .
There is no question about that .
Thanks for this milestone which Parliament has established today go to Mrs RothBehrendt and our good friend Mr Böge - they did outstanding work !
And we still got on with each other , as Mrs Roth-Behrendt emphasized this morning .
As a farmer , I am particularly pleased if I can somehow cope with a Berlin lawyer , because that means something !
But what conclusion can we draw from the story ?
Mr President of the Commission , could such a sickness break out even today ?
I say yes .
That is the starting point .
What do I not like about the whole story ?
I like , for instance , the fact that we now have a strategy , that the Commission has moved , that Parliament has made enormous efforts .
I do not like the fact that we have no guarantee at all that in the 15 Member States things will be even approximately put into effect in a foreseeable period .
That is my problem .
When we say that no more animal meal must be fed to ruminants , that will succeed to some extent , because the farmers themselves would be stupid if they did it .
But when I hear that meat should be labelled so that the consumer knows where it comes from , I would give no guarantee that that will actually be put into effect in the 15 Member States .
I would also give no guarantee that the 15 Member States will put into effect the separating out of risk material , and above all that the heating regulations , which we believe to be right , will be observed .
Those are the bills of exchange Mr Böge spoke of this morning , and which the Council must redeem .
Really , 15 ministers of agriculture should be present at these decisive debates , not just one who has to act as the whipping boy for the rest .
He will go to his 14 colleagues this afternoon , and they may say that Boden is crazy , he has let them drop him in it !
That is the point .
We must make sure in future that we in the Community can rely on it being put into effect .
Then things will be all right , not otherwise .
Mr President , I personally do not like triumphalism : we still need to work , we still need to insist a great deal on the protection of health and ensure that no scheming goes on .
I think we have managed to separate the wheat from the chaff .
The Böge report contains several worrying points ; there are still uncertainties that have to be dealt with . They have to be dealt with by the work of the Commission and by the Member States , identifying the differences between the States .
Not all the Member States are equal and different positions are held in Council : some Member States make their contribution , while others do not .
We cannot make a general statement .
It seems to me the measures taken in Italy are very important and , from this point of view , it may be a country that has developed an extremely important action .
I am very concerned about the disposal of animal meal , because it will take fifteen years to dispose of these products , and concerned too by the possibility of this animal meal being exported for processing and incineration in third countries .
I do not want this animal meal to go back onto the market in third countries .
This is a point I think we need to watch .
It is true that we need scientific activity , but I am convinced that research should be independent .
I am not convinced by the Böge report when it says that MEPs are joining scientists in monitoring the situation .
We need separate roles and separate duties .
I think there is a lot still to be done ; in particular , I fail to understand why we have not used all the legal means to bring an action for damages owing to the responsibility of the former British government .
We need to insist on this and do a lot more , because other countries will also have to assume responsibility with regard to international public opinion .
Mr President , I cannot personally share the optimism of this debate , because I believe people 's lives are at risk , and also the lives of the animals themselves .
And there are two policy errors , two basic policies which have caused this problem .
Those two problems are still untouchable ; I mean , we know this disease is transmitted through the use of types of meal - and we are now concerning ourselves with paying compensation to the victims - but we have not yet had the courage , in the face of vested interests , to ban the use of animal meal to feed other animals .
It is not acceptable , Mr President , for us to discuss this situation without discussing the core issue and the means by which the disease is spread .
The other matter , the other policy at issue is the common agricultural policy .
As you are aware , Mr President , under the policy , payments are made according to the quantities produced .
There is no concern about the method or the means of production ; production is rewarded according to quantity .
This violates all the rules of public health and animal protection .
Unless the Commission gives an unconditional undertaking to ban the use of animal remains in feed for other animals , and unless it gives an unconditional undertaking to change the CAP , which is not on Agenda 2000 , in favour of quality , animal health protection and animal welfare , then for my part I shall continue to protest here , Mr President , and use the only weapon at my disposal : my vote against this situation .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , the chairman of the committee and Commissioner Bonino for the work they have done .
The important thing in the context of the follow-up Committee of Inquiry has been the amount of change that has been implemented by the Commission .
In a reasonably short amount of time , there has been a complete reorganization of the way food safety is dealt with and I am sure this will increase public confidence and improve food safety by ensuring high standards .
The key points are reorganization of DG XXIV and transparency in the work of the scientific committees , together with improved monitoring measures and wide dissemination of data .
While the vast majority of Parliament 's recommendations have been fulfilled , there is still plenty more needing to be done .
The lack of political will at Council level means that we have to keep up pressure to ensure more progress is made to keep the public fully informed about all aspects of nutrition that are important for public health .
Regaining public confidence is the essential factor in this affair and a real start has been made to achieve this .
Mr President , like so many others I agree that the consequences of BSE are terrible and tragic .
At the same time we can still see that BSE has had the effect of making us take the process forward , not least in the Commission .
We now have greater openness .
We can also see that we have the chance of having better food safety and a strong consumer perspective .
I think that is good and I also welcome the measures the Commission has taken .
For me this is just the beginning of a process which can only go forward .
For me this does not only concern BSE as a disease , but also other diseases and other parts of our agricultural policy which actually endanger people 's health .
We must therefore have food legislation which is all-embracing from a health point of view .
We must have a system for registering cattle and a control system which ensures that the legislation is complied with .
Most important , however , is that we should have a change in agricultural policy which gives us good food throughout the EU .
Mr President , I congratulate you .
You have made a good move .
You have managed to give the impression of being serious about this , which has pacified the conscience of the great majority of MEPs , who were asking for no more than that .
This is the only thing on which I congratulate you .
As for the rest , allow me to put a damper on the barrage of praise that the majority of my colleagues have lavished on you .
You have made important transfers of staff from DG VI to DG XXIV but in practice nothing has changed .
Consider the last case of this kind in Belgium .
Information exchange still remains as slow , and the absence of controls still as obvious .
Is the truth frightening ?
Quite clearly so .
And I believe if you hide behind the status of civil servants to abandon putting sanctions in place , it is because in fact , in my opinion , you did not want , and you still do not want , to see who those truly responsible are , those who could have , at a crucial moment between 1985 and 1989 , assumed their responsibilities and thus protected the health of the citizens of Europe and the world .
You have your own internal inquiry services to monitor the actions of the different bodies of the Commission and you do not make use of them .
Was it necessary , is it necessary , regardless of the suffering of the human victims and their families , regardless of the citizens of Europe as a whole , to prevent for mercenary reasons , as I have understood in my group , the condemnation of Great Britain as responsible ?
We must not , they say , force the current British government to pay for the errors of the previous regime .
This is a dangerous short-circuit for the principle of continuity of power .
British government , Commission , Council , European Parliament , same battle .
For what ?
For health ?
No .
Against fraud ?
No .
Your attitude of refusing responsibility kills political credibility amongst young people , on your knees as you are before the interests of money .
Pitiful , Mr President , but perhaps with fifty more deaths ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen in the Chamber and looking at the monitors in the office , Mr Böge 's report deserves approval .
But I would have liked more for consumers and more for cattle farmers , whose existence has been endangered by failure in key positions .
It is not enough to give emphatical warning of disciplinary action in Item 7 of our decision .
We must name names !
In the case of BSE , the fact is that the very high officials who have escaped unpunished , as the Commission wanted , are not the only people to blame .
The Commission and Council , at least in the case in BSE , have entangled themselves equally in guilt .
I want instruments which do not just make possible the more flexible handling of disciplinary action which the Commission has promised .
Ministers in the Council must also be brought to account , otherwise BSE will soon flourish again in another form !
Mr President , I would just like to say a few words before leaving Mrs Bonino to reply to a number of the questions that have been discussed , which are appropriate to her own portfolio within the Commission .
For my part , I would simply like to thank everyone for their contributions , contributions sometimes worth qualifying , I have to say , because we do not share the feeling of certainty that some of you have just touched on with regard to a possible subsequent crisis .
At the moment , I feel truly humble , I must say .
I do not know how I would have reacted in 1985 , or 1989 , when the crisis struck , when it was in its first stages and when the scientists were still not agreed on its causes .
In terms of the mad cow crisis , I still feel very modest and very humble .
I would not dare to say that we have come a long way since then .
If we have come a long way , we have certainly still not reached the culmination of all the efforts we must make .
And we know very well that , in certain of our Member States , as some have just mentioned , illegal trafficking , which is certainly of a nature that will shake not only our confidence but that of the consumers , is still deplorable .
All these traffickers , all these criminals are , moreover , also those who are already mixed up in other fraudulent dealings , who have in the past sullied our Community , whether it is a question of trafficking in hormones or whatever else .
We will never be able to rid ourselves entirely of this type of crime .
I repeat , I feel very humble in the face of this problem .
We admitted , from the moment our first appearance before the Committee of Inquiry , that there were some malfunctions within our departments .
I did not want to accuse my predecessors .
I nevertheless took political responsibility for the Commission as an institution .
In this spirit , I believe I can confirm that , all in all , we must work constructively in this area to ensure collaboration which will enable us to straighten out the situation , both good and bad , without letting ourselves be taken in , without giving ourselves false guarantees , which nobody here can give .
I have just read , in a scientific journal which is an authority in France , La Recherche Scientifique , that scientists have a new theory on the origins of this crisis .
Let us therefore show humility in the case in point and see to it that consumers , whoever they are , regain confidence in the guarantee of the safety of our food products .
It is in this direction that we must work and I am happy that there has been a change in climate in the collaboration between the Commission and the House regarding the mad cow crisis .
I hope that the same climate of confidence is going to be established between ourselves and the Council because we should be well aware that a great responsibility still falls on Member States .
In this respect , I believe it is essential that we also work to find common ground between our different institutions and the Council .
This is all I wanted to say .
I would like to thank you once again for the spirit of collaboration you have shown , but also for the truly determined action your Temporary Committee has carried out to widen perspectives regarding the future management of this crisis .
It is to this objective that I feel an attachment , this is why we have taken a certain number of measures .
When , just now , I took stock of the five questions still pending following the reports of the Committee of Inquiry and the Temporary Committee , it was within the context of the jurisdiction of the Commission .
And I am sure that , if we continue to work as we have been doing , as we have started to do today , we will have set in motion a process , a process which opens up new perspectives , which enables us to hope that consumers will once more regain confidence in the safety of food .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 noon .
European systems of worker involvement
The next item is the report ( A4-0354 / 97 ) by Mr Menrad , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the final report of the Group of Experts on " European systems of worker involvement ' ( Davignon report ) ( C4-0455 / 97 ) .
Mr President , as you said , this item is on a comment by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs about the final report of the group of experts on European systems of worker involvement , a group which the Commission set up under the chairmanship of Mr Davignon , and consisting of scientists and social partners .
Its main task was to make proposals about how the position of employees could be defined in the statute of the planned European public company .
Unsuccessful attempts have been made for more than 25 years to harmonize or coordinate European company law more strongly .
Very recently , the debate about the legal form of the European public company has flared up again .
Adoption of an appropriate order about such company forms has failed until now in the Council of Ministers , because it was not possible to agree about the directives which concern the position of employees , and which are linked with this instrument .
The ideas about involvement and co-determination of employees are very different in the Member States of the European Union and the various social partners .
This complicated weave of opinions can be disentangled only with great readiness to compromise by all participants .
I am convinced that involvement and co-determination are a part of the democratization of company law .
They also mean economic productivity .
Mr Davignon is right : Only informed , qualified , engaged and motivated employees , who are aware of their responsibilities and who have opportunities for involvement , can develop modern organizational forms and technologies , and deal with them in such a way that all opportunities for sustained development are exploited .
As well as a statement from the Commission about information and consultation , there was a proposal for a resolution by Parliament , which in important points already led to similar results to the Davignon report .
On the basis of the Davignon study , the Luxembourg Council Presidency made a compromise proposal to the Council of Social Ministers in October .
The report of the Social Committee , which is being discussed today , sees a very good basis for discussion in both documents .
It warns against trying to transfer a particular model of codetermination from a few member countries to the others .
Co-determination is not an export article , but the more extensive co-determination by employees in countries such as Germany , Austria , the Netherlands or the Nordic countries must also not be evaded using a European legal instrument .
That could easily have anti-European effects .
The oft-quoted danger of a flight from co-determination must not simply be brushed aside , because it could happen because of the possibility of converting the company from a national to a European legal form , with reduced possibilities for co-determination .
Davignon closes this escape route , and we are glad that he has .
The question which is very often asked is why the directive about the European works council is so successful .
It can be turned round as you like , the real recipe for the success of the European works council consists of certain procedural principles , which can also play an important part in the development of the co-determination model of a European company : flexibility , negotiated solutions , minimum standards .
In the case that no agreement is reached between the organization boards and the special negotiating bodies of the employees , a European directive on legal minimum rights of employees should be prescribed .
Both documents - the Davignon report and the Luxembourg compromise - also provide for economic involvement of employees , when in doubt , by limited representation of fully entitled employees on the administrative and supervisory boards .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs hopes that a political agreement will be reached in the Council of Social Ministers under the Luxembourg Presidency , and in the spirit of our positions .
I will summarize these briefly again . Social partners must have a decisive role in the formation of rules of involvement , and their cooperation is a precondition .
Therefore , in my opinion , two signatures are possibly the most important on the Davignon report , those of the representatives of the European trade unions and the employers .
There must not be a European public company without the involvement of the employees .
The European model is not the pure market economy , but the social market economy , the important principles of which are involvement of employees and partnership .
In this spirit , I ask you to agree to this report , and at the same time I thank my colleagues on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for their support .

Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights considers that Mr Davignon and his group have done good work on a difficult issue and we are largely in agreement with the conclusions that Mr Menrad has just presented on behalf of the committee in charge , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The problem of the European company , we know , is that its stumbling block is the place of workers within the company . This has been the case for a long time .
In fact , this obstruction to the European company leads to another blockage around a different group of issues : the proposal for a fifth directive on company law , for a tenth directive on cross-border mergers , the statute for cooperative societies , mutual societies and associations .
Mr Davignon and his group also propose a solution to get around the difficulty by advocating a flexible and optional two tier system .
It is first a question of choice of formula for European companies ; indeed nobody is obliged to become a European company , this is already the first option .
Once this decision has been taken , supremacy is then given to a negotiated solution between union and management who can decide what they want between themselves .
It is only failing agreement that the " reference rules ' proposed by the Davignon group come into play , on the one hand regarding the information and consultation of workers and on the other their participation on management boards and supervisory boards .
It is therefore a very flexible system which enables , by leaving a great deal of freedom to the unions and management , a formula to be found which is agreeable to both , which therefore enables the legal structure to be adjusted at the wish of both parties , and which simply , in the final analysis , at that point proposes what is the norm in our countries as a whole , that is one method or another of worker participation in the company .
It seems to us , and this is noted by the great majority of members of the Committee on Legal Affairs , that this solution is likely to win over a majority in the House and above all to raise , within the Council , objections for which there are no longer grounds .
Mr President , many of us are convinced that the best instrument for regulating labour relations is dialogue between the social partners , and if that dialogue can be translated into agreements , so much the better .
At European level , the involvement of the social partners has improved since the first attempts at the beginning of the seventies , but progress has been much too slow .
The history of the report we are debating today - or of the background to it - is an example of the difficulties which arise when we try to elevate normal national practices to a European level .
Problems arise in finding common ground on how to define unequivocally what we understand by worker involvement , as regards both what that involvement should consist of , and how to develop that involvement .
The implementation of the internal market , and the effects of the globalization of our economies , demand that workers ' representation and involvement must be elevated to supranational level .
Today we are trying to unblock the outstanding proposals about this in Council .
It is a question of having a realistic approach to all the controversial questions relating to worker involvement ; of finding formulae which go further than just information and consultation ; and achieving worker representation which enjoys real involvement , and is not limited to just being on the receiving end of a little information .
Mr Menrad 's report tries to promote and speed up the debate on these important matters , and allow the European company statute to rapidly achieve full legal status .
The expert report , known as the Davignon report , found a way of formulating a European system of worker involvement .
Using this approach , it should be possible to reach agreement in Council and overcome the obstacles which have been encountered so far .
In its day , the European Works Council Directive found a way to make the different labour-relations models compatible .
In questions of European companies , it is a matter of achieving the same balanced , flexible agreement ( as Mr Cot said a moment ago ) in order to guarantee workers ' information , consultation and involvement , not by imposing a specific model , but by using a model which is compatible with those currently in force in each of the Member States .
Mr President , first may I thank the rapporteur Mr Menrad very heartily .
His understanding and broad vision are reflected in the report .
He has suggested sensible additions , and the agreement in the Social Committee also shows this .
The economy of the European Union presses for a statute on a European public company or a European company .
The Davignon group has done good preparatory work , there is no doubt about that .
Despite differing structures for participation by employees , the Member States can live with the proposals because , first , changes of legal form to evade co-determination are not possible , and secondly , for those Member States in which the employees themselves do not want participation , a null solution is even possible .
Thirdly , if the employees and employers do not reach an agreement , after the negotiation period expires a minimum quota of employee representatives is binding .
Information and consultation of employees are thus ensured .
The minimum quota seems to the rapporteur to be set too low .
In this I would like to support him explicitly .
Likewise , his reference to the need for haste after decades of discussion is surely right , and I also think that the inclusion of the European co-operative associations in the proposal is necessary .
The Commission 's task of convincing the Council , Commissioner Flynn , ought to be entirely possible on the basis of the proposals , which really take account of all objections .
I wish you much success in this task , in our interests too , and I thank you in advance .
Mr President , it has been stated that the issue of the status of European companies has been blocked for the last twenty five years , during which our businesses have loudly demanded such a status .
Thus , for example , in France , a company such as Airbus lacks a legal framework .
This is the reason why I would today like to thank Mr Menrad for his work on this issue as well as his commitment to worker participation .
I believe it is important that , in this House , a certain number of Members are motivated to bring the issue of participation to a successful conclusion because it is also one way of making progress in employment policy .
In spite of this , there are two observations I believe are worth making .
Firstly , whilst being in agreement with this report , I feel that it is necessary to consider the great diversity of national traditions in the areas of worker information , consultation and participation , and compared to the Davignon report perhaps , where you feel we have found a consensus , or compared to national traditions , to avoid going too far down the path towards a German system of co-management .
Mr Rapporteur , this is the reason why it would seem reasonable to us that the House does not adopt point 9 of the report which is proposed and , in particular , the last part requesting that a higher threshold than that provided for in the report of the Group of Experts and in the compromise proposal of the Luxembourg Presidency be set for worker representation on supervisory boards .
Indeed , this seems to me unrealistic and I fear that this will once more thwart the procedure which the Davignon report is today trying to unblock .
This , Mr President , is what I wanted to say very rapidly on this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , we do not need to persuade each other here today that the European form of company partnership offers an excellent opportunity to promote cross-border trading in Europe ; thus it ultimately benefits employment .
The involvement of employees in the running of business cannot be the problem , because it is this which promotes good management .
So what is the problem ?
The problem is that Member States do not want to come to an agreement , and are perhaps looking for a bandage to stop the bleeding .
My question to you is : do fiscal motives play a part , and not just the participation of workers ?
I make a final plea , to the Member States as well to Commissioner Flynn , to put this issue on the agenda now , formally , or if that is not possible informally , for Thursday and Friday when the Heads of State and of Government meet in Luxembourg , and to see to it that the Luxembourg Presidency produces results .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Menrad on his report and thanking him for his great commitment to this issue .
I can do nothing but agree with the committee 's and the rapporteur 's opinions on the report of the group of experts and even with the opinions which have been given on the Luxembourg compromise proposal which means that any statute for European companies would under no circumstances be allowed to result in it being possible to circumvent the workers ' right of co-determination in companies .
Nor shall it be possible to use European legal instruments to circumvent the right of co-determination .
Furthermore , consideration must be given to the different models for negotiated settlements between the various parties in the labour market which exist in the different Member States .
The rights which unions enjoy through national legislation or by tradition must also apply to any European companies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to thank Mr Menrad for his proposal , which we as Social Democrats also support .
That it has become a minimum consensus , Mr Menrad , is not your fault , but I think that of the Council of Ministers .
However , I would also like to thank Mr President-in-Office Juncker for making the effort to bring about a compromise at all after many years .
This proposal also states that we want to use the experience from the debate and the results of the European works council .
But that also means , Mr Flynn and Mr Juncker , that we must use the negative experience from the works council directive , for example , with Vilvoorde .
There is a big disproportion in Europe between the opportunities of labour and of capital .
We have waited for 25 years for this opportunity for co-determination to come about , whereas it took only 25 months to put directives about the internal market into effect .
It is also not enough to enable employees to own more share capital .
They must also participate in decision-making .
There I think we agree , Mr Menrad .
The Europe of the internal market , freedom of services and movements of capital even if they are speculative , has become taken for granted .
We need co-determination by employees and trade unions , further development and perhaps harmonization .
The reason that we have not come further today , in my opinion , does not lie in the complicated relationships , the different interests or even the different traditions , but quite clearly in the excessive power of capital .
I would also like to mention that we are happy and satisfied that this directive or consensus was reached together with the trade unions .
I do not think that the Davignon report assesses that correctly .
Finally , two principles . First , the trade unions must be represented , and second , there must be further development in the direction of true co-determination .
Mr President , it is important that worker influence can be guaranteed at all levels and in all kinds of companies .
The model being proposed here with a voluntary system for European companies is perhaps the most practical .
It makes it possible for employers and workers in each company to negotiate suitable forms of worker influence themselves through a voluntary system regardless of what country the company is in .
This is a decentralized system which provides a lot of local influence , which is good .
The weakness of the system is that the worker side , which is often the weaker in such a negotiating situation , could be put at a disadvantage .
The agreement could then become quite meaningless , which could mean that in reality European companies can circumvent the whole process .
That must not be allowed to happen .
Proposals for minimum rules could therefore be one way to gain influence and a good remedy when negotiations have failed .
However , to begin with it is national measures which should be taken and which are needed in order to be able to solve this .
If they are introduced , minimum standards must take into account local rules and local laws on negotiations in each Member State .
I would like to congratulate Mr Menrad on an excellent report .
I speak as rapporteur on a European company statute and in particular the directive on involvement of workers .
The company statute is a voluntary measure and no company , when this proposal is eventually adopted , will be forced to set up a company statute against its wishes .
Other forms of setting up branches in other countries , such as by subsidiaries , will remain , so there is no need for Member States to fear this proposal .
As a quid pro quo of setting up a company under the European company statute model , there must be an element of worker involvement .
The Commission insists on this , and so does Parliament .
The choice of method of worker involvement is flexible and respects national cultures and traditions .
Many businesses want to be able to set up European company statutes .
I urge the Member States that are being difficult over this proposal to wake up .
Not only are they undermining the position of companies which actively want this proposal , they are also undermining the good work that has been done in this Parliament over the last nine or ten years .
We need a European company statute , we want one , the workers want one and the business people of Europe want one .
They must pay heed to the work of the Davignon report experts and also the work of Mr Menrad .
Let us hurry up and get this sorted out .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate Mr Menrad ; he has produced a very balanced report .
We have always enjoyed the charm with which he has introduced all his reports , and he has done the same again !
However , as I would like to see this report developed into a successful one , I have to contradict what some of my colleagues have already said about a fair balance of traditions and cultures in industrial relations across the European Union .
I must point out to our colleagues and comrades alike , in agreement with Mrs Hermange , that indeed we cannot force one model on all countries across the European Union .
Many of those cultures and traditions are not enjoyed in the same way as perhaps they are enjoyed in Germany or Austria .
I am quite sure that this is where the sticking-point actually lies - in the compulsory element .
It is this issue which will unblock this mechanism and will bring about worker involvement , not participation or codetermination , as all the arguments seem to centre on .
Perhaps if we can be a bit more progressive and rather more flexible about this , we can have a voluntary arrangement between companies and trade unions which will enable them to enjoy the fruits of worker involvement , however far they want to take that .
I agree with Ms Oddy that this is voluntary in its nature .
Indeed one would hope that people will be able to spot the difference between that and other ideas about compulsion .
Let us face the other fact : if people do not join up to the European Statute , will they not be at a competitive disadvantage at some time in the future ?
These are the thoughts that are going through a lot of people 's minds .
These are the worries and fears that some people are trying to raise .
These are issues which need to be addressed and they are not being addressed thoroughly enough .
We have time to do something about that , and Mr Menrad 's report goes a long way towards reducing some of the fears and qualms .
As a compromise arrangement I think and I hope it will be very successful .
Mr President , let me first of all thank the European Parliament for having taken the initiative to deliver an opinion on the Davignon report and subsequent developments in the dossier on the European company statute within the Council .
As we all know , there was a clear mandate from the European Council in Amsterdam to make every effort necessary to secure the final adoption of the company statute by the end of this year .
We are all aware that this will require an early political agreement within the Social Affairs Council on the outstanding issue of worker involvement which will allow the Internal Market Council to finalize the whole dossier in good time .
The contribution that the European Parliament is about to give to the successful completion of the dossier is of course extremely relevant and I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Menrad , for having once again understood the great difficulty of the challenge that we are facing and the issue of the adequacy of the solutions envisaged , both by the Davignon report and by the compromise proposal presented by the Luxembourg Presidency .
We all know that these texts give us a real opportunity for the very first time in very many years to make substantive progress on this dossier .
Let us exploit the opportunity to the greatest possible extent .
As underlined in the draft text by Mr Menrad , any solution capable of gathering sufficient support within the Council must preserve the autonomy of the social partners in shaping the model of worker involvement which will apply to each European company .
At the same time we need a reference framework which will apply in the event of failure of negotiations .
To facilitate consensus among the Member States , this reference framework must incorporate both information and consultation , as well as participation provisions .
It is not designed to harmonize national laws and practices on worker involvement which differ substantially from country to country .
Ms Oddy is quite right : this is voluntary and it is available as an option and should be seen as that for the benefit of business and workers .
Its real purpose consists in meeting the legitimate concerns of some Member States who fear that the European company statute will be used to circumvent national rules on worker involvement , notably with regard to the participation systems .
But , on the other hand , we also recognize the equally legitimate concern of those who do not wish to have foreign models of worker involvement imposed upon them .
The priority given to negotiations and to the fact that companies will be dealing , within this context , with mere options will , from the point of view of the Commission , greatly minimize this risk .
So I am glad to see that these fundamental elements of the possible compromise are fully endorsed here by the European Parliament .
I would like once again to thank all of you for your support and express my hope that with your help and a lot of good will - and it will require a lot of political good will and a spirit of compromise by all the parties concerned - we will manage to make real and decisive progress in this dossier and fulfil the mandate given by the European Council .
Once again to you personally , Mr Menrad , I would like to express my thanks , to you and to your colleagues , and to Mr Schiedermeir for his good wishes because it is going to take a fair bit of political goodwill to see this through .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , I know that you were denied some of your time but you made a very valid point that this should be a central issue .
We hope to achieve the momentum that you have asked for on 15 December at the Social Affairs Council and see this business through finally .
Thank you all once again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Part-time work - Employment
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A4-0352 / 97 ) by Mrs Jöns , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commissionproposal for a Council Directive concerning the framework agreement on part-time work concluded by UNICE , CEEP and the ETUC ( COM ( 97 ) 0392 - C4-0551 / 97 ) ; - ( A4-0353 / 97 ) by Mr Hernández Mollar , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission 's report " Employment in Europe - 1997 ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing the part-time work agreement which the social partners have negotiated after the Council of Ministers failed to achieve an agreement for fourteen years .
Yet we have nothing to celebrate .
The agreement falls far short of what this Chamber agreed in 1990 , that is to protect all atypical employees from discrimination in both employment law and social insurance .
The social partners have made an agreement which only affects part-time work .
They have thus excluded millions of the atypically employed with their specific disadvantages .
I am thinking of the 14 million short-term employees , but I am also thinking of the 10 million homeworkers and teleworkers , and we all know that teleworking is booming at the moment .
But there is more .
Even in this agreement , which is restricted to part-time work , all questions of legal social insurance are bracketed out .
What is bracketed out is thus precisely the core area in which discrimination of atypical work is manifested financially .
Now , one could understand that the social partners , just before Amsterdam , did not want to provoke the Member States with regulations on social insurance , to avoid gambling with the inclusion of the Social Chapter in the treaty .
But the part-time work agreement has more gaps , because whereas we get only an agreement on part-time work , which completely brackets out legal social insurance , we ought to be able to expect at least that employment law and occupational social security benefits are clearly defined and regulated by European minimum standards .
But this is not the case !
Each Member State can define national exceptions to the praiseworthy principle of non-discrimination , just as it pleases .
Admittedly objective reasons must be given , but the room for manoeuvre is immense .
For instance , a whole group of employees can be completely excluded from the principle of non-discrimination .
I am speaking here of part-time employees who work occasionally , as it is so nicely put in the outline agreement .
Also , the length of employment , the working hours or even the amount of income can be reasons for further national exceptions for all part-time employees .
This means that the Member States can , at their own discretion , define thresholds below which discrimination can continue with enthusiasm .
A European principle of nondiscrimination thus exists only on paper , but the national right to exceptions is concrete .
All the other regulations are recommendations , for which there is no legal redress .
In a time in which we all want to create more employment , not least through flexible forms of work and shorter working hours , this really does not contribute to more making part-time work more attractive .
If we nevertheless agree to the proposal for putting the outline agreement into effect , this is only because at least it does no harm .
It does not prevent a single Member State from making better regulations .
But this does not alter the fact that the Commission is now required to submit , as quickly as possible , a proposal to put an end to discrimination against part-time work in social insurance law .
That is particularly important to me because 80 % of part-time employees are women .
But the Commission must also make proposals for removing discrimination in the other forms of atypical work , in both areas , employment law and social insurance .
Let us say here to the social partners : Even if this Chamber agrees to the agreement on part-time work , this is by no means a licence to assume that we shall accept similar weak agreements without minimum standards in future .
The social dialogue is a tender plant .
I will bet that future agreements will have more substance .
After all , this is only the second agreement since the Social Chapter .
Mr President , Commissioner , with only a few days left now before the Luxembourg summit , this may be the last debate before the Heads of State and of Government confront a challenge in which perhaps the people of Europe have more hopes invested than any other .
The report which I am presenting to the House was approved by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs with only two abstentions .
The gravity of the unemployment situation in the European Union is dramatic , even though it is improving .
The whole of European society needs to be aware of the sheer size of the problem with which we are confronted .
It is a problem which directly threatens the very foundations of the Union .
When we talk about solving the problem of unemployment , we need a sound basis for our analyses .
There is only one realistic formula for reducing unemployment in an economy such as ours : to create useful jobs .
Everything else is , as we say in Spain , " bread for today and hunger for tomorrow ' .
Useful jobs are mainly produced by businesses - more specifically , by small and medium-sized enterprises . In order for this to happen , the right climate has to be created , to allow them to survive and be competitive .
Any government can create jobs by decree , by increasing the number of civil servants or reducing working hours , but these are only short term solutions .
In the end , this sort of solution damages the economies which resort to them . The long term effect , in an increasingly open and globalized climate , is that unemployment rises to levels even higher than those which led to such measures being applied in the first place .
The Treaty of Amsterdam , on the other hand , represents the will to coordinate national policies , in order to create more jobs .
The common objectives are very commendable , and in some ways they are necessary .
But let us not deceive ourselves : objectives do not create jobs .
There have been many objectives set and plans made , from Essen up to the present day , but unemployment figures remain almost static . What we need is to achieve the Member States ' own objectives , as set out in their multiannual employment plans .
That , of course , is compatible with the continuing development of their policies .
Mr President , I should like to share with the House my understanding of what the ten commandments for employment could be .
Firstly , to complete monetary union successfully , which is not an end in itself , but an instrument for restructuring the macro-economic climate .
Secondly , to give priority to government policies on education and training , so that our young people and long-term unemployed can gain access to the jobs market with proper and effective qualifications .
Thirdly , to reform the Member States ' fiscal systems , in favour of job creation .
Fourthly , to facilitate sources of funding for small and medium-sized enterprises , removing administrative and bureaucratic obstacles , and making self-employment easier .
Fifth , to improve and complete the internal market , increasing workers ' mobility , and removing language and cultural barriers , and the protection of interests .
Sixth , to promote dialogue and social contact at sectoral , national and European level , studying new ways of organizing work , and new conditions in which to develop them ( including , of course , reduced working hours , new formulae for contracts , and workers ' protection and health ) , and proposing these measures to workers and employers .
Seventh , to increase the role of local authorities in the search for solutions , and to involve the private sector also , encouraging jobs which spring from social solidarity , the voluntary sector , cultural rehabilitation and leisure itself , and the by-products of new sources of work : regional employment plans urgently need to be put into effect .
Eighth , to improve infrastructures , and support innovation within companies , and the application of new technologies .
The ninth point is the creation of the right conditions to end the discrimination suffered by women : we have to do away with those regrettable statements still heard today in our society - that women deprive men of their jobs .
Work is the traditional right of every human being , and does not belong specifically to either men or women .
Both should work together - with governments as well - to create the necessary family and social conditions to grant women access to the jobs market . There is no doubt that part-time work is a good way to achieve this .
Lastly , Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the tenth point is to modernize our social security system .
No European citizen wants to lose what society won long ago , but our companies cannot be weighed down by social burdens , and pension payments cannot be supported just on the shoulders of an ever-decreasing active population .
We have to face this problem with courage .
Mr President , those are my final thoughts as we approach a summit which all the people of Europe hope will provide realism and concrete political commitments .
Thirty million people want a job .
A man or woman without a job ends up rejecting the society to which they belong .
Economic and social exclusion causes despair , and a serious decline in the society where it occurs .
We have to compete - not just at the level of economies and markets , but also at the level of people 's hopes and confidence , for the Europe we all want to see in the twenty-first century .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the employment summit will be the yardstick for the social profile of Europe .
The employment profile makes the ills we have to overcome very clear .
Because great successes in the creation of jobs will be thanks not just to labour market policy , but at the same time we need a macro-economic policy which promotes economic growth and does not put brakes on it .
Here there is more to be done .
We should not always be talking only about the deregulation of job markets , their modernization and restructuring , or about people 's employability .
We must create economic conditions so that we finally bring the gainfully employed ratio in the European Union close to the Japanese and American ratio of 70 % .
Only that meets our social obligations .
We therefore certainly need a prompt start of currency union , so that monetary policy can play its constructive part at European level .
But we obviously also need coordination of economic policies , and the indescribably indifferent attitude of the finance ministers must be overcome at the European summit in Luxembourg .
We must switch to targets , to reduction of the unemployment rate and redirection to an active job market policy .
But above all we must do more in relation to investment .
Investment is the key .
When I think that job-creating investment in production plant rose by 30 % between 1989 and 1996 in the USA , but by only 5 % in Europe , we can imagine the difference in the employment trend .
I must say that benchmarking for employment and benchmarking for investment must be added to our vocabulary .
This does not only involve pump-priming for private investment , but also redirection of infrastructure investment , public investment , from wasting it on subsidies to employmentoriented public expenditure .
Mr President , I rise to put forward the view of the Committee on Fisheries about this important report on employment , drawing attention firstly to the fact that the question of employment takes on special characteristics in the fisheries sector .
Matters relating to employment and working conditions in the fisheries sector are perhaps the least developed aspects of Community fisheries policy at the moment .
This is a significant lack , when you consider that since the seventies , this sector has been suffering from continual erosion , leading to constant job losses , deteriorating working conditions , decreased job security , and so on .
In fact , the consequent lack of attractiveness is resulting in an aging workforce which is no longer being renewed by fresh generations .
As we all know , the new international law of the sea , enshrining 200 miles as the exclusive zone for the exploitation of fishing resources by coastal states , meant that the Community fleet found itself with excess capacity . This has produced a constant demand for reductions in both the ocean-going and the small-scale coastal fleet , resulting in an alarming loss of jobs .
To quote just one example , in the case of Spain , which has the greatest fishing capacity of any country in the Community , nearly 20 % of jobs in this sector have been lost over the last ten years .
The loss of jobs in the fisheries sector has in some cases had a dramatic impact , since many of these jobs - especially in small-scale coastal fishing , which is labour-intensive in terms of processing and related jobs ( shipyards , marketing , etc . ) as well as the actual fishing - are located in outlying regions heavily dependent on fisheries , where at present there are few real opportunities for converting to other activities .
Furthermore , since the phenomenon affects outlying regions of the Community , this can only serve to exacerbate the conditions I have already described .
Therefore - and I am just finishing - the Committee on Fisheries urges the European Commission to draw up a detailed study of employment and working conditions in this sector , and to undertake specific revisions of the directive in relation to the question of jobs .
Mr President , first I would like to thank Mr Hernández Mollar for his , in my opinion , excellent report .
Especially excellent , by the way , because it contains two issues which could provide a correction to the decisions made last time on the report to the summit on employment .
These are , in paragraph 10 , a clarification on the shift from tax on labour to other factors we consider necessary and also a clear request in paragraph 15 to instigate research into the feasibility of the system proposed by Michel Rocard to modulate social security contributions between the first 32 hours worked and the remainder .
Other speakers have already said that this report has to be seen above all in the light of the summit in Luxembourg , and I also think that this must be the first subject under discussion here in this debate .
This summit is a first step , is what has frequently been heard during these past few weeks .
That is true in itself , but it is often said as if it is an excuse to ensure that the step taken will be small .
I believe that this first step should be a very clear one .
Clear enough to inspire trust , trust on the part of the citizen that finally , after all those exaggerated stories , after that huge amount of paperwork , there will be action .
I would like to concentrate on what is the least that action should achieve .
There should be concrete targets both at European and international level .
There is resistance because people are afraid that they will not be able to meet those targets .
I would like to point out that this fear did not exist when targets were formulated for the EMU .
At that time the criteria could not be tough enough , and were aimed very high .
I conclude from this that the issue is above all one of political will .
A political will to promote an employment policy , and the political will to recognize that the out-dated belief that EMU will lead to economic growth and that economic growth automatically leads to employment is wrong , and that we should pursue a much more active labour market policy .
Secondly , a important goal is benchmarking : to direct our policy , our targets at the performance of the three countries with the best performance .
If you take those targets no-one will be able to say that they are not realistic , because you have at least three countries which meet those targets .
And for the first time , at last , you are not involved in this dismal process of harmonizing to the level of the lowest common denominator , but at the level of the best .
I would think that that will give people much more hope .
Finally , various objectives should be set , but above all , as a priority , a policy that guarantees that young people under 25 will never be unemployed .
They should have a job , or be in training , and all long-term unemployed should be given a second chance to re-enter the job market .
And , last but not least , in the Delors White Paper there is finally a serious decision about tax reductions , the shift from tax on labour to the environment , to raw materials and to capital .
Mr President I would like to thank Mr Hernández Mollar sincerely for the excellent report he has produced , and also for the ten commandments for employment , which he spelled out a short time ago .
Much has been said about the summit in Luxembourg , but we must realize that we are now involved in an exercise which rises above that , which constantly tries to improve the still unhappy employment situation in the European Union .
I am sometimes surprised at how sad people feel when we discuss Luxembourg .
When it is the socialists who are particularly sad , I want to say : look at the numbers ; look at the twelve of the fifteen governments in which socialists are represented .
If the summit fails , then it will be a failure of socialist Heads of Government , so beware of that .
I believe there is still hope for the summit , and I hope that we can keep this afloat .
But we are discussing the report by Mr Hernández Mollar who has given an exceptionally accurate analysis of the situation , and also of what we have already done in the past and what we should continue to do .
There is little I can add to that .
The other item on the agenda is the Jöns report on part-time work .
This report , too , has created quite a storm .
I originally wondered how it would be possible to discuss these two very different reports in one debate , but actually it makes complete sense .
In a number of countries , including my own , part-time work has contributed more to the reverse of the unemployment figures than anything else , and it has done so in a way that conforms to the market .
But then part-time work should , of course , be remunerated in the same way and be treated in the same way as full-time work , in such a way that we get rid of the outdated idea that part-time work is some sort of secondary employment , employment that does not count .
It was not an easy report .
We know that .
We fought very hard for it and for us the most important issue is that we as social partners should formulate an agreement that says that we will not interfere in the content of the agreement .
We can reject the agreement .
We can accept it , but we should not take halfway measures .
I think that in the amendments which are now on the table , we have found some kind of halfway house .
The Jöns report states quite rightly that it is incomplete , that we will have to do more for atypical industrial relations than this report alone , that this might be a small contribution .
But it is the first contribution to this debate , and that is more than we have had so far .
That is why I think it is important to support the agreement .
And also to ask the Commission , to ask you , Mr Flynn , to take the necessary extra steps so that we come up with a balanced package , because then we will be further helping to defeat unemployment .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Jöns for her report which draws attention to the nature of the work contract between employees in part-time work and their employers and the many ways in which discrimination against these workers occurs .
There are a number of other serious implications arising from parttime work which should be brought to the attention of the Commission .
The main one is the exclusion from certain EU-sponsored schemes of many of the least well-off in our society .
I regret to say that this situation pertains principally to my own country , Ireland .
I refer , for example , to the Commission 's programme for rural development or accompanying measures under the common agricultural policy .
In this report and in the Commission document , great importance is attached to the need for proper provision for social security and pensions for part-time workers .
Yet , the Irish Department of Agriculture is at this very moment debarring applicants from the EU 's early retirement scheme for farmers if they are found to have been engaged in part-time work for a period prior to their application .
I do not refer here to farmers with large holdings which are commercially viable .
I speak of those farmers with holdings of 15 or 16 hectares who simply must supplement their incomes with off-farm work in order to survive .
Surely it was to these farmers that schemes such as the retirement scheme were in the first instance directed .
And the matter does not end there .
For these small-scale farmers , who one would have considered unfortunate enough not to have secured some type of part-time work , the option of work on state sponsored schemes became available .
Yet , what do we discover ?
We discover that the modest amount they have earned on these short-term schemes is also being used to keep them out of the retirement scheme .
Before they ever reach this stage , our Department of Agriculture is seeing fit to exclude them from certain premium payments by making an assessment against them for this off-farm income .
It was always my opinion that the taxation system of our Member State was there to regulate the amount of money that an individual earned .
If they earned over a certain amount they were taxed on that amount and that was the end of the matter .
The majority of farmers are in that network .
Yet it seems to me that what is going on here is discrimination of the most blatant nature .
The weakest and traditionally most vulnerable of our rural community , in terms of social welfare , and smaller farmers are being dealt with in the harshest and most unjust manner by our state .
I most certainly hope and believe that it is against every objective and principle of the Commissioner 's directive that a Member State should be allowed to manipulate what is essentially an EU social benefit in this way .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate both rapporteurs on their reports .
Many of the issues which have been raised in the Hernández Mollar report , have been under discussion here on account of the van Velzen report .
I would like to bring one more point to the attention of the Commissioner , and that is that despite fine words about tax reductions , tax on labour has risen again from 43.5 % to 51 % at present .
I think that most of the emphasis on Thursday and Friday should be directed at shifting tax on labour to other sources , as recommended in the Hernández Mollar report .
Mr President , the Jöns report is also under discussion .
Here you may ask yourself to what extent we can leave this to the social partners .
I see no sign of the participation of small and medium-sized business in the social dialogue .
But now , in principle , that we have left the issue to the social partners , this is where the main responsibility lies .
With each company they will have to give flesh and blood to this agreement in collective labour and others agreements , because we are not doing it now .
And that is why I wonder whether we should continue to deal with proposals like this in this way .
Mr President , I would like to ask Commissioner Flynn which proposals on the issue of shifting tax on labour to other sources he considers achievable at the summit in Luxembourg .
Perhaps he can indicate whether tax on energy or other taxes will indeed now stand a chance .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mrs Jöns on the splendid degree of skill she has brought to this difficult issue : the blanket agreement concerning part-time work .
What we have before us is the result of labour market negotiations .
Given this , it is very difficult to reject this proposal , although its shortcomings are evident .
I think the rapporteur has come to the right conclusion in proposing that the results of these negotiations should come in for some strong criticism , though their acceptance is recommended .
The greatest problem with the blanket agreement is its limited scope .
The agreement affects only part-time workers and totally ignores others in atypical employment relationships .
However , it is just these groups of workers that have problems which , as the report states , are often greater than those of regular part-time workers .
The Commission must immediately start drafting a motion for the equal treatment of those in untypical employment relationships , who remain left out of this motion for a directive .
Furthermore , I am afraid that there is a danger that the same kind of watered-down decision will come out of the Luxembourg Employment Summit as from this part-time work contract .
Messages emanating from yesterday 's marathon meeting of the Council of Ministers have not , at least around me , increased optimism for the prospect of getting very clear and concrete decisions on how we might improve the employment situation in Europe on any large scale .
Hopefully my fears are groundless , but yesterday 's meeting of the Council of Ministers was not very promising .
Even the Commission has shown more initiative and been more active that the Council of ministers and individual states appear to have been .
I also wonder about the attitude of my own country , given that it is not interested in the Commission 's proposal to reduce the VAT burden on services .
But that would help to create those very jobs which are badly needed in the service sectors .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , many of us have great hopes leading up to the forthcoming summit in Luxembourg .
There are not many days left to go .
Above all it must be the 30 million unemployed who hope that this summit will achieve great things .
I am not so sure that it will , but let us still hope .
Many people believe that growth is the only thing that can help us out of unemployment . Even Mr Hernández Mollar does so in his report .
I believe that we are going to fail if we believe that growth will get us out of this mess .
I do not believe , you see , that there is one single solution . I believe there are very many solutions in which we must have faith .
These solutions look very different depending on what country , what region and what local conditions we are speaking of .
One such solution , which we must allow to bloom , might be to concentrate on the most serious problem we have , youth unemployment .
We Greens believe that you must guarantee young people training positions in companies if they are ever to get a job .
Otherwise they will end up outside the labour market for a long time .
We have to be able to give them a paid apprenticeship for a lengthy period , perhaps even up to two years .
We must also encourage and support what we call the third sector or the social economy ( a loved child has many names ) which is concerned with cooperatives , non-profit-making organizations , small businesses , things concerned with cultural work , with nursing , caring and that type of activity .
In Sweden there are in fact examples showing that this is the sector which is growing most rapidly ; i.e. small cooperatives and the third sector .
It is also absolutely essential to have an environmental tax reform linked to a reduction of tax on work .
I totally disagree with Mr Hernández Mollar regarding the wonderfulness of EMU and that EMU is the most important thing for getting results where employment is concerned .
There are well-known economists , Mr Hernández Mollar , who maintain the precise opposite , and we have already seen the effects of EMU with the cutbacks which have been made .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Hernández Mollar for the quality of his report on employment in Europe in 1997 .
Eighteen million unemployed , very different social legislation from one country to another , economic policies that are still too nationalist , a growth rate which is still not sufficient to create true jobs and to curb , let alone reduce , the European scourge of unemployment .
In the face of this balance sheet , we today have the proposals from the European Commission along with the European summit in Luxembourg which will take place in 48 hours .
My group , the European Radical Alliance , is happy with the proposals made by the Commission .
How could you not subscribe to them in the face of the failures of national employment policies , at least to date ?
How could you not accept the setting of quantifiable objectives at last , aimed at effectively fighting unemployment in Europe ?
On this point , it is unacceptable that Germany and Spain are blocking the process which is to be undertaken in Luxembourg in a few days time .
The guidelines in these proposals will enable the creation of nearly 12 million jobs by the year 2003 and bring the rate of unemployment down from 10.6 % to 7 % .
An SME / SMI plan , professional training for 25 % of those unemployed , technological innovations , reduction of costs , these are the strong points of this plan .
Very good . But we could go further , be more daring , more ambitious .
At a time when the European Employment Summit is about to open in Luxembourg , European public opinion would not understand if we were unable to propose a strong project for employment in Europe , unable to admit the urgency , to search at a European level for solutions to this problem that undermines , traumatizes and weakens each one of our countries .
After European peace and security , which have been assured for decades by the European Union , employment is the main concern of our citizens and a good measure of the health of our societies and of the dignity of our workers .
I support a socialist government in France , which has placed employment at the heart of the European project and it is , perhaps , to reply to one of my colleagues who was asking just now , because there are today a majority of socialist governments in Europe that the Luxembourg meeting may result in a true European employment policy , which we can but welcome .
ECU 800 million of aid to SMEs , European status for company heads and workers , improved European rates of enterprise creation , the development of small home-based industries , the lightening of the tax burden , there are so many factors which could enable us to go further .
Let us take courage , if we want to give meaning to Europe , if we want to make it credible and useful to our citizens .
A coordinated employment policy is required . We need a Europe which leads the battle , here in Parliament as well as in Luxembourg , for modernization of our social relations .
After the failure of a social Europe , we must not mess up the employment meeting in Europe .
The citizens of Europe would never forgive us .
Mr President , I consider the report by Mr Hernández Mollar to be extremely important .
This report of the Community Commission was given an almost unanimous vote in this committee . Of course I also congratulate and thank its rapporteur , Mr Hernández Mollar .
Mr Flynn , the report was based on a very valuable piece of work undertaken by the Commission .
Today , just a few hours before the special summit on jobs , we in Parliament are having a debate on the same issue . Quite by chance rather than by good fortune .
I believe that this is our opportunity to send out a strong , separate political message , but one without political oratory and without political rhetoric , but with political action .
I do not feel pessimistic concerning the special summit meeting the day after tomorrow .
What does worry me of course is the widespread - and well-worn - pessimism about the outcome of the meeting .
Yet I believe that this meeting may , and please forgive my pomposity , be of historic importance . Since those citizens , that nightmarish number of our fellow citizens who are trapped in the vicious circle of unemployment , in the final analysis do not care about who or what is to blame , but value , quite rightly , solutions and results .
This means those responsible must shoulder their obligations and take action .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Hernández Mollar on his report and on a very good speech .
I would just like to add and to reiterate that jobs can only be created through many more successful and expanding companies .
Particularly in the debate on employment politicians appear to be concentrating exclusively on measures which tackle the symptoms rather than the disease .
Many of us appear to want to regulate a bit more .
But I think that some of the wording in the Jöns report suggests a fear of leaving anything unregulated .
We must look upon the new age with confidence .
I believe that employees and employers need to have more room for individual agreements .
Quite clearly the labour markets also need to have fewer regulations .
It can be seen that countries with a lower level of regulation have also succeeded best in the fight against unemployment .
The UK under a Conservative government is a prime example .
The Commission 's guidelines for the employment policies of the Member States for 1998 emphasizes four sound concepts .
I welcome the debate on individual people 's employability and adaptability .
But the keyword is entrepreneurship .
From 1988 to 1995 small and medium-sized businesses in Europe created 250 , 000 new jobs per year , while businesses with more than 100 employees lost 200 , 000 jobs .
These 250 , 000 new jobs are good , but are not sufficient .
That is why the policy must now be aimed at avoiding barriers to new jobs by having more growing companies .
For that we should not switch taxes , but reduce them .
Working hours will also have to be flexible .
Again I say to this House : the EU 's Member States should not give up prosperity and growth through job sharing .
Mr President , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs for their work , which falls within the remit of improving employment policy on the eve of the European Summit .
I believe that our work has shown that we have a spirit of confidence and determination with regard to this summit , because it is what our citizens are asking for .
It also shows the political will of the European Parliament to make progress in this area .
Furthermore , my group has demonstrated this , because we proposed the anticipated allocation of ECSC surpluses to EIB loans for SMEs which create jobs .
It is a concrete proposal to make progress in this area .
Personally , I would have liked to see us go further and that the employment summit would enable social indicators to be defined , for I believe that our citizens do not understand very well why criteria exist with regard to Maastricht but not with regard to social policy .
Mr Commissioner , I would like to make a concrete proposal : as the Summit will last two days , I propose that on the first day , the Heads of State reflect , but that on the second day they invite fifteen young unemployed people from Europe and they tell them clearly what proposals they could offer them so that , tomorrow , they can find work .
Share this proposal with the Heads of State and of Government .
This would prove their concrete determination to make progress on this issue .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I believe our most important task in the eyes of the general public is to solve unemployment in Europe .
That is why many people , including myself and others , have great expectations of the Luxembourg summit . In fact , it must not fail .
We need a positive business climate .
We need reduced tax on employment and increased tax on environmental and natural resources , as many have said .
We need new companies to grow which can take advantage of the future recycling society with new environmental technology , etcetera .
We need simpler and cheaper services .
We need to support female enterprise , and not just with regard to jobs for women .
We also need lots of local solutions .
I do not believe in any fiscal or financial policy .
Nor do I believe that EMU is a kind of ' open sesame ' which is going to solve all the unemployment problems in the EU .
That is not how things work .
But now that there are proposals for convergence criteria for budgets and for inflation targets , there must also be convergence criteria for employment in order to balance out the budget and inflation targets .
That is why it is necessary to introduce these kinds of convergence criteria , with the same standards , requirements and levels as for budgets and inflation , as a step towards solving the problem of unemployment .
However , measures must be taken at the national level .
Mr President , I am going to speak on the framework agreement on parttime work , but first I should like to congratulate my compatriot Mr Hernández Mollar for his work and his speech .
Two types of part-time work exist at the moment . One relates to so-called corporate strategy , which is defined according to company interests .
The second type corresponds to the strategy of the individual , in which employers adapt to their workers ' needs .
Obviously , the first type is the most common . This means that , generally speaking , part-time work does not satisfy the requirements of the people who are obliged to do it , most of whom - over 80 % - are women .
Mrs Jöns , I congratulate you on your report .
I agree with both the thinking behind it and the resolution .
Above all , I support the idea that this agreement should contribute to overcoming the gender-specific segregation of the labour market , and that no direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds of gender can ever be justified .
In calling on the Commission to prepare an annual report on part-time workers , I hope that my amendment requesting a specific chapter on the situation of women will be supported . My amendment was inspired by the following question : does part-time work liberate women and represent progress on the issue of equal opportunities , or does it perpetuate the traditional division of roles and fail to benefit women at all ?
I hope that chapter can be written , so that we can have an answer to this question .
Mr President , the agreement between the social partners on part-time work is , to be honest , even more dreadful than the original one which covered parental leave ; what is more , the treatment of part-time workers is undermined by countless exceptions in this agreement , and the flexi-workers have simply been fobbed off .
How is it possible that the European Trade Union Congress agreed to this ?
Mrs Jöns uttered serious accusations in her report .
It is no coincidence that the agreement was reached ten days before the Amsterdam Summit , and in doing so the social partners sacrificed the importance of part-time and flexiworkers to the preservation of their position of power in the new treaty .
I am afraid that Mrs Jöns is right about that .
Perhaps the fact that more than 80 % of part-time workers and most flexi-workers are women plays a part in this .
Or should I say : after all , they are only women , gentlemen of the trade unions .
We are on the threshold of the summit on employment , which is in danger of becoming a disaster , although I understand that Mr Pronk continues to have faith in the socialist leaders .
This agreement , too , is a missed opportunity to stimulate part-time work , and thereby create new jobs .
We really must get rid of this corporatist procedure which farms out European social policy to social partners without there being a parliamentary driving force .
In her original draft resolution Mrs Jöns took the view that the agreement , and I quote her original resolution , does not need to be transformed by a Council directive , because this contributes neither to uniform standards , nor to increased legal security .
That was a brave and appropriate conclusion .
But unfortunately it had disappeared from the current report .
Yet I continue to agree wholeheartedly with that original vision .
I would like to ask Mr Flynn if he plans to do anything with the amendments which this Parliament will adopt , and when will the Commission produce the additional directive for atypical work , as is requested in paragraph 14 .
Because this is particularly important in this case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the employment report for 1997 confirms the worsening of the job market situation in many details .
Women 's unemployment has risen further , youth unemployment is at 20 % , relaxation is not in sight .
The reasons for the high unemployment lie firstly in the trend of business activity , which continues to be bad , but also in structures which have become rigid , and make it more and more difficult to act nimbly in international competition .
Fair competition within the EU is also made impossible because of the existence of different social and environmental standards in the individual Member States of the EU .
The consequence is that the net growth of jobs in 1996 is entirely due to part-time jobs .
This is a disturbing development , which offers no real solutions , above all for socially weak groups , and above all for women .
Low income , bad social security and low chances of improvement are the start of social impoverishment .
The special Luxembourg summit on employment questions takes place against this background .
A summit which is linked with high expectations , because the Commission has announced the ambitious goal of 12 million jobs .
It is in the nature of things that much is expected of those who promise much , and there will be deep disappointment in the end if these goals are not achieved .
Mr President , I wish to express my congratulations to Karin Jöns for the excellent report and thorough work she has undertaken on the issue of part-time work .
Secondly , I wish to congratulate and thank the Commissioner and the social partners for making some progress after many years of difficulties ; but it is a qualified thank you and qualified congratulations .
I want to refer specifically to the position of women , who make up over 80 % of part-time workers in the European Union .
In many Member States such part-time workers do not enjoy equal rights with full-time workers .
This is reflected in their pay and pension entitlements .
For example , women working full-time receive on average 80 % of men 's full-time pay .
However , in the United Kingdom women working part-time receive on average only 58 % of the average hourly earnings of men who work full-time .
This pay gap between women working part-time and men working full-time has not narrowed in the last 20 years .
The low pay of women part-time workers is reflected in their current social insurance entitlements .
Again an example from the United Kingdom : 2.25 million women workers - mainly those working part-time - are excluded from social insurance schemes because their wages are too low .
This inequality between part and full-time workers is increasingly contributing to the fastest growing group of the poor in Europe . That group is older women .
A recent study illustrated that two-thirds of older women are receiving minimum pensions compared with one-third of older men .
The framework agreement is a small , but I hope significant , step in a process which may lead to greater equality since it will allow part-time workers the opportunity to compare their positions with full-time workers and require employers to address the issues of equal treatment and equal pay .
However , the agreement , as Karin Jöns ' report thoroughly demonstrates , is very limited in its scope , and it is necessary for the Commission to draw up a new draft directive which will protect all atypical workers against discrimination .
If the Commission 's proposals for its employment guidelines for 1998 are to take effect , then it is important that the Commission draws up some legislation and brings it before the institutions so that this can be implemented .
We need to ensure that all our workers have equal protection in the social field and in terms of employment , pay and conditions .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate Mrs Jöns and Mr Hernández Mollar on their reports .
I would like to focus on the Hernández Mollar report .
As many speakers have already said , coming up to the Employment Summit , it is one of the key areas where Parliament could at last have its voice heard by the Council and the Heads of Government .
Despite what other people may think , some brilliant ideas come from this Parliament .
I know there is a lot of rubbish but there are some very good ideas .
In particular , in Mr Hernández Mollar 's report one sees the basis for employment creation and , most importantly of all , employment retention - looking at ways of maintaining jobs as well as creating new ones .
If I were to hope for anything from the Employment Summit it would be for the Commissioner to come forward with three suggestions .
Firstly , that tourism as an employment growth area be recognized .
Secondly , that the small and medium-sized enterprise sector , which has been spoken about by other colleagues , be given freedom to operate and create new jobs and new economic growth within the whole European Union .
Thirdly , previously wrong decisions of the Council , Commission and European Parliament should be overturned .
In particular , the question of the abolition of duty-free in 1999 , which will cost us over 400 , 000 jobs .
Those are practical measures which can assist employment growth and retention .
Mr President , first of all I would like to express my congratulations to Mrs Karin Jöns for her report , which quite accurately exposes the problems caused directly or indirectly by the Agreement that was signed by the bodies of the European organizations of employers and employees and which , unfortunately , lags far behind the settlements which have been elaborated by the International Work Organization or which are already being implemented in certain Member States .
Mr President , we are faced with two sides of the same problem , with enormous implications for the living and working conditions of working people .
On the one hand , an entire operation to make part-time employment common practice , a whole range of atypical forms of employment , the major responsibility for which lies in the general orientation of the economic and social policy of the European Union .
On the other hand , the provocative downgrading of those rights concerning not only the part-time employed , but also all atypical forms of work , which are placing millions of workers at the mercy of their employer , with dramatic reductions in wages , in holiday entitlements , in benefits , in hours of work and in social security .
Working people are being called upon , through this virulent and unjust treatment and through the widespread increase in poverty , to shoulder the burden of strengthening the competitiveness of European capital .
It would appear that the European trades unions that have signed this agreement have assumed enormous responsibilities towards working people .
On the contrary , in fact this agreement promotes employer immunity and in no case does it cover the rights of working people in part-time employment .
It is also clear that the European Union has not freed itself of its own enormous responsibilities by promoting a legal basis which downgrades rather than promotes the labour , wage and security rights of working people .
As a result it is necessary to promote measures for the defence of those who nevertheless will work under part-time or atypical work agreements . Above all , however , an obstacle must be placed in the way of the anti-labour logic of the push to make flexible employment common practice .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Hernández Mollar for an altogether outstanding report .
On two previous occasions I have talked about the employment situation .
Now that we are debating it again , we can note that the situation has improved slightly .
But , in spite of everything , we now have a new situation .
This time we have a new treaty with a partially new content .
We also have a summit on employment which shall take place this week .
I hope that this summit does not become one more in a series of summits between Heads of Government from which people emerge with a ' book of poetry ' which is put on the shelf and taken out on ceremonial occasions .
We now need concrete objectives : concrete objectives with regard to youth unemployment , concrete objectives with regard to long-term unemployment and concrete objectives with regard to an active labour market policy .
We also need a major effort in the area of training measures and a proper effort in the area of small and medium-sized businesses .
I would like to comment on a few things .
The question of EMU and its effects on employment are disputed .
What I say is that it cannot be disadvantageous to a long-term rise in employment to have balanced budgets , to have low inflation and to have low interest rates .
Seen in the long term that can only be good .
We now have that situation in Europe , so we should now have an opportunity for long-term growth in employment .
Secondly , Mrs Carlsson from Sweden , who is not here right now , said that there was a clear link between deregulation and higher employment .
That is not true .
Before Mrs Carlsson became a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we had the Molitor report , which investigated this question .
We looked into it on the committee and there is no such link .
If we look at the countries in Europe which have the highest levels of employment , they do not have the most deregulated labour markets .
Finally , I want to tell Mr Pronk that it is true that there are 12 Social Democratic governments .
We shall try to influence them prior to the employment summit .
However , I believe that the most important person to talk to is Helmut Kohl .
I therefore think that is what Mr Pronk should do , since that is the greatest obstacle leading up to this employment summit .
Mrs Lulling wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I note with amazement that we are interrupting this debate for Question Time , and that it will not be continued until 9 p.m.
I know that we are running late , but if this was accepted for the mad cow issue , why not do as much for the questions .
I am asking the House to continue with the debate regardless .
It should soon be finished and you do not interrupt such an important debate for questions , whose importance I contest ...
Mrs Lulling , I respect your opinion , but I must remind you that the agenda is set at the start of the session by the chairmen of the political groups , and we should respect what we have ourselves approved .
In the agenda , Mrs Lulling , it was approved that Question Time to the Commission should start at 5.30 p.m. today .
Besides which , Mrs Lulling , there is also an agreement with the members of the Commission that they should attend here at strictly specified times .
In any case , this is a question which you should refer to the chairmen of your respective groups , to see if they think the system should be changed .
However , ladies and gentlemen , my duty as the Presidency 's representative at this moment is to respect the agenda which has been approved .
And the agenda states that Question Time to the Commission should start at precisely 5.30 p.m. today , so that is what we are now doing I am afraid , Mrs Lulling - and five minutes late .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0901 / 97 ) .
The Council 's 1991 decision on the abolition of intra-Community dutyfree sales granted a particularly long transition period ( up to 1999 ) in which duty-free sales would still be tolerated within the scope of the single market .
This was a significant exception to enable the operators and competent authorities to take all the necessary measures to adapt to the new scenario , in which these specific tax benefits will no longer be granted .
It is the Commission 's duty to report the well-known distorting effects of duty-free sales , particularly with regard to the various means of transport , where in the Union in general trains and buses compete with sea and air transport , the latter two benefitting from the possibility of offering duty-free sales .
It cannot be ruled out that some transport fares may increase following the abolition of duty-free sales .
The benefits of duty-free sales , on ferries for example , help them to operate to a certain degree .
The Commission considers that , if Community support were provided in this sector ( for Ireland or other similar cases ) it would be advisable to look for a specific solution totally independent from the mechanisms of indirect taxation .
Ireland has identified the tourism sector as one area where it is possible to generate economic growth and new job opportunities for our young people .
With the help of European Union structural fund investment in tourism projects in recent years , it has been possible to record significant advances in the tourism sector .
Equally vital components of successful tourism policy for an island nation such as Ireland are low-cost air and car-ferry links .
The cost of both air travel and ferry links has been kept at a low level , partly because of the EU-imposed competition between airlines and between car ferries and partly because of the cross-subsidizing of transport costs through duty-free sales .
Why does the Commission continue to disregard the calls from MEPs , Member State governments and the tourist industry and refuse to bring forward proposals to extend duty-free for a further ten years or until all indirect taxes have been harmonized ?
Mr Collins , I would like to point out that the Commission also regards tourism as important as a sector generating growth and employment , and that the Commission regards the situation of the islands as important and worthy of attention .

At the same time , we believe it essential that the single market should operate fully and , within its scope , eliminate serious distortions to competition , because we think that those concerns , that may arise with reference to the specific cases indicated by Mr Collins , may be adequately taken into account with means that do not distort the single market and that do not have the disadvantage , as duty-free sales do , of generating unemployment in other sectors of the economy .
Would the Commissioner not agree that there are inevitably going to be distortions to air and ferry links , meaning very serious distortions to internal travel within a single market , as a result of the removal of duty free , for the simple reason that it costs a great deal more to fly from Dublin , Scotland or Milan to Brussels than possibly to take the train from one of the Benelux countries ?
Would he not think it is more appropriate to extend the derogation for ten years , bearing in mind not just the jobs in the duty free sector but also the fact that you are calling a special conference to boost employment in the European Union , whereas , in fact , with one fell swoop you are going to make approximately 13 , 000 people unemployed ?
What we know for sure is that the present system generates distortion .
If the elimination of intra-EU duty does have certain consequences then , as I just said in response to Mr Collins ' question , specific instruments can well be considered - and the Commission is prepared to do that - to alleviate any adverse consequences .
But we must not close our eyes to the fact that the present system generates , and has for many years generated , hidden , adverse side effects on other means of transportation , on other ways of doing retail business .
It also has the more subtle and perverse effect of transferring resources from general tax-payers to those benefiting from the use of duty free .
Normally the average tax-payer is less well-off than the user of duty free .
Having said that , I repeat that though the Commission is definitely not prepared to consider a prorogation of the duty free system , it is willing to consider what transparent , clear instruments might be put in place to offset certain specific , adverse consequences , should they materialize .
Question No 25 by Jan Bertens ( H-0820 / 97 )
Subject : EU policy on APMs in the aftermath of the Conference of Ottawa
In December the ' Ottawa Treaty ' to ban APMs will be signed .
In that regard it is of vital importance that the Union gives a signal to support the global campaign to ban APMs .
What concrete steps is the Commission going to take to increase participation in the Ottawa Treaty and activities in demining of third countries ?
What concrete proposals is the Commission intending to make during the Ottawa Conference in December ?
Do the funds set aside in the 1998 draft budget give the right signal of commitment to the Ottawa Conference in December ?
As everyone knows , the European Commission is making a decisive contribution to the international action aimed at overcoming the anti-personnel landmines tragedy .
In the last two years , around ECU 52 million have been allocated to mine-clearing measures in the countries most affected .
The Commission has therefore been invited as such to the Ottawa Conference where it will be represented by the Commissioner responsible for humanitarian aid .
The signal to support the Commission in the battle against landmines is now loud and clear .
It is also clear that the signature of the agreement by the States supporting it will not mark the end of the process , but will encourage all the parties in question to intensify their efforts .
For that reason , the Commission is attributing particular importance to the Action Forum that will be held at the same time as the signature ceremony .
The Commission will take an active part in all the discussion groups where it will firmly insist on the need to strengthen international coordination , emphasize the need to improve the means of management and data banks and describe the capacities it has available .
At a practical level , in 1998 , the Community will implement four types of measures in the mines sector .
Firstly , the European Commission will to a large extent continue to support the anti-landmine actions worldwide , using all the resources available , including the ECU 7 million of the anti-landmine budget line and the plans implemented in all the countries affected , through the budget lines for reconstruction , cooperation in development and humanitarian aid .
Secondly , the Community will become the first individual supporter of the programmes drawn up by the International Red Cross Committee , aimed at helping landmine victims and making public opinion aware .
Thirdly , the international and regional actions will be supported by plans drawn up by organizations such as the United Nations and the Southern African Development Community .
Fourthly , and finally , the technical plans will be intensified , irrespective of the type of measure .
Mr President , the Commission , which will benefit from the constant support of Parliament , can make an enormous contribution to achieving the Ottawa objectives .
May I wholeheartedly thank the Commissioner , and through him the entire Commission , for the way in which they have defended themselves against the plague of landmines .
We are delighted that Commissioner Bonino will be present in Ottawa .
Mr Cunningham and I myself will represent this Parliament .
It is unnecessary to call on this Parliament here to later on play a leading role with the Commission during the second phase of the Ottawa process .
Financial efforts , as you are well aware , Mr Commissioner , even hundreds of millions are not enough , but I am in any case delighted that the first step has been taken .
I have two questions .
Will the Commission raise the issue of landmines , anti-personnel mines , at the transatlantic summit which is to be held the day after the Ottawa Summit ?
And what attempts will the Commission make to get China , Vietnam , Iran and even the United States to add their names to the signatories ?
And furthermore , how does the Commission hope to improve the existing technology , because I understand that at present mines are still cleared using technology which originated during the First World War ?
First of all , as pointed out by the questioner , I would like to record the full agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on this important matter .
Without being able to give a very detailed answer to the second question , I can recall once again our opinion that Ottawa will certainly not end a process , as after this meeting there is a lot still to be done ; certainly , the various international aspects , that Mr Bertens pointed out in his second question , will all be duly taken into consideration and , in this sense , the Action Forum that will be held at the same time as the signature ceremony will be of great importance .
I would like to add that the United States have announced that they have appointed a special representative to guide and boost the Demining 2010 initiative , which also indicates the United States ' interest in this matter .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , there was something missing from your splendid answer , at least from my point of view .
It was once said - I no longer know by which Asian politician - that landmines are the nuclear bombs of poor nations .
There is some truth in that .
I believe that what it refers to is that the landmines , and the whole situation , which is sometimes difficult to solve , can mostly be traced back to the fact that the two great nuclear powers , Russia and the United States , have done nothing themselves , despite their earlier promises , about nuclear disarmament .
Is the Commission prepared to refer to this question in relation to landmines ?
Because as long as there is a nuclear bomb monopoly for two great powers , there will be no disarmament !
First of all , I can assure you that I will pass these points on to my colleague , Mr van den Broek , who is responsible for this matter .
Personally , I have no doubt that the aspects of the world framework you have brought to light will be kept in mind , otherwise I cannot see how the European Union can carry out its action effectively ; also , aware of the determination with which the Commission has acted and intends to continue acting on this subject , I think I can assure you that this dimension you have brought to light will be perfectly kept in mind .
Question No 26 by David Martin ( H-0798 / 97 )
Subject : Primates as laboratory animals
Would the Commission please detail its plan for involving the European Parliament in the elaboration of the ' Community Policy Statement on the use of Primates as Laboratory Animals ' which is currently being drafted in the meeting of national competent authorities for the implementation of Directive 86 / 609 ?
Mr President , the first draft of the Community 's statement of policy on the use of primates in research was produced in 1994 .
The initiative is aimed at improving the supervision of the acquisition and use of primates for test purposes in laboratories .
Further work on this statement was put on hold until well into 1997 , as first it was necessary to resolve the important question of producing statistics on the use of animals in research .
The competent authorities of the Member States finally agreed on use of joint statistics in April 1997 .
The first discussions on the draft statement have just begun .
On 4 December 1997 , the Commission 's service branch will have a first meeting with the national authorities responsible for protecting the animals used in animal research .
A subsequent meeting is already scheduled for early 1998 .
We very much hope that the meeting in December will give the Commission 's service branch an opportunity to assess the situation on primates including wild animals as it appears in the Member States .
It will then be possible to draw the necessary conclusions for the EU .
We can then decide what tools to use .
It may be a political statement , a recommendation from the Commission or an actual law initiative .
Once the preparatory work is complete and the status of the statement in law has been defined more precisely , the Commission will of course involve the European Parliament in the discussions .
And I would like to add that it is my personal belief that we will need to choose a form which gives Parliament a reasonable amount of influence in this very sensitive and important area .
I wish to begin by thanking the Commissioner for that very helpful response .
I wonder whether she would agree with me that primates are man 's closest relative and all the evidence shows that they feel pain and suffering in the same way as man ?
Therefore , the Commission 's work - which I repeat I welcome - should be aimed at ensuring that we make the minimum use of primates and secondly that their transportation and housing is of the highest order and has the highest welfare standards in mind .
I look forward to bringing this matter before the European Parliament so that we can give a political response to the Commission 's technical work .
Mr President , I can only say that I agree with the additional remarks completely .
I also think it is about finding a form whereby we uses animals as little as possible , and I also agree on the comments on transport .
I have already had an opportunity to have discussions with the animal welfare group here in Parliament , and I certainly think we will get some results too .
Mr President , as both a Dane and an Environmental Commissioner , I have been following the news of the serious environmental incident which happened in connection with the building of the Hallandsås tunnel in Sweden very closely and with considerable interest .
After such an incident , it is only natural to ask what could have been done to avoid it .
Could the Commission have intervened when work was suspended in 1995 to ensure that the most appropriate solution was found to the environmental problems before work continued ?
And let me say straight away : no , the Commission could not .
The Commission has no powers to check that the Community 's environmental legislation is being observed .
The relevant legislation , Directive 85 / 337 / EC on environmental impact assessment ( the EIA Directive ) became binding on Sweden when it joined the Community , in other words on 1 January 1995 .
Under the terms of the Directive , Sweden is obliged to assess the impact of new projects on the environment if the approval procedure started after 1 January 1995 .
The project in question , that is the Hallandsås tunnel , which is part of the west coast railway line , did not come under this obligation , as it had already been approved and started before that date .
The relevant Directive 85 / 337 / EC on environmental impact assessment does not state that a new EIA has to be carried out if a construction or building project which has been approved and on which work has already started is suspended temporarily and then restarted .
So there is no way the Commission can intervene in such a situation .
As I said , it is the Commission 's responsibility to ensure that EU legislation is followed ; but this does not extend to technical or engineering decisions , which are a matter for the implementing authority .
I would like to say thank you for your reply .
The environmental scandal at Hallandsås which involved the release of dangerous chemicals into the environment has caused serious damage .
It could most probably have been avoided .
What can be said with certainty is that if the project had complied with the requirements for environmental impact assessments found in Directive 337 of 1985 , the accident would never have happened .
The directive includes far-reaching requirements for accounts of all the consequences of various methods of working and also for a public statement of emission risks .
I think this shows how important it is that the Commission really ensures that the directive is implemented as soon as possible and really puts some weight behind the Union 's decision .
Sweden has had a long time to tighten up its legislation .
For investments of this type , however , I would like to question whether or not it would have been logical to have carried out a tougher environmental inspection in the light of the EU 's requirements .
No , the Commission has not had an opportunity to look into this matter .
I am aware that the Swedish authorities held an environmental assessment of the project themselves at an early stage of the proceedings , and I can perhaps say for Mr Virgin 's information that we have of course now amended the directive in question as Directive 97 / 11 / EC , which must be implemented by the Member States by 14 March 1999 .
If the environmental assessment Directive had been in force , it would have been possible to intervene and hold a new assessment , but this cannot be done with the existing Directive .
I would like to ask whether the draft directive on the assessment of certain plans , such as the programme 's effect on the environment , which the Commission recently put forward , could have had an effect if it had been in force , since a lot of the damage which has occurred is not directly project-related , so to speak , but is connected with the transport planning which took place a long time ago and which resulted in the need to build a tunnel , which has since led to leakages , which in turn led to the emission of toxins .
I would like to hear the Commissioner 's assessment of what effect this proposal from the Commission , which we in this Parliament also mentioned in a resolution on 22 October , could have had on developments at Hallandsås , and similar cases of course .
As I said to Mr Virgin , it is of course always interesting when an incident happens to consider whether it could have been avoided , and if it would have been better if another Directive had been in force .
But there was no other directive , and so of course we have to abide by the Directive which actually was in force and , under that Directive , there was no provision for the Commission to intervene in the matter .
As I said in reply to Mr Virgin 's supplementary question , the matter would have looked different if it was a question of Directive 97 / 11 / EC , but this Directive will not be implemented by the Member States until March 1999 , and until it is implemented , we cannot of course use the provisions it contains .
Question No 28 by Robert Evans ( H-0773 / 97 )
Subject : Policing at international football matches
In the light of the events of Saturday 11 October in the Olympic Stadium Rome during the football match between England and Italy is the Commission intending to conduct its own enquiry into the organization and policing of the event ?
With reference to previous resolutions and reports adopted in this Parliament does the Commission feel that the principles of free movement of people , including football supporters and others have been contravened ?
Constituents that attended the match , or who were simply shocked by the appalling scenes on television , have asked me to raise this issue at a European level .
Football is a sport enjoyed by millions ; negative images and the maltreatment of genuine supporters do serious damage to the efforts of the European Union in promoting sport as an essential part of European culture .
Proper planning and coordination , combined with effective but fair policing has demonstrated that many similar sporting events can take place without any such problems .
What steps does the Commission intend to take to enforce European legislation and to avoid any future repetition at similar events ?
The implementation of appropriate policing measures for the purpose of preventing hooliganism and violence generally at sporting events or other occasions attended by large numbers of people aims primarily to maintain public order .
The Commission thus does not have competence and is therefore not in a position to intervene in the way police forces in the Member States maintain public order on their own territories .
Within the Justice and Home Affairs Council , the police cooperation working group tackles this issue from an operational point of view , with liaison officers and an annual meeting of these contact points .
In this context , the Council adopted in 1996 a recommendation on guidelines for preventing and restraining disorder connected with football matches .
More recently , in 1997 , a joint action with regard to cooperation in public order and safety and a resolution on preventing and restraining football hooligans were adopted by the Council .
The Commission is , of course , in favour of the promotion and implementation of closer international police cooperation .
However , the implementation of appropriate measures for preventing and restraining disorders is undertaken by Member States in accordance with their own national laws and Community law .
Furthermore , a Council draft recommendation on the responsibility of organizers of sporting events is currently being discussed at a technical level .
The Commission is not involved in the application of UEFA regulations concerning stadiums but it does operate with organizations that have a specific role in this area such as the Council of Europe , where a standing committee has been created .
I thank the Commissioner for her answers although they are not answers to the questions I put .
She mentioned football hooligans several times .
If she were to look at the large number of newspaper cuttings regarding this particular event she would see that many of the people involved - and I have evidence - are not people who can be stereotyped as ' hooligans ' .
Many of them are barristers , executives , company managers , sales people and people from wholly different walks of life to those alluded to .
The point of my question was , does the Commission feel that the principles of free movement of people have been contravened ?
We hear of people being held in the football stadium until 3 a.m. , by which time no public transport was available and they had to walk home .
Many of them had items of clothing taken away which were never returned .
I am talking about a broader issue than the one raised in the Commissioner answer .
Could she address my specific points ?
I would once more remind the honourable Member that the Commission does not have competence and is therefore not in a position to intervene on the way police forces of the Member States maintain public order on their own territories .
We must respect that .
I just want to ask Mrs Gradin whether she is aware that a number of Members of this House will warmly welcome her statement ?
The Commission has got enough serious work to do without having to try to take over the responsibility of national police and national enforcing bodies .
Will she , in her answer , perhaps add just one or two sentences , particularly in praise of the football authorities of Member States who sought to coordinate the many complaints of genuine football supporters who were caused a great deal of inconvenience during that particular match and managed to communicate those complaints with great clarity to the Italian football authorities ?
Perhaps she will agree that the imperative is that the lessons learned from that should not have to be relearned during the World Cup next year .
All of us who are interested in football really hope that the coming events will be handled in a proper way .
As I said , the Commission is not involved in how UEFA and the relevant organizations are working with stadiums .
We cooperate with organizations that have a specific role in the area .
We should all try our best to have good football matches that we can enjoy .
Question No 29 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0756 / 97 )
Subject : Vocational training in the Maghreb countries
What measures and initiatives are to be undertaken to assist the development of vocational training schemes in the Maghreb countries ?
What are the expected results of such action ?
Mrs Rojo , as you know , Community policy on technical education and vocational training forms an essential part of Euro-Mediterranean policy as established at the Barcelona Conference , and its general aim is to increase the competitiveness of the industrial and services sectors , and to help the process of economic transition in those countries by creating a much better qualified workforce .
This is being achieved by means of a series of efforts designed to restructure the systems of technical education and vocational training , in close collaboration with other aid donors , both bilaterally and multilaterally .
You ask what specific steps we have taken in the association agreements negotiated so far , of which a fundamental part relates to vocational training .
Firstly , I must tell you ( although I think you already know ) that one of the first projects under the Meda scheme , which came into effect in October , is the Manform project being implemented in Tunisia , with a fund of ECU 40 million .
In collaboration with the Tunisian Government , we have used a programmatic approach to negotiate a large project - almost ECU 40 million - which is of great importance for that country . One of its objectives is to increase the competitiveness of Tunisian businesses , but above all , focusing on the network of small and medium-sized enterprises , it aims to improve the quality and capacity of the education and training system .
At the moment we are negotiating a similar programme with the Moroccan Government , and a decision will be reached before the end of the year .
It has the same overall aim of increasing competitiveness , which of course in the Moroccan case includes the private sector .
In the first instance , the contribution which the European Union has offered the Moroccan Government amounts to ECU 38 million .
We would like to establish negotiations covering vocational training and government attitude , which also - in the case of Morocco - take account of the demands of the private sector of Moroccan management .
I should also like to mention that in the past , within the framework of our relations with Egypt , we created the socalled Social Fund , as part of the process by which Egypt 's economy is being opened up , following that country 's negotiations with the Bretton Woods institutions .
Of this project , which amounts to approximately ECU 70 million ( if my memory is correct ) a large part has been devoted specifically to helping the Egyptian Government reform its whole system of vocational training .
In conclusion , I can assure you that we are supporting the reform of the educational system , and particularly of the vocational training system , as regards its links with the manufacturing sector , and its contribution to the private sector , particularly the small and medium-sized enterprises which need it .
These enterprises have the potential for good production , because they benefit from a cost differential in their favour , but the big problem faced by small or medium-sized enterprises in the Mediterranean area is precisely a lack of qualified workers .
That , then , is the line the Commission is taking , and will continue to take as other countries join in , for vocational training is a key element in the economic adaptation and liberalization of these countries , and the countries themselves are specifically asking us for help in this area .
Thank you , Mr González , for your very full , even exemplary , answer .
I would like to thank the Commission for its decisive actions in this area , especially now that it has enabled the European Foundation for Vocational Training to get involved in the Mediterranean countries , as we had requested .
I have been able to see with my own eyes what the European Union is doing in the Maghreb , and I think it is very successful .
However , I did notice some aspects where I think we are encountering more difficulties .
With Tunisia , I think the problem lies in managing to integrate vocational training with industry .
Another problem is making sure that education is adapted to the reform .
Also problematic , though less so in Tunisia than in other countries , is the use of positive measures to promote the involvement of women .
I also wonder whether you will boost these policies particularly in those areas where there is a lot of emigration , such as northern Morocco ?
Will you reform human resources training ?
Will you take account of the special characteristics of the Maghreb countries , so that you do not just copy what has been done with Tacis and Phare ? This last point is very important .
Thank you very much again , Mr González , Vice-President of the Commission .
Thank you very much , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , but allow me to say two things .
Firstly , you have exceeded your allotted time by one minute .
May I remind you that you are taking up time which is needed for other Members ' questions .
Therefore , please keep to time .
Secondly , I am a little surprised to hear you addressing your requests to Mr González .
I am not sure exactly which Mr González you are referring to , but ... Ah !
Mr Marín González .
I see , thank you very much .
It was just that , had it been some other Mr González , I was going to offer to pass on your comments .
However , Mr Marín González now has the floor .
Mr President , my second surname is González .
I am a second son , Mr President .
You are absolutely right : that is the line we are taking .
We do not have any problems negotiating with the World Bank , because in fact we are cooperating very closely with that institution in defining the objectives .
However , the countries in question have difficulty understanding the dual system of vocational training ( linking education , vocational training and industry ) which is normal in Europe and works very well there - you mentioned the experience of CEDEFOP in Berlin .
Furthermore , these are countries whose political and democratic development is relatively recent , and it is not easy to get the trade unions , the employers and the authorities to sit down together .
I am not going to hide the fact that this difficulty exists , because it obviously has an effect on negotiations for collective bargains and aspects related to internal politics .
You ask if there are programmes specifically for women .
The answer is yes , there are .
You ask whether we have considered the most deprived regions . Again the answer is yes .
In the case of Morocco in particular , one of the options offered to the Moroccan Government involves the development of industrial zones in the north , to consolidate a network of small and medium-sized enterprises , together with vocational training , so that the people who emigrate across the Straits of Gibraltar in such a distressing manner can at least be shown that they do have a future in their own country .
However , that will take time .
Thank you very much , Mr Marín González .
Question No 30 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0812 / 97 )
Subject : Fundamental freedoms in Cuba
In the light of the Pope 's forthcoming visit to Cuba , how do you view the current situation with regard to religious freedom in that country , and what efforts is the Commission making as part of developing economic relations to exert pressure on the Cuban Government to respect fundamental freedoms and human rights ?
I have a problem with this question . It refers to fundamental freedoms in Cuba in the light of the Pope 's visit , and to religious freedom and the role of the Catholic Church .
I think it is a question which should be addressed to the Vatican spokesman .
There is little sense in the Commission expressing an opinion about something which the Pope is going to do , acting through the Vatican State , which is completely sovereign .
Therefore , I do not think the Commission should express any opinion on this matter .
Mr President , privately you can believe what you like , like any of us , but you must not mock us !
You are the representative of the Commission , and what matters is that we should respect human rights in relations with third states .
That is not a job for the Pope , it is a job for the European Union , to put its external relationships , its development relationships to the service of human rights .
Religious freedom is an elementary human right , which you must press for !
What you have said seems to me to be simply mockery of the people who have died or been imprisoned in Cuba for their beliefs !
Mr Posselt , it is my responsibility as President to request - indeed , demand - that all Members of this House to show the greatest respect for the members of the Commission who attend here to answer their questions .
At no point did I notice anything offensive in the attitude of the Vice-President of the Commission , and I want to put that on record .
In any case , Mr Marín now has the floor to respond to Mr Posselt 's question - if he wishes to do so .

Thank you for your comments , Mr President .
Mr Posselt , I have neither insulted nor shown a lack of respect to any Catholic or any Christian in this hemicycle .
Absolutely not !
Your remarks seem to me to be deliberate and demagogic , and I do not accept them at all .
On the contrary , I have replied in an institutional capacity , because the European Commission has no reason to pass judgement on the aims of the Pope 's visit , as your question asks .
To make my point absolutely clear , let me tell you that I have been personally invited to the Vatican to give my opinion on this visit , but in an individual capacity , as a private person .
I am always very respectful in this sort of situation , so please do not use such an offensive tone .
The negotiations which the Vatican State is initiating with the Cuban Government ( about religious freedom , the Church 's presence , the opening of new churches , and new priests ) are strictly a matter for bilateral discussions between those two parties .
Furthermore , I think you should allow the Vatican authorities to carry out their work in peace . I think they are doing very well .
That is all I can say to you .
But I will not allow anybody to say to me in public that I was lacking in my respect to Catholics .
I do not accept that at all .
Mr Commissioner , this is indeed a very delicate matter , in which I think we have to choose our words very carefully .
I think there has been a misunderstanding here , Mr Commissioner .
I think Mr Posselt is talking about defending human rights , and as far as human rights are concerned , there are certain attitudes in Cuba which do not respect them adequately .
My supplementary question is this : I recently received a directive about respect for human rights under the legal basis of article 130w , that is , development aid .
Mr Marín , with all due respect and in an attempt to regain our sense of proportion - because I realize that we have to be extremely careful with this , and what you said is entirely reasonable - I would like to stick up for this view .
Where Cuba is concerned , the Commission should also take account of the criteria expressed in the proposal I have mentioned , and should act accordingly .
Mrs Palacio , thank you very much for your balanced view , but there has been no misunderstanding .
We both heard the Spanish interpreter , and I was accused of a lack of respect towards the Catholic Church . That is unfounded .
I have tried to be very careful .
I have a very good relationship with the Catholic Church and the Pope 's diplomatic representative .
However , negotiations of this type have to be conducted , as you say , with restraint and intelligence , and the Vatican authorities have to be allowed to negotiate .
Let them negotiate : I can assure you they are excellent and extremely clever negotiators .
That is all I can tell you , except to say that I am in contact with them .
Secondly , you asked me a general question , Mrs Palacio , but I have a completely clear conscience .
Indeed , I was the Commissioner who decided to break off the Cooperation Agreement negotiations , because I judged that the circumstances at that particular moment did not correspond with the mandate issued by the European Council .
How can this House ask me whether or not I am aware of problems of civil liberties ?
Of course I am aware of them .
However , there are ways of approaching this type of negotiation . As a layman and an agnostic - which I do not deny - it seems perfectly reasonable to me that religious freedom in Cuba , as in any other country , should be included in a set of negotiations if indeed the Cuban Government wants the Pope to visit Havana next year .
To me it seems common sense that they should negotiate , and we are in favour of it being done in this way , but your question was intended in a wider sense .
Therefore , let us allow the Vatican to negotiate with the Cuban Government , in order to resolve certain problems relating to the Catholic Church .
Do not forget , Mrs Palacio , that Catholicism is not the only religion in Cuba ; there are others , with other types of problems , making this a much more far-reaching debate .
So , now that we have made contact again with the Cuban Government ; now that we have made use of the new approaches they are making to a Member State - you know very well that things are improving ; now that the Cuban Government has contacted us again and it seems that a point of reference is being established for the future , which the Pope 's journey itself will open up : please allow us to see if we can guide this matter in a new direction . Let us see if we can reinitiate something we would like to see : far-reaching negotiations , adapted to the Cuban situation , which will allow us to persuade that country to enter into a privileged relationship with Europe .
However , I repeat : this sort of thing has to be done very carefully and cautiously .
Since the time allocated to questions to Mr Marín has now expired , Questions Nos 31 and 32 will be answered in writing .

Mr President , the Commission has already dealt twice with the subject matter which is again presented in the question .
First , I have written a letter on this question to the Spanish government , and I have already commented on it once in the debate on the Green Paper on numbering here in Parliament .
I will willingly repeat it .
However , I must first correct the assumption in the question .
The reference to the code number for Gibraltar in the Appendix to the Green Paper about a numbering plan is not in the ' Countries ' column , but in an untitled column , containing explanations of the actual use of certain code numbers , including quite different code numbers such as short codes for European services , telephone information , etc .
Also , the code numbers which have a geographical meaning are not country codes but regional codes .
The fact that the regional code for Gibraltar - which was not defined by us , but by the ITU - happens to be between those of Germany and Luxembourg has no political significance at all , but is the result of the numerical sequence of the table .
It was therefore decisively important to include a reference to code number 350 , which is currently used for Gibraltar .
That is , as I said during the debate , the table only gives an overview of technical data , based on facts .
Nothing else !
It does not take a political position .
I said in the debate that if we were to change these facts now , by taking the code number out of the table or something similar , we would be making a political declaration , which the Commission never intended .
Obviously , we would not get involved in this political question in favour of either side .
That was not the intention of the table , and I hope that is now finally clear .
We take the greatest possible care to be politically neutral in this question .
Commissioner , you mention a reply that was given to the Spanish Government , which does not concern us in this House .
Also , you say that the column in question is empty , with no entries .
Nevertheless , I can read that it says " country 's dialling code ' .
You could have put " territorial dialling code ' or " dialling codes for Member States and territories whose foreign relations are dependent on a Member State ' , or anything you like .
But " country ' means country , whether the word is used in a political document or an annex to a political document , which is what this is .
Therefore , I would ask you , Mr Bangemann , to please reconsider the situation , because there is a resolution from this Parliament requesting you to do so .
Mr President , the question has just been repeated again .
I have already said : If you look at the column on the far left , there is country code today , and then indeed comes 350 .
In the column on the right , where the proposals are , it says quite clearly : regional code .
For this reason , we refrained from changing it , because that would have been a political declaration .
But I would like to ask you to take account of what I have said .
It is the same as what is in the letter .
Fine , the letter does not concern you , but it may interest you that we also said clearly in this letter to the Spanish government that this is not a political statement .
It does not mean that we recognize Gibraltar as an independent country .
The fact that the number was assigned to Gibraltar has nothing to do with us , but is a decision of the ITU .
I have already said in the debate that we do not associate any political motivation with it , and I say once again as the answer to your question : We do not take any position in this way to one or the other claim of one of the two countries which cannot agree about this question .
I think that must be enough !
Question No 34 by Robin Teverson ( H-0779 / 97 )
Subject : The Millennium ' Bug '
Every owner of a computer is being faced with the potential collapse of his / her computer after the year 2000 simply because of the short-sightedness of the computer industry who have failed to program their products with the information necessary to function after the start of the new Millennium .
What action is the Commission undertaking to deal with the potential catastrophic repercussions of this ' Millennium Bug ' , as it is now known , not only throughout the European Union but also within the Commission itself ?
Mr President , this really is a problem , and Mr Teverson is quite right to refer to it again .
We have discussed this question intensively for the last two and a half to three years , prompted by the then British Minister for Telecommunications .
First we marked out the extent of the problem in a group of experts .
We then informed the Member States , and above all we informed those concerned in several conferences , and by now everyone is clear about what the problem means .
One can spend a long time thinking about where the roots of the problem are .
It may be to do with the shortsightedness of some people at that time .
It may also be , and I presume that this is the more likely explanation , that with the available memory which existed then it seemed too costly to many people , because the year 2000 was still relatively far away .
So they saved costs .
But now money has to be spent to make the necessary adjustments .
That is not cheap .
Whether a cost saving results if the two are compared to each other will surely depend on how long the old systems have been used .
So we have done everything necessary at the right time .
There is now software to make some of the necessary corrections , and therefore the users and suppliers of software themselves will know best how to solve the problem , and we know that this is now happening .
So we have again and again made people aware of this year 2000 problem .
We have set up working parties , etc .
Now we can do no more than we have already , and I think that now those who are affected must themselves do what they previously neglected .
Obviously it is easy to say that it would have been better if they had all looked forward to the year 2000 , but it is sometimes the case that foresight about such things is not very great .
Thank you for that reply .
Very briefly I would like to come back to you on three things : firstly is the Commission itself happy and confident that its own systems will survive through from 31 December 1999 to 1 January 2000 ?
Will the Commission 's own systems actually function properly ?
I would be interested to know , given all the research and the work that has taken place in the committee of experts , how well prepared you now think that business in Europe , in the European Union , actually is .
Are you confident that commerce will not grind to a halt on 1 January 2000 ?
Lastly I am concerned at reports that in the computer business itself systems are still being sold that do not sufficiently take account of the millennium bug .
Is this also the Commission 's understanding , and what steps is it taking in the single market to make sure that stops ?
Mr President , I can really only answer the first part of the question with hope .
I do not know 100 % how things will turn out , but I think that the responsible people have thought about it just as we have .
Perhaps it is easier for us , and that is , if you like , an advantage of neglect .
Everything has two sides . In the past , we neglected to make 100 % use of the possibilities of electronic data processing - we are now trying to change that - and to that extent we are not now in this fix , because we certainly have available data material which can be brought past the year 2000 in other ways .
That is only a provisional answer .
If the MEP is interested , we will willingly tell him what we ourselves in the Commission have done to solve this problem .
As far as others are concerned , they have been made aware of it .
We have also set up certain research programmes to help to find solutions . The solutions are there now .
There are two problems .
For one thing , they are expensive .
The software producers expect to be well paid for what they are offering .
For another thing , even if software is used , in some cases experts still have to be involved , and there are not many experts , so that there are bottlenecks , and I must say that it is possible that some companies will not sort out the problem , despite our efforts and their efforts .
Then there is a third group , to which you refer in your second question .
Indeed there are companies , even today , which think it will be all right : it does not affect us , we will get round it somehow .
And that means that there are still companies which have not discovered the problem , and that is alarming .
Question No 35 by Marianne Eriksson ( H-0783 / 97 )
Subject : Tunnel through the Halland Ridge in Sweden
Large amounts of acrylamide were released during the construction of a rail tunnel under the Halland Ridge in Sweden , and have polluted the groundwater for years to come .
During the construction work several workers using Rhoca-Gil sealing compound suffered damage to the nervous system and are at increased risk of cancer .
Farmers in the region are unable to sell their produce because of the discharge of acrylamide into the ground water .
At present only those who can prove the presence of acrylamide in their ground water receive compensation , although all farmers on the Bjäre Peninsula are having great trouble in disposing of their produce .
The French chemicals firm Rhône-Poulenc , manufacturers of Rhoca-Gil sealing compound , stated before the accident that the acrylamide content of the ceiling compound was 1.5 % ; it has since proved to be much higher .
What action does the Commission take against large European undertakings involved in breaches of environmental legislation ?
Will the Commission investigate Rhône-Poulenc 's sales methods ?
Will the Commission investigate the use of Rhoca-Gil sealing compound ?
Mr President , I have a very long answer , and I am wondering if I can shorten it in the interests of the other questioners .
In principle , the answer is as follows . First , we have all the necessary directives to understand this dangerous substance , which incidentally is classified as poisonous , level 2 carcinogenic and level 2 mutagenic .
This means that it is not a substance which can be handled carelessly . That is legally controlled .
That is the first point , and therefore the whole legal regulations are quoted here .
The second point is this . In the first place , it is the task of national authorities to ensure that substances which in our directives are classified as poisonous and dangerous are either kept out of use altogether , or , if they are used , the appropriate regulations for use are observed , so that no environmental danger occurs .
We are waiting for what the Swedish government will tell us .
We can then decide whether we need to make our own decision .
At the moment , therefore , we see no reason to intervene , but when the Swedish government reports to us what violations have occurred and how it has been handled , we will check whether there is an additional need to act .
That is the short form of a long answer , Mr President .
I can read it out , or I can give the answer to the MEP .
It is six pages long , so we would lose a lot of time if I read it out .
I would like to thank Commissioner Bangemann for his reply .
I look forward to receiving these six pages , since , just as the Commissioner says , it concerns a very dangerous substance .
I still do not really think that I have had an answer to the questions I put .
I now wonder , among other things , whether the Commission intends to investigate the use of the substance throughout the EU 's Member States .
It has been used for just over 20 years , not only in tunnel construction , but also at airports and in mines , and so on .
Are we totally unprepared ?
After all , the substance is forbidden in Japan and its use is restricted in the USA .
Surely , this is not the way the EU is going to compete in the world market ?
Mr President , as I have already said , we shall check that when we have the report of the Swedish government .
At the moment we are also investigating this substance within our regular risk assessments , whether it should be classified at a different level or possibly use of it must be completely forbidden .
That is a possible result of our current investigations .
Since the time allocated to questions to Mr Bangemann has now expired , Question No 36 will be dealt with in writing .

Mr President , Mrs Kjer Hansen , the questions concerns one of the grants which was approved for the 1993 PACTE programme .
The programme is financed in the form of a global grant to the European Committee of the Regions , which was commissioned to monitor the programme administration .
On the basis of the reports which were submitted to it , at the start of 1997 the Commission paid the Community resources which had been approved for it since 1993 , in full .
The administration office of the Committee of the Regions subjects each project to a check after the event .
In some cases , claimable expenditure which differed from the amount which the project manager stated in his final report was identified .
Before the last tranche was paid out , the Committee of the Regions required the project managers to send it vouchers for all expenditure .
It informed the Commission that most project managers met this requirement , and the remaining amount was paid to them .
If the project managers could not submit the required vouchers within the set period , the conclusion of the projects which were then still open was based exclusively on the expenditure which was classified as claimable .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I am glad that these payments have now been sorted out .
I feel it is annoying that there have been problems with the administration of the PACTE programme , because if people do not get the resources which they are due , this puts the EU in a bad light .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner a supplementary question , as to whether he can promise a deadline by when we can get the refunds we have been promised , so we do not find things dragging on for years again before those involved in the project can get the resources which the Commission promised .
Can the Commissioner set a fixed time limit for the payments ?
Yes , Mrs Kjer Hansen , indeed the execution of the PACTE programme was afflicted with many problems , and one cannot be at all satisfied with how it has gone , especially because , as you know , even during the process , because of the justified criticisms which the Court of Auditors and others made of the execution , the conditions for claimability had to be tightened .
I think that in future this must never happen again .
Directorate General XVI is therefore thinking very hard , first about how this cooperation can be further promoted , but on the other hand how such things can be avoided in future .
I can only promise you that we have learned from the problems of the past .
I welcome that answer .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to say a little more about the PACTE programme .
I know in the next few weeks she will be coming to a decision about the future of the PACTE programme .
I know she will not announce that today .
I understand that she has concerns about some of the deficiencies in management of the programme .
Will she accept today that some of the criticisms levelled at the PACTE programme are because some of her officials do not like the large number of small projects the PACTE entails : they prefer the bigger figures in the article 10 programme ?
Will she accept that there is some merit in the principle of having a programme run by associations of local authorities themselves , which have good contacts , rather than by private consultants ?
While we are trying to achieve concentration , will she accept that in this very fractional , peripheral part of the structural funds there is some merit in keeping a programme which provides very small amounts of money to large numbers of authorities that otherwise just would not get involved ?
Mr Howitt , I can very well share the principle , and I also know that the effect of these programmes was partly very positive , particularly in local communities .
But I also know that if we are unable to administer such programmes properly , afterwards the frustration is greater than the success .
It is not a matter of whether some officials perhaps are not so keen on seeing these programmes , but simply of what the Commission is able to do .
I believe that we must also have some ideas , not only with the PACTE programme , but also with all the article 10 actions , about how we ensure the mobilizing effect of such small projects , but at the same time find administrative forms which do not overstretch us .
There is no point in bravely starting such things and failing in the end because we are unable to ensure the appropriate management .
We therefore check all these things .
As you know , that has nothing to do with the fact that because of the inter-institutional negotiations we are forced to set up programmes where we have budget lines without a legal basis , and therefore we have to investigate again how we can include such programmes in the pilot projects .
I ask you please to understand that the Commission does not now simply make promises , but is really trying to find a system which can ensure responsible execution of such projects , at all levels , the Commission level and the level of the authorities which are carrying them out .
Mr Marinho , President Santer 's statements are based on the document Agenda 2000 , which was submitted in July .
He referred in what he said to the increase in total resources for objective 1 , resulting from the retention of the Commission proposal on the weighting , until now , of objective 1 , that is two thirds of total resources .
Apart from the Lisbon region , which considerably exceeds the threshold value of 75 % of gross domestic product per head , the level of regional prosperity of the Portuguese regions is appreciably below this threshold , so that they continue to be eligible for support within objective 1 .
Regions which lose their eligibility for support , which will probably include Lisbon , will receive a generous ' phasing out ' .
Finally , the proposal to retain the cohesion fund in its present form does not raise a question about Portugal 's further eligibility for support within this fund , so that in future Portugal will have available considerable resources from the Structural Fund and the cohesion fund .
Mr President , I had intended to put a question to the Commissioner asking whether she knew if the cohesion fund was included in the Commission 's accounts . The cohesion fund is not affected by the inclusion of a given country which benefits from it in the front line of economic and monetary union .
I was very pleased with her reply , because even before I asked the question the Commissioner gave me her assurance here that the countries in the front line of European monetary union , which will therefore be adopting the euro , will not be at a disadvantage in terms of the cohesion fund and that the fund will be maintained .
It was a splendid reply and very positive from the Portuguese point of view .
Mr President , Agenda 2000 makes a distinction , so to speak , between the continuation of structural policy for the 15 Member States , and pre-entry and structural support for new Members States after entry .
What I said , and what Agenda 2000 also ensures in this sense , is that support for objective 1 regions will not be reduced because of the entry of new members , but that the proposal is still two thirds of resources which are increasing in total .
Also , the cohesion fund will continue to be open for Member States which do not exceed 90 % of gross national product .
The half-time check refers to this 90 % and not to future members which enter in the period from 2000 to 2006 .
Does the Commissioner agree that in looking at which regions will qualify under the 75 % rule for objective 1 funding after 1999 , it would be inappropriate to apply this rule in a rigid , statistical way given that some regions will fall just above or just below the 75 % according to some , frankly , not very reliable statistics .
In the case of regions on the borderline , ought not consideration also be given to factors such as whether they came into objective 1 status during the last review - in other words whether they are regions that have only just gained objective 1 status and only just got the infrastructure and the procedures into place to benefit from it ?
Just as they are beginning to benefit from it and obtain results , it would make no sense whatsoever to cut them off , and that aspect merits consideration .
Mr Corbett , I must point out to you that your question goes beyond the scope of Mr Marinho 's .
The question being considered refers to Portugal , and you have strayed a long way from the point which was being made .
I do not know whether Mrs Wulf-Mathies wishes to answer your question , but in any case , you should restrict yourself to the subject covered by the question .
The floor is yours , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , if you would like to reply .
Mr President , I think I can do that quite briefly , because afterwards I shall go into the question again specially .
But the basis for calculating the eligibility for support of the regions is the last three years for which regional data is available .
Our problem is that we must make fixed rules , and however much I understand every individual with his imaginative arguments , I think we would all be in an awful mess if we did not keep to preset criteria .
As far as I can see , the 75 % criterion is mostly undisputed throughout the Community .
Question No 39 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0777 / 97 )
Subject : Agenda 2000
In its reflections on new objective 2 , Agenda 2000 states that ' a limited number of significant areas should be identified in order to facilitate an integrated strategy for economic development ' .
What is the Commission 's view on how these ' significant areas ' should be identified , will NUTS 1 or NUTS 2 classification be used for this purpose and will the final decision be left to each Member State to decide ?
Mr President , Mr McMahon , in Agenda 2000 the Commission proposed that simple , transparent and specific Community support criteria for the various types of area which fall under the new objective 2 should be set up .
These criteria should take account of the regional priorities of the Member States .
The affected areas should therefore be defined in the context of the partnership between the Commission and the authorities of the individual states , and the aid should be concentrated on the most disadvantaged areas .
However , implementation of an integrated strategy for regional development , in which actions to extend the infrastructure , human resources and the economy are meshed , requires a certain size .
Experience with objectives 2 and 5b shows that NUTS 3 regions or areas which have a coherent local economy and can be delimited administratively are most suitable as a spacial concept .
However , the Commission strives for a certain flexibility , which allows us to take account of national and regional criteria .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer .
Who will make the decision on the criteria ?
Will it be a joint decision ?
Will it be a Commission decision ?
Will the Member States make the decision ?
Secondly , what level will it be based on ?
Will it be NUTS 1 , NUTS 2 , or NUTS 3 ?
It is important that we receive some indication of the level the Commission is thinking of .
When is the decision likely to be made ?
Mr President , I indicated in my answer that I assume that the NUTS 3 regions , i.e. the NUTS 3 level , is in principle the suitable level .
Who decides ?
First , in the new Structural Fund orders , the criteria for eligibility for support are defined , and thus European criteria , which obviously require the consent of the Member States , are specified by the Commission .
The national criteria , which we shall take into account additionally , will be proposed by the Member States , and the Commission will investigate in partnership how far these correspond to the objectives and effects which are aimed for .
Third question : when ?
The Commission proposes to submit the new Structural Fund orders next year around Easter , and all further decisions then depend on the decisions of the Council , not just about the financial prospects , but also about the Structural Fund order .
Here the Commission is not the sole mistress of the procedure .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her answer , and ask her to say something , if possible , about the criteria for choosing these significant areas for objective 2 - the industrial zones mentioned in Agenda 2000 .
I should like to know whether the Commissioner thinks any of the following are going to be among the selection criteria for these significant areas for objective 2 : high unemployment ; the relative contribution of industry to the economic structure of these areas ; the proportion of jobs which have been lost in the older industrial sectors ; and additional problems such as social exclusion . Finally , insofar as these structural problems can be worse in transborder areas , could this be an additional selection criterion for areas for objective 2 ?
I will willingly do that , Mr President . We are currently working out the criteria .
I can therefore not give a final answer .
But it is correct that all the criteria which you have listed must certainly be taken into account , e.g. for industrial areas , dependency on a particular branch of industry and associated exceptionally high unemployment , for city areas , the extent of social exclusion , for instance , and for rural areas , not just dependency on agriculture , but also the danger of emigration associated with the decline of agriculture .
We shall therefore develop criteria for eligibility for support which are based on the origin of the problems - industrial regions , rural regions , parts of cities .
But we want the actions to be taken to be based on a programme and an integrated development concept , because it is important now not to be always looking at the past , but to develop prospects for the future .
We shall make proposals about this in the structural fund orders , and I am certain that we can discuss the individual criteria then .
Thank you very much , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , for joining us here today .
Since the time allocated to questions to the Commission has now expired , Questions Nos 40 to 79 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
Mr Howitt wishes to speak on a point of order .
I congratulate you , Mr President , on preserving the integrity of Question Time by sticking to the time and even overrunning ; I fully support your decision .
Could you comment briefly on the implications for the agenda this evening .
At the moment there is a debate scheduled between midnight and 12.30 a.m.
By overrunning that could be even later .
Can you give some guidance to members on the implications for tonight 's session .
Will the agenda be finished or will some reports be postponed ?
Parliament 's administrative staff inform me that they expect us to be able to complete all of the scheduled programme tonight , and finish by 12.30 a.m.
That is the information I have been given .
Of course , it will also depend somewhat on the discipline of those Members who speak , and the extent to which they respect their allocated speaking time , which occasionally leaves something to be desired .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Part-time work - Employment ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the following reports :
( A4-0352 / 97 ) by Mrs Jöns , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commissionproposal for a Council Directive concerning the framework agreement on part-time work concluded by UNICE , CEEP and the ETUC ( COM ( 97 ) 0392 - C4-0551 / 97 ) ; - ( A4-0353 / 97 ) by Mr Hernández Mollar , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission 's report " Employment in Europe - 1997 ' .
Mr President , I would just like to make an addendum so that the Minutes of the proceedings are correct .
A Swedish member claimed earlier that I was not here during his previous speech .
I was here , and I heard his attack on me .
However , there is no point in replying to it now since he is not here himself now .
Thank you , Mrs Carlsson .
But how could he have overlooked you ?
Mr President , I congratulate the two rapporteurs - and not just as a formality , because they really have done the best that could possibly be done on this theme .
Whether the Commissioner will be able to use these arguments , or the Commission 's own , to convince the fifteen young people who have been invited to attend the second day of the Luxembourg summit is another matter .
We will probably have to get used to accepting - at least in this Parliament , Mr President - that in matters of employment we have lacked a theoretical standard for a long time . We have learnt some lessons from benchmarking , that is , from the comparison of European industry with industry in the United States and Japan , who have been gradually depriving us of our market shares in the industrialized countries , and have been doing rather better than us in creating jobs .
However , the lessons we have learned have not of course been enough to solve the problem .
From that experience - not from a theoretical standard - we know that the services which affect companies ' competitiveness are more expensive here than on the other side of the Atlantic , and that we have to progress - to continue to progress - towards liberalization .
We know that our infrastructure is weaker , but we also know that the European Union can never find enough funds to tackle the infrastructure we need to create jobs .
We also know that we have to make the labour market more flexible .
Furthermore , we know that we spend less on research and development here than is spent in the United States , and that the involvement of private enterprise in this area is less . Also , the methods we have chosen , of direct assistance , do not work as well as earnings-related fiscal advantages .
I repeat that taxation on labour has gone up enormously , while taxation on capital has been reduced .
The solutions being suggested here do not fit this diagnosis .
It is clear that a tax on energy will not resolve the problem .
It is obvious that to reduce social security contributions - and that is the specific idea , Mr President - we have to start thinking whether the VAT we have , which is deducted immediately from capital goods , is appropriate in this employment situation .
It was when it was brought into effect .
We will probably have to start thinking about a form of VAT in which the tax on capital goods is not deducted immediately , in order to make capital relatively more expensive than labour , and to favour the replacement of capital-intensive methods by labour-intensive methods .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs on the excellent work carried out and speak in particularly about Mr Jöns ' report on the agreement on part-time work within the social protocol .
For some time now , a magic word has appeared in all the documents : flexibility .
The Council uses it a lot , the Commission uses it in its guidelines , the social partners also use it , and the European Parliament considers it to be one of the means of dealing with the problem of employment in its resolutions .
To really be effective , flexibility has to be of interest and convenient for everyone : workers and employers .
It has to favour a solution to the problems ; that is , it has to be able to increase employment , favour a reconciliation between work and family commitments for men and women , it should not discriminate with regard to working conditions , pay , social security and welfare , it should not penalize professional careers .
From this point of view , the Council 's position is highly contradictory - on the one hand , in fact , it calls for flexibility as an efficient means but , on the other , it is not prepared to sign commitments or to define rules governing flexibility and the way it should be applied .
The Commission 's first documents dealing with the regulation of atypical employment go back to the ' 80s .
Today , at the end of 1997 , we are dealing with a partial problem on the regulation of atypical employment , part-time work , within an agreement drawn up between the social parties which we certainly welcome , because we believe that social dialogue should be developed , but we consider it very partial .
We approve of Mrs Jöns ' report and believe her words to be enlightening ; we approve it because the agreement is actually harmless , but we realize that it does not take significant steps forward .
The employers are even more contradictory ; I think that they have been the fundamental reason for the agreement being very timid in dealing with the problem ; often in fact , as in my country , employers understand flexibility in one way only , as the freedom to do what you want in the company , without taking any rights into account .
This agreement is therefore partial because it only deals with part of the problems ; together with Mrs Jöns , we ask the Commission to finally take up its position , propose a directive on atypical employment and lay down regulations on all its aspects , because otherwise flexibility will remain an empty or even more dangerous word .
Mr President , there is an unfortunate tradition in the European Community that , when dealing with problems relating largely to women , a great deal of patience is required , for it will be at least several decades before you manage to get a legislative text adopted .
This has been the case concerning the implementation of article 119 on equal pay , equal social security , adjustment of the burden of proof and so on .
And too often , the mountain gives birth to a mouse .
This is once again effectively the case with part-time work .
In order to eliminate the discrimination which part-time workers face , the great majority of them - more than 80 % - women , the Commission made a good proposal for a directive regarding voluntary part-time work nearly twenty years ago .
It was , furthermore , on this basis , that a few years ago in my country , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , a law was established , after having decided to wait no longer for a European Directive as we were fighting a losing battle .
We are now confronted with a framework agreement concluded by some of the social partners - SMEs are not represented - on part-time work , an agreement that I would qualify as " watered down ' in comparison with the initial proposal for a directive and even in comparison with the amended version of 1983 .
First of all , it is missing an important word in the title : voluntary .
For what needs to be sorted out at European level is " voluntary ' part-time work .
This work is not atypical , far from it .
It will furthermore become less and less so , and the logical and non-discriminatory solution would be to simply apply to part-time workers the same conditions of salary , work , promotion and social security as applied to full-time workers , it of course being understood that they would be paid and covered in proportion to the hours worked .
But this logical , non-discriminatory principle , which could be easily implemented , does not seem to be easily understood by everybody .
I understand that with regard to social security , for example , pensions , you need to have worked a certain length of time to be able to benefit from the right to a guaranteed minimum pension .
I understand that with regard to health insurance it could seem unfair to work , for example , one hour per week and be insured by paying derisory contributions , when the illness or the operation costs the sickness fund as much as for a full-time worker .
We know there are these problems and I hope , Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) I wanted to say that we intended to ask for the withdrawal of the proposal .
But I will vote for it , whilst hoping all the same that it will bring an end to discrimination .
Mr President , I would like to begin by saying to the Commissioner how pleased I am to see him at this late hour .
One thing should be said : much is being said about flexibility here , but the Parliament gave another demonstration just now of how inflexibly we venture to manage our own Regulations .
Anyhow , I would still like to congratulate Mr Hernández Molar on his report , especially as I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that it adds something to what Mr van Velzen raised in his report .
This report contains a number of points of special interest which look like they might quietly disappear from the table of the summit in Luxembourg .
I would like to cite three points .
Firstly , and especially the importance which is attached in this report to income policy and social protection , within the scope of employment policy as well .
As a matter of fact , Mr Commissioner , that was one of the most important themes at the employment week last week .
I received a study recently , which I recommend my colleagues to read , which demonstrates with crystal clarity that classic OECD recipes are completely irrelevant to the European Union countries .
A larger wage range , more wage flexibility , less generous benefits make very little difference to employment levels , Mrs Carlsson , and certainly make no difference to unemployment .
Such a policy does , however , lead to the erosion of low wages , and most certainly to an undermining of the standard of living of the people . And that is therefore not a choice that the Luxembourg summit should make .
It is neither social protection n or employment .
They have to find ways to combine both .
Local employment , community service , fine .
We support these , but with respect for decent wage conditions , and not in the shape of compulsory workfare .
Mr Pronk , we as socialists support the promotion of part-time work and career breaks , if possible , for men and women , but only with good social security cover , so that people are not pushed into precarious circumstances .
Mr President , a second point I wanted to cite , is that this report brings up another buried topic , namely the reduction of working hours .
I am delighted with that .
We , as the European Parliament , Mr President , asked the Commission as far back as in 1996 to produce a study , a comparative study into good examples of how the working week can be reduced ; into how the reduction of social security contributions can give a new impulse to shorter working hours .
Sadly , I have not been able to find a trace of this in the Commission 's new report - an employment agenda for the year 2000 .
I know that this issue is perceived very differently in the different European Union countries , and I also understand only too well that the employment organization UNICE is none too keen on this topic .
But all the more reason , Mr President , for the European Union to put the debate on shorter working hours on the agenda once more .
I know that not all of these topics will be discussed , or else they will be discussed insufficiently , at the Luxembourg summit , but I hope that the ministers will at least make a start with these important debates .
Mr President , let me thank Mrs Jöns for her report .
I agree fully with her assessment , and indeed with the original version of the document , and for this reason I wish to make a number of general comments on the subject of social dialogue .
Of course the latter has a valuable contribution to make . However , the achievements of the social partners in Europe , whether in respect of career breaks or part-time work , are sadly minimalist in the truest sense of the word .
We cannot be satisfied with this .
For this reason , Mr Commissioner , I do not share the euphoria which has so far surrounded the results of social dialogue .
We have but one foot in the door , and we will have to push much harder if we are to achieve anything .
I hope that we can count on your support here , though I personally am not convinced that your support will prove strong enough .
If we are to be presented for a third time with an agreement of such minimal value , then I believe , with some regret , that we must reject it .
I also wish to express my thanks to Mr Hernández Mollar .
His contribution to the employment summit has been significant and I would like to give it my wholehearted support .
However , I fear , Mr Hernández Mollar , that like the social partners in Luxembourg , the Council will adopt the minimalist approach and the peoples of Europe will ultimately blame us for this , since we in the front line may well have aroused more expectations than the Council is prepared to fulfil .
I only hope that my prophesies in this respect do not come true .
I would like to thank all those who have contributed and all those who have come back for the end of the debate .
There are two distinct topics here and I would like to address the two reports separately .
Firstly , the 1997 Employment in Europe report is part of the package on employment adopted by the Commission on 1 October along with the joint report and the Commission 's proposal for employment guidelines .
Honourable Members will recall that we had an excellent debate on the guidelines at the last session here when we discussed the van Velzen report .
Indeed Mrs Van Lancker contributed eloquently on that occasion as well .
On the subject you are talking about now I would just like to say to you that this matter is covered in the Green Paper on work organization and the deadline for submissions is 30 November .
It is an on-going debate and certainly we are going to hear more about it .
The Employment in Europe report is the Commission 's analysis of the employment situation and its presentation of the policy messages which come out of that analysis .
Similarly the report by Mr Hernández Mollar puts forward Parliament 's view on all of these matters .
I am very reassured by the degree of convergence between the two views .
We all agree on the importance of the overall economic situation .
Achieving and maintaining a substantial rate of growth is a fundamental element in our ability to meet the objectives that are set out in our guidelines .
This was very much highlighted by several of the speakers .
We also agree that tax and benefit systems should be employment-friendly , providing the necessary incentives for employment while still providing the income support which is the hallmark of the European social model .
Among the many interesting points put forward in Mr Hernández Mollar 's report I detected two areas on which I think he is trying to place somewhat more emphasis .
I would like just to pick up on these points because I believe that this emphasis is shared by the Commission as well .
The first is that there is the need to address the skills gap and the strategy for education and training that is required to fill and plug that skills gap .
In the draft guidelines submitted to the European Council the Commission has identified three areas of attack that we need to improve : the basic education of young people setting out on their working life , because that lays the foundation for the adaptable and employable workforce of the future .
We need to provide a system of life-long learning to enable people to upgrade their skills throughout their working life .
We need to address the problem of the skills of the unemployed to help to get them back into a position where they are able to compete once again on the labour market .
Parliament and the Commission are in complete accord .
We hope that the Member States will take this on board .
The other issue is the problem of the gender gap , which has been highlighted as well .
We need to help women to participate in the labour market .
Despite the growth in jobs for women over the past ten years - and there have been many new jobs - we still have a major gap in the employment rates of men and women and a somewhat lesser one in the unemployment rates .
Promoting better reconciliation between home and work is but the first step in dealing with this problem .
You will be very interested to know that the joint meeting that took place yesterday evening of the Ecofin ministers and the employment ministers was a very good one .
My impression , after spending the whole day listening , is that there is a lot of common ground there .
We eased out a lot of the misunderstandings as well .
The joint meeting had a very high level of representation .
In fact it is the highest level of representation that I have seen in my four-and-a-half years here .
So this says something for the possibilities for a very successful job summit .
Our guidelines - the ones we discussed just recently - and the joint report have provided the main basis for the discussion as far as the preparation for this summit is concerned .
It is my estimation now that there was overwhelming agreement at the jumbo Council meeting for the procedure to be followed : that is , on the action plans of the Member States , the joint surveillance , the recommendations if warranted , and , on the substance , the four pillars that I outlined here on the last occasion are agreed by all .
Also agreed is the need for both quantified and qualitative targets .
The European Union targets on the long-term unemployed - we have all spoken about youth and employment - and also on the question of training ; training is not quite as settled yet .
There is going to be some other representation on the text .
My opinion is that the whole thing now has reached a watershed as a result of Amsterdam .
That is what is different .
I would think that we are set fair just now for a major breakthrough in the progress and development of the European employment strategy .
Everything is in place for this to be a success .
That is my estimation of what went on yesterday .
I hope it will convert .
If it does I will be coming back here to say very strong , favourable things in regard to what you recommended and the Commission put forward to make all that a success .
Regarding Mrs Jöns ' report , the importance of the new forms of flexible working , especially part-time work , has increased very substantially over the years and the trend continues on national employment markets .
In June 1996 , UNICE , CEEP and ETUC expressed their common wish , as you know , to enter into negotiations on the parttime aspects of this issue .
After a very long and detailed negotiation these three organizations agreed on 6 June 1997 the framework agreement on part-time working .
On the same occasion they requested the agreement to be implemented through a Council instrument .
We all know that .
The Commission is bringing forward this proposal to the Council pursuant to article 4 ( 2 ) of the agreement on social policy .
To our mutual regret this article does not provide for involvement of the European Parliament .
However , the Commission has kept its promise to Parliament and informed it about the various phases of consultation of the social partners .
It has also provided Parliament with the proposal in order to enable it to deliver its opinion .
I would like to take the opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Jöns , for her report and for all the efforts she has made to get a general consensus here .
I appreciate it personally .
But having said that I would like to underline that I do not share the overall criticism of the social partners agreement contained in the report for this reason : I will not conceal from you that the Commission finds itself in a difficult position vis-à-vis one single amendment which affects the material content of the agreement .
In order to respect the autonomy of the social partners under the social protocol procedure , the Commission made it clear in its communication on 14 December 1993 concerning the application of the agreement on social policy that the Council could not amend the social partners agreement .
For this reason any amendment which alters the terms of the agreement and , in particular , the terms concerning objective reasons and casual work cannot be accepted .
In this context the compromise Amendment No 3 added by Mr Pronk and Mr van Velzen cannot be accepted in so far as it involves a definition of the above-mentioned terms .
The Commission will , however , monitor the implementation of the directive to ensure , in particular , that derogations concerning objective measures and casual work are strictly limited to those notions .
The Commission does not favour the inclusion of such a proposal which imposes new obligations under Amendment Nos 1 and 2 on the Member States and the social partners .
However , the Commission will monitor the implementation of this directive and will address , therefore , the issues referred to by Amendment Nos 1 and 2 .
Concerning the more general question of Parliament 's role during this specific procedure , the debates both in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights have shown that this is one of your major points of concern .
In this regard the Commission is currently reflecting on the possibility of the European Parliament playing a somewhat more active role in this process while respecting both the terms of the Treaty and the autonomy of the social partners , as we are bound to do .
Part-time work is only one aspect of the broader issue concerning the protection and promotion of other flexible forms of work .
In fact the Commission consulted the social partners in a much wider context which included other forms of non-standard employment contracts .
This agreement is to be seen , therefore , as a very important first step forward .
In the preamble to the framework agreement the social partners have already expressed their intention to consider the need for similar agreements on other flexible forms of work .
In their joint contribution to the employment summit adopted last Thursday , 13 November , the partners state that they are considering the possibility of a new negotiation .
So the Commission hopes that the social partners will soon be able to agree to open the relevant negotiations and would welcome an early announcement in this regard .
Finally , since the question of social security has been mentioned by a few contributors , I should say that the adaptation of social security rules to stimulate more innovative forms of work organization is one of the issues covered by the Commission 's Green Paper on work organization .
We cannot prejudge the outcome of the ongoing debate by making proposals for action at this stage .
However , the question will certainly be addressed in the social action plan for the Commission that we are going to adopt next year .
Mr President , on my Amendment No 3 , is the Commissioner not misreading it ?
We do not ask in that amendment to take care of that in this directive .
We ask to take care of it in general .
This is the essential difference between the Amendment No and the original text of the resolution as passed by the Social Affairs Committee .
Did the Commissioner take this difference into consideration in his answer ?
The answer is yes .
I said that we would be considering the matter he has referred to .
Thank you , Mr Flynn
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Aircraft safety
The next item is the report ( A4-0335 / 97 ) by Mr Gonzalez Triviño , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive establishing a Safety Assessment of Third Countries ' Aircraft using Community Airports ( COM ( 7 ) 0055 - C4-0140 / 97-97 / 0039 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , as rapporteur for this report on the safety of aircraft from third countries using Community airports , I am very pleased with the progress we have made in the Committee on Transport and Tourism . We have been able to reach a unanimous opinion on the improvements which can be made to the text of the Council 's proposed directive .
The terrible air accident in the Dominican Republic in February 1996 , in which nearly 200 people lost their lives , alerted us to the need to improve the inspection procedure for aircraft from third countries which use our airports .
The text of the directive , which seems to enjoy the Member States ' unanimous support , represents an important step forward in improving safety levels , by means of equipment being inspected and its operation being forbidden when there are reasonable doubts about its safety .
Of the fourteen amendments approved by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , there are three which deserve special mention .
First , I would like to draw your attention to the amendment to article 3 , allowing the scope of this directive to be extended to cover aircraft which , while operating with a company from within the European Union , are to all effects and purposes chartered from third countries -sometimes even with the crew included - to operate from Community airports .
This was the case with the unfortunate accident in the Dominican Republic to which I referred earlier .
Secondly , I should like to mention that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has approved an amendment to allow the inspection of most aircraft showing potential signs of a defect with safety implications. article 5 of the original text envisaged the inspection of just 10 % of such aircraft .
Thirdly , I think it is important to mention the amendment which will make it possible to publish the names of companies whose aircraft have been grounded for safety reasons .
We think publicity is an indispensable means for further dissuading companies from operating inadequately maintained equipment .
Finally , I should like to explain the purpose of another of the amendments . It is designed to clarify that when the directive talks about the safety of people on the ground , it does not just mean airport personnel , but also people living near airports .
In the next few months , we will have the opportunity to improve the text of this directive even more , but the most important thing at the moment is to speed up the timescale for its implementation as much as possible , and guarantee the technical , economic and administrative resources which will be needed for it to be put into practice rigorously and effectively .
This directive will also be a step forward in the creation of the single market . At present , an airline company can have its permission to fly withdrawn for safety reasons by one Member State but can nevertheless continue to operate in a neighbouring country without correcting the original defects .
This directive will prevent that situation .
Finally , my own personal opinion is that sanctions against companies with defective equipment would perhaps be more effective if the European Commission were the competent body , rather than the individual Member States .
If we are to have a directive which applies to all the airports of the European Union , and in such a sensitive area as safety , it would be a good idea to have a body of technicians who could apply the regulations in a consistent and rigorous fashion .
I would like to end , Mr President , by expressing my gratitude to Commissioner Kinnock , and to his whole technical team at the European Commission who once again , arm-in-arm with this Parliament , have made it possible to modify the original Council text . I believe that between us , including the members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we have achieved a good directive , which will greatly improve aircraft safety .
Mr President , the contents of the directive and of the report on safety inspections for third country aircraft were not at issue in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Though this may seem like a purely administrative process , it has to be said that the fate and lives of many people will depend on this particular resolution .
In February 1996 a Boeing 757 operated by the Turkish company Birgen Air crashed in the Dominican Republic .
All 189 people on board , most of them tourists returning home to Germany , were killed .
This accident involved a third country aircraft manufacturer , a third country airport of departure , a third country flight operator and a third country pilot .
This complexity was reflected in the accident investigations which followed .
In Germany the accident triggered a fierce public debate on safety standards , landing and take-off bans , blacklists , etcetera .
The search for the cause of the accident and for those responsible for it saw some real buck passing , with the tour operator blaming the airline , the airline blaming the airport maintenance crew , then the plane makers and even the German government .
At the end of the day it was apparent that because of competitive pressures and the liberalization of air traffic procedures all those involved had adopted sloppy working practices and that the almost voluntary system of aircraft inspections worldwide were simply inadequate .
If in Europe a third country aircraft is banned from landing in EU country A because of some particular technical fault , it simply diverts to EU country B. For this reason alone I believe that we must introduce common regulations to ensure the safety of aircraft passengers and crew .
Such a directive would allow all information on pre-flight ramp inspections to be centrally compiled and would lay down standards for aircraft inspection work .
The Commission could then issue flight bans on certain aircraft or could even prohibit certain airline companies from taking-off or landing at all EU airports .
We in Parliament call for a safety check on all aircraft which have been reported for technical faults , or which are suspected of such , and not just the 10 % .
We also demand that the flight ban list be published every 3 months .
This directive will certainly lead to better standards in aviation safety .
However , binding regulations are still required on cabin crew working hours , in order to reduce the number of human errors attributable to excess fatigue , and on training standards for maintenance crews , in order to cut the number of technical malfunctions on a more consistent basis .
There is therefore still much to be done by the Commission , by the Council and by this Parliament , before these vital regulations can become a reality .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament 's concern for aviation safety goes back to before the crash of a Turkish aircraft in the Dominican Republic in February 1996 , which Mrs Schmidbauer has reported on so fully .
Our concern here is now focused on the safety of aircraft from third countries .
We already have adequate regulations to cover aircraft from EU countries , though if I may say from personal experience , there are still some areas requiring definite improvement here .
Like the directive on port state control in the maritime transport sector , we must introduce regulations to ensure that our standards are imposed on third country aircraft wishing to land at EU airports .
We in the European People 's Party therefore support the proposal of the rapporteur , which constitutes a major improvement in many areas .
The EPP does however have a problem with one aspect of the proposal .
Can it really be logical to consult the opinions of non-governmental organisations in this connection ?
Passengers , people living close to airports , pilots , maintenance services , incident reports - yes , but non-governmental organizations , whatever they may be ?
We in the EPP cannot accept this proposal , let me make that absolutely clear .
Pre-flight ramp checks are without doubt the best way to improve safety .
Information exchange and cooperation also constitute a important element .
On top of this , sanctions must of course be available , otherwise the proposed measures will lack the necessary bite .
Some of the proposals contained in the report are excellent .
Publication , for example , is a very important means for ensuring greater transparency in this area .
I would ask the Commission to take a long hard look at Parliaments proposals and not simply to dismiss them from the agenda with the slogan " We are in the process of collaboration ' .
There is no doubt that these measures would have a major impact on passenger safety in Europe and beyond .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the Commission on this valuable proposal and the rapporteur on his excellent report .
In his explanation , the rapporteur points to the fact that , under commercial pressure , lesser airports are more inclined to turn a blind eye to an aircraft which is in a less than perfect state of repair .
The inertia of the regional authorities in the presence of the frequent risks which hang not only metaphorically , but literally over the people living around the airport of Ostend is unacceptable to me .
I will be relying fully on this legislative initiative to see that the attitudes of the authorities and the airport itself change .
Not only passengers but also people living nearby can be the victims of an aircraft which is in a less than perfect state of repair .
In the case of cargo planes , with few people on board , it is the people on the ground who are most vulnerable .
I have submitted two amendments on behalf of the Committee on Transport to include explicitly in the risk categories people living near airports .
At the same time I think that they , and not only the passengers should be able to lodge a complaint in the event that they find an irregularity .
I hope that this guideline will be given early approval .
Mr President , the accident in the Dominican Republic in February 1996 clearly highlights the problem before us today .
That particular case involved a Turkish aircraft chartered by a German tour operator in which all 176 passengers were killed .
There it would appear that insufficient pre-flight ramp checks and pilot errors could be said to have turned a minor technical problem into a major disaster .
I congratulate the Commission on introducing this proposed directive and the rapporteur for his excellent work in preparing this report .
This is the first of a series of measures recommended by the high-level group of experts charged with defining the Community aviation improvement strategy which formed the subject of an earlier report in my name .
In that opinion the European Parliament wanted to introduce a similar system of safety checks for third country aircraft using European Union airports to that used in port state control in the maritime transport sector .
That is to say that ICAO safety standards should be applied in relation to all third country aircraft to create a blacklist of those third country carriers not meeting European Union safety standards .
Clearly the standards required by ICAO ought to be imposed on third country carriers carrying European Union passengers or using European Union airports .
I welcome here the fact that for the first time JAA is to centralize all information relating to ramp checks , specific conditions under which ramp checks must be carried out and set down in specific EU measures for action to ensure that these standards are applied .
These are a very welcome first step and I hope they will lead to even greater safety throughout the European Union .
Mr President , firstly I thank the rapporteur for his excellent report on our proposal to improve aviation safety by providing for a system of inspection of third country aircraft that are suspected of non-compliance with internationally agreed safety standards .
Naturally I am pleased that the rapporteur and other Members who have spoken tonight are supporting us on this very important issue and also that many of the 15 amendments which are proposed are useful additions or suggestions which complement the Commission proposal .
The House will recall , as Mr González Triviño and others said , that after the tragic accident at Puerto Plata in February last year in which 176 European Union citizens were killed , both the European Parliament and the Council asked the Commission to study possible measures to improve safety .
Consequently , in June last year the Commission published its communication on a Community aviation safety improvement strategy which included a programme of action .
The first element of this programme to be presented as a formal proposal is the one being considered by the House tonight .
That was issued in February of this year .
The Commission is happy to accept all the committee 's amendments as they stand with the exception of two , as well as the new Amendment No 15 which covers issues similar to those of Amendment No 2 .
With regard to Amendment No 14 which requires the Commission to draw up a report on the application of the directive no later than two years after its entry into force , I would say that if the proposal is adopted along the lines of the rapporteur 's opinion , I do not believe there would be any need for a further proposal in the near future .
However , I am willing to accept that circumstances may change and maybe a new proposal would then have merit .
Consequently , the Commission will incorporate the substance of Amendment No 14 in a modified proposal .
Finally , there is one amendment that the Commission cannot support .
Amendment No 13 to the proposal as it now stands calls for the deletion of article 12 which requires Member States to lay down a system of penalties for breach of the national provisions adopted to implement the directive .
We consider that article 12 is a necessary instrument to guarantee the proper application of a Community legal instrument in the member states and we therefore want to keep it in the text .
I hope that on further reflection , especially since there is very clear and strong support for our proposal , the House will come to share our view of article 12 as a necessary provision for enforcement .
I am pleased to see such a positive common effort in attempts to improve air safety .
That common view is completely consistent with the approach of this Parliament over many years .
I look forward to the future adoption of this proposal which should contribute to improving the security of European citizens and , indeed , many other air passengers , as well as providing additional protection for people living near airports .
I am therefore very appreciative of the efforts yet again of Mr González Triviño .
Many thanks , Mr Kinnock
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Economic and social cohesion
The next item is the report ( A4-0329 / 97 ) by Mr Izquierdo Collado , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the First Triennial Report on economic and social cohesion ( COM ( 96 ) 0542 - C4-0016 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , this report was submitted by the Commission before the Members of this House had ever heard of any Agenda 2000 document , even in draft form .
Nevertheless , many of its concepts and criteria have now become commonplace , because as time passed , the report on cohesion came to virtually overlap with other important reports , including Agenda 2000 .
The cohesion report which Parliament is presenting starts out by challenging the philosophy of cohesion . Cohesion is not the Red Cross ; it contributes to fairness within the Community .
Cohesion is the other side of the coin of the single market . It does not consist of indefinite and indiscriminate subsidies , but of efforts to achieve competitiveness in the different regions of the European Union .
The Commission 's report pointed out to us something obvious : there had been uneven progress in matters of cohesion .
The Member States had moved closer in this respect , but cohesion had nevertheless failed to affect the regions in the same way .
Variations in employment , research and many other areas also showed that we were a long way from achieving the European Union 's cohesion objectives .
We state quite clearly in the report that Parliament is satisfied with the European Union 's political structure .
We are happy not only with its policies , but also with those who are responsible for them , and I am glad that the Commissioner can be with us here today .
I have heard her speak in Germany and other Member States with the same language , and I must say , Mr President , the Committee on Regional Policy feels honoured to have been able to work with her . Any positive features of Parliament 's report owe a great deal to the Commissioner 's help and judgement during our discussions with her .
So , we agree that the structural policies have to change many things .
But we want to state clearly and explicitly to Parliament , and to the institutions and people of the European Union , that we are very critical of the remainder of the European Union 's policies , insofar as they relate to cohesion .
Article 130b of the treaty calls for policies to contribute jointly to achieving the objective of cohesion .
We cannot afford to let our efforts be wasted .
We cannot take away from the regions with one hand what we have given them with the other .
All the European Union 's policies need to work together before we can really achieve the objectives of cohesion which Parliament and the whole of the European Union are aiming for .
Therefore , we think there must be substantial improvements in the way all Community policies are adjusted to the objective of cohesion . We do not want research to be limited to the most well-developed regions .
We want the trans-European networks to be laid out logically and cohesively . We want competition policy to wake up to cohesion , and focus to an increasing extent on the cohesive aspects which it needs to respect .
We want the common agricultural policy to carry on progressing and introducing cohesion . That is our message .
Mr President , we have had long discussions about whether or not 1.27 % of the European Union 's GNP is a sufficient allocation for questions of cohesion , and whether repeating the objectives already agreed at Edinburgh might give a negative image of the European Union by suggesting that we have not made any progress .
We are in favour of realism - of admitting that this is not the right time to demand that Member States should contribute more , while we are preoccupied with monetary union . However , Mr President , before we embark upon enlargement , a new financial approach will be needed , in order to really tackle the enlargement process seriously .
I should like to thank all my colleagues , Mr President , for the enormous amount of work they have contributed to this report , and for the help they have given me personally . I should also like to thank you for allowing me to overrun a little .
Mr President , I am delighted that we are having the opportunity tonight , even at this very late hour , to discuss cohesion policy .
The Commission 's first triennial report on cohesion policies and their impact has been an essential part of the evaluation reflection on future priorities for cohesion policies .
It takes place at an important watershed with the reform of the structural and regional policies and the Agenda 2000 package .
We can begin the process of taking stock , reviewing the achievements and success and , as our rapporteur has done very effectively in his comprehensive analysis of cohesion , set down markers for the future that we can use as our reference manuals .
But there can be no doubt about our commitment to cohesion .
In fact , we have it in every Treaty , including the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Everyone agrees that it is important just like motherhood and apple pie .
Of course the proof is in the commitment in translating those obligations into practical policies .
The rapporteur stresses the equal value - and I agree with him - of cohesion policy alongside achieving the single European market and economic and monetary union .
Sometimes you could be forgiven for getting the impression that economic and social cohesion is a flanking policy .
It is not .
It is a key priority of the EU to make the European Union more than a single market , a free trade zone or a currency zone .
Cohesion policies are vital to delivering a citizen 's Europe and giving tangible support to regions and communities , to open up access to the opportunities of the single market for jobs and training .
The visible projects that I see in my constituency , such as the computer training suite that I launched yesterday , is the human and proactive side of European Union policies .
Support for coalfield communities , learning projects are an essential component of achieving economic and social cohesion .
Member States at the extraordinary summit this week on employment would do well to remember that .
Quite frequently they do not remember or think about the role that cohesion policy has .
We know that inequalities persist and it is the objective of cohesion to continue to try to overcome these .
I have to say that my comments are not addressed to Commissioner Wulf-Mathies , because we know of her commitment to cohesion policy , but to the whole College of Commissioners .
We need to see more evidence of other policies contributing to , or addressing , the cohesion imperative .
I should like to ask the Commissioner if she thinks it might be useful for us to have a cohesion audit on an annual basis and try to build that into the Commission 's work programme .
The other Commissioners would do well to review their own policies and see how they are supporting cohesion .
One of the few criticisms I have of this excellent report is that the Commission has not dealt with EMU in a very effective way .
The future is running fast to meet us and we still have no clear analysis of the impact of EMU on our regions .
It is high time we looked at those issues .
Finally , we have to have the means to match our ambitions for our cohesion policies as Jacques Santer said .
Regional and cohesion policies can be successful if everyone works together - the Member States , the regions and the local authorities .
The key priorities are : to be effective , to have a fair and equitable distribution , to have affordable policy , because less sometimes can be more , and to have a sustainable cohesion policy that will take us into the new millennium .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
The report which has been presented by Mr Izquierdo Collado is very comprehensive indeed and goes far beyond the remit for a critical analysis of the achievements of the structural fund over a period of three years , in respect of economic and social cohesion , and the resulting conclusions .
We are in full agreement with the rapporteur on a number of points , namely the call for a greater concentration of resources , better coordination of community policies , improved economic competitiveness , sustained development and the creation of competitive jobs , since these are in fact priorities in the Union 's structural policy .
However , detail regulations pertaining to agriculture , Union financing for the whole of the next planning period , and the enlargement process due to take place during this period , do not belong directly to the motion for a resolution contained in Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report .
Now that these items are included , in spite of considerable opposition to some of them in the Committee , we are now obliged to examine them in this House , whereas the best solution would still be to delete them altogether .
Here the rapporteur is becoming entangled in his own contradictions .
On one hand it is said quite correctly that the limited instruments and resources should be deployed deliberately and purposively to reduce inequalities in economic development in those areas which require them most .
At the same time we are focusing too much on ownership , the cohesion funds , the questioning of the upper limit for own resources and precautionary adjustments upwards , and paying too little attention to one of the fundamental principles of cohesion - namely the promotion of less-developed regions to the point where support of this kind is no longer needed .
From the conception of the European structural policy it therefore becomes clear that the available aid is always to be of a temporary nature and is intended to make the recipient region independent of financial support of this kind in the medium and long term .
Here , transitional instruments can serve as an effective bridge for those who are emerging from the benefit stage .
Economic and social cohesion should not be a one way street .
Giving and receiving cannot become too much of a one-sided arrangement , otherwise solidarity can all too easily become just the reverse .
Put another way , financial agreements are always set-up for a specific period of time , and correctly so .
At the end of this period the cards can be reshuffled to correspond with the new economic situation in the countries of the Union , this applying to both givers and receivers alike .
The rapporteur quite justifiably calls for criteria for the promotion targets , but these criteria must be objective and easy-to-calculate , such as objective 1 regions receiving 75 % of GDP under the NUTS II scheme .
Though the report may be controversial , various compromises have been reached in the preliminary debate .
Its acceptance by the majority of the House will depend on the adoption of important amendments .
Mr President , the structural funds have played a positive role in helping the less developed regions on the periphery of the Union to develop their economies closer to their full potential and to close the gap with the well-off regions in the core of the Union .
This is particularly true in Ireland where the structural funds have been concentrated on constructing new improved roads , airport facilities , industrial modernization and vocational training for young people .
The results of this concentration of resources are beginning to bear fruit as the Irish economy records consistently high economic growth rates and new employment opportunities emerge throughout the country .
However , the objective of improving average living standards in Ireland to the levels existing in the better-off regions of the centre of the Union is still a long way from being achieved .
There are continuing structural problems in the economy which must be removed if our economy is to achieve its full potential and be able to maintain a GNP level similar to that of the better-off regions of the Union .
The structural funds have played a central role in encouraging the advances of recent years .
I believe the use that Ireland has made of these funds can serve as a model for other regions and countries of the Union .
It is vital to continue the programme of capital investment now under way , not just in order to finish the many important projects that have already begun , but also to maintain the impetus which has resulted in the economy recording consistently strong growth levels in recent years .
These strong growth levels have led to many commentators suggesting that the need for structural fund investment in Ireland is declining .
I would strongly disagree with this view .
The criteria for assessing whether or not a country or region qualifies for maximum structural fund levels can mask continuing , underlying problems .
For example , the use of GDP levels suggests that Irish economic development has made stronger advances than is the case if use is made of GNP levels .
Consequently our level of development as compared with better-off regions of the Union is also exaggerated .
This is because of the amount of foreign investment in our economy which distorts the situation to our advantage .
The issue should be addressed when the next round of structural funds is being divided between qualifying regions .
Secondly , unemployment levels must be given a prominent place among the criteria being used to determine qualification for Objective 1 status .
Finally , the Irish authorities , like those of many other less-developed regions of the Union , have a particularly serious problem trying to find employment opportunities for the long-term unemployed who are often without even the most basic skills which they could offer potential employers .
This problem should be taken on board when determining eligibility .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the first thing I want to do is congratulate Mr Izquierdo Collado on his report on the triennial report on economic and social cohesion .
Obviously , this report was produced at a time when the earliest information about Agenda 2000 was just becoming known .
I think the rapporteur has done the right thing in basing his report on all the information available to him at the time , because the reports which we produce in Parliament are living documents which are in touch with reality , and we should not restrict ourselves to watertight compartments .
There will be time to modify , if need be , the opinions which Mr Izquierdo Collado is expressing today in the current report .
Economic and social cohesion is the basis of the European Union . I should like to remind you that although it was not one of the themes of the Treaty of Rome , nevertheless somebody - in fact , it was Minister Spaak - was already predicting the future need for instruments to promote economic and social cohesion in the various regions and zones of Europe .
I believe the European Union has progressed in some ways in this respect , as regards the instruments , the structural funds , the cohesion fund , and the common agricultural policy itself , in order to strengthen this economic and social cohesion .
And it is clear - one of the speakers said so - that the assistance provided for this strengthening of economic and social cohesion cannot consist of unlimited aid granted for an indefinite period of time , but has to be properly controlled - which it is .
I would even say that it is controlled precisely because it is measured in terms of the domestic product of those regions which receive help in the form of structural funds .
Of course , even if this aid is for a limited time , I should say that the period is a long one , because a region cannot be developed , nor its situation improved , in a short time .
Therefore , this should be thought of as long-term aid .
In this sense , I agree with the rapporteur when he calls for more coordination in implementing these policies . I would say we need the subsidiarity principle to be applied to a greater extent , giving regional and local bodies their proper role and allowing them more responsibility in executing these funds .
I do not think we have the right legislation for applying this principle of competence to the regional bodies , in order to allow them to manage the cohesion funds and the structural funds .
I therefore think this is a good report and that this structural fund policy should be maintained .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , none of us can be satisfied or comfortable with the Commission 's report on the development of economic and social cohesion in the European Union .
If a few Member States ' GDPs do approximate to a very limited extent to the Community average , that cannot conceal the fact that such progress is clearly insufficient in itself and , as such , incompatible and out of line with the fundamental objectives established by the Treaty of Europe in that respect .
We also note a clear aggravation of the inequality between the richest and poorest regions , and the real and obvious inappropriateness of many policies to the objective of cohesion is confirmed beyond doubt , particularly the common agricultural policy , whose lack of structural and regional balance results in the richest farmers receiving over 80 % of subsidies and cohesion countries such as Portugal , for example , being a net contributor to the common policy .
Yet these clear limitations and insufficiencies were quite clearly foreseeable , since , the budgetary resources provided for the period from 1994 to 1999 were and are insufficient , thus confirming the appropriateness of the ceiling for the Community Budget in 1999 as proposed by Jacques Delors in Edinburgh , or the essential need for the even greater sums suggested at that time by various economic fact-finding studies , which proved that such sums were vital to ensure a real convergence rate that could deliver genuine internal cohesion .
And also because resources were paltry from the outset and therefore national capacities for financial absorption were and still are limited , not for lack of projects or needs , but because of budgetary restrictions designed to achieve the purposes of the single currency , which are thus in clear conflict with the objectives of cohesion .
On the eve of decisions on the future financial framework of a Union with more members and new and growing needs for structural and other forms of support , it is becoming increasingly obvious -despite what Mr Berend has just said , in the light of what we know about the proposals contained in Agenda 2000 , and we and the rapporteur prefer not to hide our heads in the sand like ostriches - it is becoming increasingly obvious , as I was saying , that certain aspects put forward in Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report are highly relevant .
We must maintain the cohesion fund for its present beneficiaries with a GDP of less that 90 % of the Community average ; we need to ensure that the present levels of aid to existing Member States continue in force ; it is absolutely essential to match policies to principles and practise real cohesion ; and it is vital that we face the new problems arising from enlargement with our financial capacity strengthened .
The consensus of opinion on these central issues inevitably brings us back to the need to reconsider the level proposed by the Committee for future financial perspectives ( 1.27 % of Community GDP , the same proportion as before , which has been shown to be too low a ceiling for 1999 ) . This makes it necessary to alter the proposed figures , or at least to revise them appropriately before the first enlargement takes place .
Mr President , the European internal market has produced remarkable gains for national economies , but has so far failed to bridge the gap between rich and poor .
Unemployment in the ten poorest regions is almost seven times higher than in the ten richest regions .
The concentration effect of the internal market is clearly bringing greater wealth to the industrialized areas , but at the expense of the disadvantaged regions .
In spite of substantial structural funding we have yet to redress this inequality .
Are we to allow this to continue ?
While the initial trend was to do away with economic and social cohesion as the European Union 's own solidarity policy , the cohesion report is becoming a symbol for the preservation of the European social model .
Yet there are still finance ministers in individual Member States who are haunted by visions of fantastic sums being paid out by Europe 's net contributors .
On a number of recent occasions the German Finance Minister has forgotten that the structural fund is not there simply to transfer financial resources between Member States , but rather is designed to use the EU 's economic potential in the best possible way for the good of the Community .
Does the Commission really want to change the message of the cohesion report and to make greater use of the structural policy for the harmonious development of the Community ?
Here I fail to see the substantive embodiment of sustained development in Agenda 2000 .
In this context sustained means restoring the balance between ecology , economy and social security - not only for the industrialised areas but also for the disadvantaged regions .
At the moment , and for the foreseeable future , the latter tend to be the rural areas .
But an effective cohesion policy is only possible with the cooperation of the people on the ground .
They are entitled to a development policy which meets their needs and should not have centralized projects , such as the current plan for trans-European networks , imposed upon them from above .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , firstly I should like to congratulate Mr Izquierdo , as my colleagues have done , for producing this complicated , difficult , important and interesting report .
We have repeatedly discussed this report during long meetings in the Committee on Regional Policy . The report evaluates the results of Community cohesion policy during the last few years , and considers it to be a basic and fundamental element in the building of the European Union , and its future .
In discussing and voting on this report , we need to think about certain points which have not only been vitally important in the recent past , but will continue to be so in the immediate future , because of enlargement .
It must be stressed that cohesion policy has had the positive effect of reducing the existing disparities between the Member States , as regards cohesion and other aspects .
However , there are still regrettable regional differences in income , while differences in unemployment rates have increased .
This fact reveals the lack of coordination between the various Community policies , and demonstrates the need for a global approach to ensure that they are consistent with the objective of economic and social cohesion .
Another worrying aspect which has arisen during the debate on this report , Mr President , is the attempt to withdraw the cohesion fund from those countries which join the first phase of economic and monetary union .
This idea , which in itself displays a lack of solidarity , contradicts the spirit and the letter of the treaty , where the cohesion fund and the method for its application are set out explicitly .
Projects to do with the environment and with transport infrastructures are vital for these Member States , and these projects take a long time and require a lot of funding .
Nevertheless , access to economic and monetary union is absolutely appropriate , and is not at all contradictory to or incompatible with what I have just said .
That is what the European Commission said in Agenda 2000 because , among other things , its legal department has set out the basis for applying the cohesion fund , and this is absolutely independent of whether or not the convergence criteria have been met and whether monetary union has been accomplished .
As Mr Izquierdo 's report says , a country 's efforts to join the third phase of economic and monetary union will be of no value to that country if it is immediately punished by having the cohesion fund withdrawn .
This fund is essential at all stages of the process . Therefore , Madam Commissioner , we think it would be a good idea for you to convey to this House the content of your legal department 's document on this question , so that we can learn what is in it , and devote some thought to it .
It is up to us in the European Parliament to emphasize why cohesion was included in the treaty : to define a fair Europe , characterized by solidarity and social commitment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is more than a common internal market .
It is more than a common currency , which will soon be introduced , it is a Community because of its constitution and because of its composition and it is cohesion which sustains it .
For the benefit of those who do not meet it every day , it is worth explaining exactly what is meant by the term cohesion .
Cohesion is a characteristic trait , that means , we look at one another and together try to get this European Union going , the stronger working with the weaker and the weaker with the stronger .
For this purpose we have at our disposal a great European instrument , and that is the structural fund .
I will talk about this later .
Returning to the subject , however , it has to be said that individual national policies also form part of the European policy of cohesion .
Mr Izquierdo Collado and the cohesion report itself drew attention to this fact and we should be thankful for it .
Policies should not undercut or counteract each other .
Here the first step is to ensure that National States do not introduce policies which block what is being done at European level - otherwise the policies we apply here become completely nonsensical .
This also means , however , that we must coordinate our policies , while at the same time guarding against a policy in which everything is submitted to absolute diktat , since this would render us incapable of focusing on individual objectives .
Research is one such area . Here quality is the most important factor and this must be upheld .
I am truly grateful to Mr Izquierdo Collado , and this contrasts with the remarks made by Mr Berend , that he has dealt with the subject on a much wider basis .
It is a matter which also includes the structural fund .
In our discussion we had to ensure that we were not tying ourselves to the present .
The debate on the structural fund will take place next year .
There is no doubt whatsoever that guidelines are required for this debate and it without doubt also right to draw lessons from the cohesion report .
In the committee and in the following discussions we encountered difficulties when agreeing the cohesion fund for the coming years .
This is to be my final remark on the subject .
We did not want to make any commitments as far as subsequent debates on the structural fund are concerned .
We do not wish to introduce a fund which at the end of the day only results in a transfer of revenue .
For this reason we have made it clear that the compromise which has been found is for us , in its wording , both binding and reasonable .
In this respect I want to thank Mr Izquierdo Collado , who has devoted an enormous amount of time and effort to the project .
He has done great service to the subject matter , namely economic and social cohesion , and I would like to congratulate him on his report .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the realization of cohesion is affected by the globalization of economies which has been very progressing very quickly , and which the activity of the EU should act as a counterweight to .
In its essential internal policy , however , the EU had not acted in the spirit of article 130b .
For example , EU policy on traffic , competition , science and research has focused its influence more on the economy than on the enhancement of solidarity .
Likewise with energy policy , there should be alternatives for the promotion of cohesion , rather than centralization .
One example of this is the bio-energy resources of the Nordic regions and their effective exploitation .
The EU seems more concerned these days with the blending of economic policies and monetary systems than the preservation of the essentials of life in remote areas .
This is also seen in the decisions on cuts in Member States ' budgets for miserly hand-outs in the future .
The EU should , in the name of cohesion , ensure that the complimentary principle takes root in Member States .
As it is now , EU funds are often used as a substitute for former national regional policy funds .
Of great importance to cohesion in the EU is , furthermore , the viability of agriculture throughout the entire EU region .
The present system of agricultural aid does not account sufficiently for production difficulties due to factors of climate and other conditions in nature in both the northern and southern peripheral regions .
Cold or drought , sparsely-populated areas and long distances from main markets are major drawbacks that require compensation .
This is one of the main issues of cohesion policy and this report merely glosses over it .
A workable and efficient cohesion policy requires the EU to aid the development of the regions , given their particular conditions , and to operate more flexibly than it does now .
Mr President , cohesion policy will soon have to face two challenges : economic and monetary union , and enlargement .
Either of these could result in the existing regional inequalities becoming more pronounced , as previous speakers have repeatedly said .
The fact that it is possible for these differences to become more pronounced shows that the application of the cohesion fund has been relatively unsuccessful .
Recognizing this failure should be the starting point for any thinking about its future .
For one thing , the budgetary rigour imposed by the stability pact can endanger even the objectives which have been achieved .
The imminent dangers demonstrate that the cohesion fund has to be made more redistributive than it is at present .
In conclusion , I should like to say that we support the measures which this report proposes as regards coordinating Community policies , administrative transparency , job creation , and so on .
However , all these measures become meaningless if the cohesion fund is not supported as an end in itself , rather than as a subordinate measure of less importance than other policies .
Mr President , the short time available forces us to make choices and omit aspects of context or appraisal of the Commission 's report .
This report shows how dangerous the theory of a fair return is , developed by several Member States , when the policy of cohesion is applied , and show that the other policies only make a relative contribution towards achieving the objective of cohesion .
I want to concentrate on the essential message Parliament wishes to send through the Izquierdo Collado report , because we are about to reform the funds and the enlargement process , to achieve monetary union and hold the Extraordinary Council on Employment .
These all deadlines which , in our opinion , will be affected by the follow-up to this report and , in particular , by the items taken from Parliament 's report : the difficulty of overcoming regional differences ; the fact that other Union policies , but also many national policies , do not contribute towards cohesion and the fact that the report has some gaps in it , for example that of not dealing entirely with the consequences of expansion and the achievement of the monetary union and particularly post monetary union .
I would like to conclude by asking the Commissioner whether he can tell us in his reply what value the Commission will place on the report but also on Parliament 's opinion so as to enlighten subsequent choices .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if the first triennial report on cohesion was good , and the Commission , and particularly Directorate-General XVI , deserve our congratulations for the analysis and thought that went into the document , then the report on that document presented by our colleague Juan de Dios Izquierdo Collado is a balanced and well-structured text , containing rigorous and thorough analysis , and just to read it gives an idea of the huge efforts which such an undertaking required .
I should like to draw attention to two statements which appear in the report : firstly , the inequalities within the European Union have hardly been reduced in the last ten years , despite the progress which has been made and the effectiveness of structural policies ; secondly , nearly all Community policies have effects which are clearly counterproductive to cohesion .
These statements mean that neither article 130a nor article 130b of the Treaty are being rigorously applied .
On the one hand , structural policy does not receive sufficient funds to allow regional inequalities to be reduced quickly in the medium term . On the other hand , Community policies are not formulated in such a way as to include the basic aim of reducing regional inequalities .
Agenda 2000 can correct these shortcomings .
Regional policy reform ; concentrating the effects of the structural funds ; rationalizing regional programming ; preserving the cohesion fund in its present form ; and maintaining the relative position of the designated objective 1 regions : these measures , if applied using strict criteria , can be a golden opportunity to make progress in reducing regional inequalities . Especially if , in the context of enlargement , we can undertake a revision of the financial perspective , to provide the European Union with additional resources above 1.27 % of GNP .
Reform of the common agricultural policy can allow the European Union 's agriculture to regain its balance , if we do not follow the Commission 's status quo policies , and achieve a balance between continental and Mediterranean farming , so that the best-funded policy in the Community budget is also ruled by criteria based on economic and social cohesion .
I end by expressing once more my sincere congratulations to our rapporteur for his excellent work .
Madam President , we regard Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report as essentially constructive because it does indeed get to the heart of the crucial issue of economic and social cohesion .
However , I would like to make a few comments concerning certain omissions , gaps and inconsistencies contained in the report .
Nowhere does it mention that problems of foreign policy or of obstacles faced by various peripheral regions of the Community have an adverse effect on their cohesion and development and also on their progress towards equal ranking with other regions .
First , I will take Greece as an example , where the situation in the Aegean , Turkish aggression , the stocking of stupid and dangerous weapons , adversely affect the development and growth of certain regions , especially the Aegean islands .
Secondly , the report does not mention the unequal distribution of the , rather limited , funds .
Madam President , while funds for Germany and Spain for 1994-1999 are increasing , they have been reduced in the case of Greece and Portugal , two of the poorest countries of the Community .
Thirdly , I am rather surprised that there is no mention in the report of where those funds go , because , in the case of Greece , and Madam President is aware of this , they go on stupid things , on doing up music halls which do not contribute to growth or to employment , and which cannot be regarded as productive investments .
Consequently , Madam President , this report must be supplemented , either by means of amendments or , on another occasion , to correct what the report emphasizes , namely the fact that the funds that are available do not meet the needs of real economic and social cohesion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by saying that cohesion is vital for a Union which is becoming increasingly integrated and will very soon be adopting a federal monetary system .
The historical experience of federal or proto-federal states clearly shows that budgets must be designed with a view to redistribution , dispensing equity and justice .
In addition to responding to enlargement , the European Union budget cannot evade that essential issue .
Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report makes an excellent critical analysis of the Commission 's three-yearly report , which in itself is a report of high technical quality and great analytical rigour , but , not wishing to be constantly reiterating what has already been said , Mr Izquierdo Collado skillfully bridges the gap with Agenda 2000 , introducing essential ideas on the future of the Union .
Three comments seem to me to be necessary . The 1.27 % ceiling proposed for financial perspectives should be rejected .
It is a dangerous strait-jacket .
Once upon a time , in the Delors package , it was a stimulus ; now it is a hindrance .
Secondly , the cohesion fund must be maintained in view of its efficiency and relevance to the present situation .
Thirdly , the present cohesion countries and regions cannot as a matter of principle pay the costs of enlargement , even partially .
So it would be deplorable if aid to the cohesion countries were reduced .
Portugal , for example , should not be penalized for the fine results she achieves by being a good pupil of the European school .
If Portugal has achieved the feat of meeting the eligibility criteria and if she succeeds in maintaining a genuine convergence line - in 1995 Portugal achieved 67.4 % of the average Community GDP ; in 1996 it went up to 68.3 % ; and in 1997 , with a calculated 4 % growth rate , it may rise to around 70 % , and , moreover , with unemployment under control - it would be serious , unjust and paradoxical if Portugal were penalized for her success .
It would be like punishing virtue .
This sort of confusion has happened before . In committee I have already suggested that we use first names when addressing each other .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , the previous speaker , Mr Lage , gave us the cue when he said it was all a matter of redistribution .
I am of a quite different opinion and I believe that this is a subject which we must tackle and discuss in detail in the months ahead .
It is something which is going to occupy us for some time to come .
What does economic and social cohesion mean ? To my mind it does not mean the creation of equal living standards , since the socialist model of wealth redistribution has failed in practice .
It is a policy which cannot be implemented .
What we can and should try to do is to create comparable living standards , and I am not just playing at semantics when I say this .
What this wordplay conceals is that we can fully accept the differences which exist within the European Union , and that this actually allows free competition and indeed makes it necessary .
My second comment is that economic and social cohesion is not , and never has been , primarily the responsibility of the European Union , but rather is a matter for the Member States , since the instruments and resources available to the Union can only act as an accessory to the main event .
Madam President , the Commission 's report is an important analysis of what has happened in the area of cohesion in the European framework .
Furthermore , Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report is an excellent analysis in connection with this .
But as important as it is to analyze , we have to know what is going to follow on from this analysis .
How is equality going to be enhanced among the regions ?
How can the less developed regions gain access to the more developed regions , to tap their resources ?
We must have a background strategy on this .
Without any clear thinking on the influential forces that obtain in regional development we will not get beyond the situation where we only have projects scattered about here and there , all of which are unconnected , which threaten to take up enormous sums of money .
We must also bear this in mind when we consider what is going to happen in the future to our cohesion fund .
This kind of strategic view might be guided by Arlene McCarthy 's idea that we should regularly check how cohesion is progressing .
Then we would definitely have to give consideration to the real results .
Neither can we underestimate the effects of national economic policies , national structural policies , and EMU .
It is actually quite true that structural funding and cohesion funding are small items compared to national economic policy and what EMU is going to bring along with it .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , European economic and social cohesion is an essential principle and a prime objective in the building of Europe , and is just as important as monetary union or the single market .
Nevertheless , the objectives of articles 130a and 130b of the treaty have not been achieved .
The Commission 's cohesion report shows this clearly .
The inequalities between Member States have been reduced , but there is still a gulf separating rich and poor regions .
The per capita income in the 25 best-off regions is three times greater than in the 25 least-developed regions .
Therefore , we need to strengthen cohesion policy and European solidarity . We must not forget that this benefits everybody , not just those to whom it is specifically directed .
We are not designing different sectoral policies : we are building a continent .
We are providing Europe with territorial cohesion , in the face of the historic challenges of monetary union and the achievement of a great Europe .
Therefore , we need to rise to the occasion we are living through , and plan financially for the challenges we face , by contributing the means to achieve our ambitions .
Our inevitable enlargement cannot be achieved at the cost of our current European cohesion .
We should simplify the programmes and concentrate resources in the less-favoured and peripheral regions of the European Union , maintaining - as we have done so far - two-thirds of the structural funds for objective 1 , as the Commission has proposed .
We should obey the treaty , and make sure that all policies tend towards economic and social cohesion - not just structural policies , but policies on agriculture , fisheries , research and development , transport , competition , state aid - from which , in the last analysis , the rich regions benefit more than the poor ones .
The Izquierdo Collado report considers all these questions , or nearly all of them .
Reports do not always contain everything we would like them to , of course , but in this area we need consensus .
I know very well , however , that consensus is difficult to achieve , because as Mr Izquierdo Collado knows , I was the rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Policy 's first report on the future of economic and social cohesion .
However , I want to finish my speech , Mrs President , ladies and gentlemen , by expressing my sincere congratulations to Mr Izquierdo Collado for his magnificent piece of work , for its thoroughness and rigour , and everything that has been achieved in it .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I totally share the views that have been expressed on the report under debate and I would like to stress that the assertion that , after ten years of action of the structural funds there continue to be enormous economic and social inequalities between the various regions of the European Union , means that the objective of economic and social cohesion is part of a long term , steady process .
The policy of convergence and cohesion , this key policy without which European integration would be impossible , must be pursued in order to consolidate what has been gained and to ensure steady progress towards growth , competitiveness and convergence throughout the coming years .
The financial restraints that have been imposed by the pact of stability and growth , the anticipated realignments in the European market following the imminent enlargement of the Union , and the possible adverse effects on the less developed regions of the Union , such as Greece , underline the urgent need to intensify community efforts and to push forward the cohesion policy with adequate financial backing , during the new programming period .
Madam President , there is no doubting the fact that economic and social cohesion is a fundamental part of the European Union 's policy .
The aim of this cohesion policy is to reduce the inequality which exists between EU regions .
Europe is regarded thus , and solidarity too , but solidarity naturally has its limits - and even rich countries have poverty and structural problems within their boundaries .
Looked at this way , net contributors want to be more than just payers .
They therefore insist that the absolute limits of 1.27 % of GDP below 0.46 % , as far as the budget and structural policy is concerned , should remain as real limits .
In this context the question which arises for me , and probably for others too , is whether a report which covers the period 1994 to 1996 really has to include subject matter relating to the future of the cohesion fund and to the future financing of the Union .
As I have already said , there are still a number of question marks hanging over the whole thing .
In other respects we can accept this report and its contents in full .
Support for SMEs and greater inclusion of private initiatives in EU structural and reform policies should be considered important , particularly when this means the creation and / or preservation of jobs , and consequently a reduction in unemployment levels .
Here Europe really is living not just in abstract solidarity , but in the kind of solidarity which matters to individual job seekers .
On the subject of enlargement , which Mr Izquierdo Collado 's report also covered , one can only emphasize that the preparatory phase must be supported by a special financial instrument so that new Member States can really be brought into the European community of nations .
Madam President , this report by my compatriot and political rival , Mr Izquierdo Collado , is not good : it is magnificent .
It is magnificent because he has managed to approach the theme , not from a national viewpoint , not from a party-political viewpoint , but from a thoroughly European viewpoint - from the point of view of the philosophy and social model which should dominate the process of the building of Europe .
Mr Izquierdo Collado 's political group and my own , which are the two most important groups in the building of Europe , both agree that Europe will only be possible if it is based on two elements : a functioning market , and the strict application of the principle of social compensation .
That is why everybody has so often said that the building of Europe rests on three equally important pillars : the internal market , economic and monetary union , and economic and social cohesion .
How did cohesion perform during the period we are considering ?
The conclusions are clear : if you add together the effects of domestic aid ( state aid ) , non-structural Community policies ( basically , research and development policies ) and truly structural policies , there has been a loss of cohesion .
This is because the differences between the 25 best-off and the 25 worst-off regions is the same at the end of this period as at the beginning , and because the differences between the states have increased .
There has been a loss of cohesion , furthermore , because the amount of per capita aid ( adding the three types together ) is much greater in those countries not included in cohesion policy than in those countries which are included .
What should we do ?
There are three reasons why we should not decrease our efforts towards cohesion . Firstly , because it has not been enough .
Secondly , when the internal market and economic and monetary union are complete , they will increase the extent to which activities are concentrated in the richest countries . Thirdly - and this is an aspect the report does not take into account - once we no longer have exchange rates and monetary policy as a way of dealing with crises of asymmetry , funds to address the principle of cohesion will be needed more than ever .
Congratulations , rapporteur ; my only regret is that you do not belong to my political group .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . This report , and the matter under discussion , focuses attention on two particular areas , namely structure and agricultural policy .
Here I must contradict Mr Rack .
What is the point of examining the past without also drawing conclusions for the future .
Mr Izquierdo Collado tries to train his argument on the future , knowing well that the EU is in constant flux and that we are right now faced with major changes if we are to include European enlargement in our considerations .
Yet this approach is the correct one , since enlargement is coming and in political terms it is both necessary and desirable .
We also have to ask how much this will cost .
Can the European family continue to manage its affairs in the same way as before when it has to look after a number of new members ?
Is it not time for some reorganizing here and there ?
Should we also be tightening our belts ?
Here talk of ownership is simply out of place .
The structural fund has been introduced to enable the EU 's poorer regions to adapt .
I am assuming here that these regions will in fact be able to adapt over a period of years by the efficient use of resources .
There are in fact some early indications of success in this respect .
Were this not to be the case , then the resources in question will have been misappropriated .
It is simply premature to be discussing increased levels of self-generated resources .
Of course we will have to think about this again in five years time and review the situation . I advocate this , as does my group .
I believe that the same applies to the cohesion fund , which was set up to help Member States move towards monetary union .
When this has been achieved , then I would say that the cohesion fund will have fulfilled its role .
Should further support be required , then we should consider some other arrangement , possibly also involving a structural aid scheme .
Economic and social cohesion cannot only be measured in terms of financial resources .
But cohesion must also come from within .
I regret that we have had so few positive things to say this evening , but I too am running out of time .
Let me just say one final thing : structural policy and regional policy have both scored successes and that is something we should not forget .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
Let me first thank the rapporteur , Mr Izquierdo Collado , for his excellent report , and let me also thank him for saying that the European Parliament was satisfied with the structural policy .
I think his remarks also include a degree of criticism , but nevertheless , one is pleased to hear a positive comment on the subject .
In this respect I also wish to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Klaß for recognizing the success of the structural policy .
On behalf of the College of Commissioners may I say unequivocally that the cohesion report carries the full conviction of the Commission that cohesion policy is a mainstay of the European integration model .
I think that this is borne out by a number of decisions , not only in the area of cohesion policy .
Economic and social cohesion as the guiding principle for a common policy therefore extends far beyond the economic dimension .
The aims of the structural policy and its practical implementation on the ground are extremely important when it comes to understanding and accepting the European Union and reinforcing the social dimension in Europe .
I believe that the cohesion report also brings this clearly to the fore .
A number of you also mentioned other EU policy areas which were first looked at in conjunction with the cohesion initiative .
I would like to emphasize once again that here we should not lose sight of the primary objectives of community policy .
From our point of view its contribution as far as cohesion is concerned is much more positive than has been suggested in the report and by a number of speakers in the debate .
The reform of the common agricultural policy , for example , has had a positive effect on cohesion since 1992 because it has guaranteed higher transfers of funds to the poorest Member States and regions .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has also referred to this in its opinion statement .
It is important , in my opinion , that we pursue this through the Agenda 2000 package .
The main objective of European research policy , if I may comment briefly on the subject , is to strengthen the EU 's competitive position as a supplier of flagship technologies , primarily vis-à-vis the United States and Japan .
Nevertheless , one of the key roles of the research framework programmes is also the dissemination of research results and technology transfer projects ; this new knowledge will be of benefit to everyone and indeed they will find a wealth of information in the framework programmes .
Yet the Commission still sees its future role in helping develop the use of synergies and improving the coordination of all Community policies .
The Committee welcomes the support for its reform proposals and , if I understand the situation correctly , there seems ultimately to be a consensus , if one reads between the lines , in favour of reforming the structural funds regulation , both in the budget framework as well as in terms of its priorities and necessities .
The Commission is convinced that the proposals of Agenda 2000 will guarantee unlimited solidarity with the poorest regions of the Union for years to come and will provide a progressive access route for new member countries .
We therefore consider that changes to the budget plan or even to the financial forecast are unnecessary .
I believe that we can also sense agreement on the need to concentrate objectives and programmes .
I think that we also agree on basic objectives , such as the reduction of development disparities , the fight against unemployment and of course the need for sustained development .
Allow me again to clarify the Commission 's proposal for the cohesion fund , since this was a key part of the discussion .
The proposal is designed to ensure that Member States whose GNP is below 90 % will continue to receive assistance after joining the monetary union , the reason for this being that there are still considerable infrastructure backlogs , even in the most successful cohesion countries .
Certainly , the 90 % criterion will have to be reassessed half way through , and if it is no longer applicable , then we should still be in a position to draw conclusions from the success of our previous policy .
I cannot support the call for an additional structural policy support instrument in respect of economic and monetary union .
The structural funds were not designed as a short-term response to regional economic crises , neither were they intended to be a long-term instrument for fiscal adjustment .
Maintaining the cohesion fund will , in my opinion , promote the continued extension of Europe 's infrastructure , even under the difficult conditions imposed by the stability pact .
Neither should we forget that Member States and regions with weak infrastructures are the very ones who stand to profit most both from increasing levels of growth and from falling interest rates , which even now are evident as a result of stability initiatives .
Nevertheless , I believe that it is correct for us to keep a close watch on development within the Union and to report on it at regular intervals .
I think that I will do this anyway in the Committee on Regional Policy at very regular and frequent intervals .
Finally , the Commission also welcomes the broad consensus on the guideline principles for the reform of the structural funds Regulation .
Simplification and transparency are basic pre-requirements for the success of decentralization .
But the Commission wants not only to decentralize but also to ensure that local and regional actors and social partners have a greater involvement in the framing and implementation of the programmes - otherwise decentralization can quickly turn into renationalization .
And that is something which we all want to prevent .
Let me conclude by thanking you once more for the extremely constructive dialogue which has taken place between Parliament and the Commission .
You can be sure that we continue to regard Parliament as an important ally when it comes to safeguarding the economic and social cohesion of the Union .
Contributions to International Fund for Ireland
The next item is the report ( A4-0317 / 97 ) by Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on Community financial contributions to the International Fund for Ireland ( COM ( 97 ) 0130 - C4-0233 / 97-97 / 0116 ( CNS ) )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin my presentation of this report by once more pointing out how important we in this House think it is to undertake initiatives to support the process of peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland . We respect that region 's ability to provide its own solutions , but we also have a firm wish to cooperate in their implementation .
In the European Parliament there is unanimous support for peace , reconciliation , recovery and development in a territory which , since it is part of the European Union , we all feel part of .
The Committee on Regional Policy has repeatedly expressed this wish for solidarity , in the form of concrete proposals , and is doing so again today before the European Parliament with this report which I am honoured to present .
Opinions and votes have been contributed to this report by the representatives of all the political groups who sit on the committee , and I must also mention the important role played by those Members of the European Parliament who are directly related with Northern Ireland , whose names we are all familiar with , and whom we thank once again for their efforts .
The proposal for a regulation which the Commission is presenting to us is along the same general lines as the existing 1994 regulation . The European Parliament contributed to that regulation , by means of an excellent example of collaboration with Council , who incorporated all our amendments into the text .
The new element of the current proposal is the reference to the Community initiative programme Peace . It is essential to take this into account , since it pursues the same objectives .
The proposal rightly seeks to ensure consistency between projects financed by the fund and those supported by the Peace initiative . Such consistency is vital , but proper coordination is also needed between measures financed by the fund , and those financed by the structural policies .
That is the purpose of our Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 5 .
We also think , Mrs President , ladies and gentlemen , that it is important to stress that financing from the fund must be exclusively additional in nature , being directed towards objectives which will increase the region 's innate potential .
That is what we intend with Amendment No 2 .
Finally , bearing in mind that the European Union is the leading donor to the International Fund for Ireland , we think it is right - and important - that the citizens of Northern Ireland should be made aware of our efforts to express our solidarity with them as fellow Europeans .
This is the purpose of Amendment No 4 .
The European Parliament longs to catch a glimpse of fresh hopes for peace rising above the mountain of difficulties .
It is our constant wish to help to break the vicious circle of violence , economic problems and exclusion which hinders the peace process . Therefore , we are in favour of the fund 's continuation , and we hope that our amendments can help it to become better coordinated , to be used in a way which will complement and assist other initiatives , and to be better known and appreciated by the public .
Madam President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for his tremendous work and cooperation on this report .
The future of social cohesion in the two communities in Northern Ireland is inextricably linked to the future of the International Fund for Ireland for such is the importance of the fund as an instrument for reconciliation and development .
The key to lasting peace on the island of Ireland lies with the process of reconciliation at ground level in communities and in neighbourhoods .
This is work that is carried out away from the public eye , far from the high-profile peace talks currently taking place .
However , it is this work at community level which will bring people together to recognize what they have in common rather than that which divides them .
It is vital that this work underpins the continuing quest for a lasting and just peace in my country .
The International Fund has played a uniquely valuable role in facilitating and promoting the community level process .
However , this is work for the long haul ; it will take many years for the scars of the past to heal and to banish the mistrust and suspicion .
It is vital , therefore , that the fund continues to prosper and grow .
The emphasis that the fund places on cross-Community projects is particularly important and must be given every support .
I welcome the strong contribution and continuing support from the European Union but , in particular , from Parliament here towards searching for that reconciliation and that peace .
The continued existence of poverty and disadvantage in Northern Ireland and in the border counties serves only to exacerbate the challenges of the peace process .
In this regard the focus of the fund on disadvantaged areas is of particular importance .
If people feel discriminated against , it is much harder for them to feel they belong to part of a community or to be part of that process .
As well as that , the key work and cooperation that can be created at cross-border level has been neglected for too long and the fund has brought together communities on both sides of the border to create greater understanding and a greater belief in what they can do for themselves .
Madam President , on behalf of my political group and my Prime Minister and the British Government , I very much welcome the contribution the EU is making in this area .
I want to say a special thank you to Mr Gutiérrez Díaz for the commitment he has shown on this issue , both as a former chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy , a Vice-President of our Parliament and someone who has keenly followed these issues from the beginning of the peace process .
He has demonstrated a great deal of sensitivity in this area and for that I thank him .
I consider the International Fund for Ireland to be an essential part of the confidence-building process for the communities , alongside the peace and reconciliation programme .
It is very important to engage local communities in groups , outside the institutional level of the current peace talks .
These are their channels and their programmes and they have the ownership of this community-building peace programme .
My government welcomes the continuing efforts being made by the Commissioner and the programmes she has launched .
It is particularly important in this critical phase of talks for the EU to continue its commitment and for the International Fund to give a signal to our international partners that we still need to underpin the peace process with grass roots projects .
I agree with the rapporteur that as the single biggest donor we would like to see the Commission fly the flag more often .
Indeed , we would like to see Commissioner Wulf-Mathies there backing these projects and launching them .
Equally , we need to have budgetary rigour .
We want to see more effective use of funds and we do not want to see them duplicating what we do in mainstream funds or in the P & R programme but giving added value to work that is going on .
Finally , I wish that all Members of this House could come and see the difference this makes to grass roots communities .
Our Northern Ireland colleagues know this very well working as they do among the local communities .
They will have seen the efforts made by groups to work in partnership , to rebuild communities .
I pay tribute to the efforts of those local people , sometimes in impossible circumstances .
In particular last year , when there was a breakdown of the peace process , these projects were vital peace lifelines .
I should like to relate an anecdote .
We conducted hearings on how these funds work .
I was very impressed when a local community worker came up to me and I felt as if I had brought a case of money to him he was so grateful and so pleased for the support that the European Union was giving .
He said : ' The people , the areas , the community groups at the heart of the problem must be at the heart of the solution . '
There are no quick fixes and we cannot overstate the importance of the alliance-building that has been done to date with the support of the International Fund for Ireland .
Madam President , first I should like to compliment the rapporteur , Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , on his report and in particular for the sensitive appreciation of the situation in Northern Ireland that his explanatory text displays .
Let me say straight away that I welcome the proposal by the Commission to extend European Community support for the International Fund for Ireland for a further two years .
Although the proposed level of funding is lower than the last two years , we must recognize that it represents an increase on the original amount subscribed prior to 1995 .
I support the thrust of the amendments by Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , in particular with regard to the need for proper coordination between the fund 's activities and projects financed under Community structural programmes : with regard to ensuring that assistance from the fund is additional to and not a substitute for other public expenditure ; with regard to pursuing objectives that are consistent with the peace fund programme and with regard to ensuring that appropriate measures are taken by the Commission to publicize the Community participation in the activities of the fund .
Let us get some credit for our support and if , in the process of attracting publicity , we also subject the workings of the fund and its governing body to more scrutiny then so much the better for transparency .
This fund was established under the Anglo-Irish Agreement , which was not a treaty as suggested in the explanatory statement , with the objectives of promoting economic and social advance , while encouraging dialogue and reconciliation between the two communities of Northern Ireland .
That is to be warmly supported and it is worth noting that it has been supported by countries of the Commonwealth as well as the United States , in addition to Member States of the European Union .
However , we must remember that it is not easy to apply the consensus and conciliatory approach that characterize this Parliament to the deep historical divisions of Northern Ireland society .
I hope very much that the new government in my country will not trample on Unionist wishes in its own desire to achieve a settlement but will remember that political solutions can only work if there is consent .
Madam President , I also wish to pay tribute to the rapporteur and also to the Commission and Parliament for their continued support for the International Fund for Ireland .
We are now at a crucial juncture in the peace process and I hope that in the months ahead we will see the forging of a lasting peace and the establishment of a historic accommodation between the communities on the island of Ireland .
The work of peace is slow and much of the real work will be carried out behind the scenes to bring communities together in a spirit of openness and friendship , after generations of conflict and suspicion .
The fund plays a vital role in this process and the purpose of the fund is to promote economic and social advance and to encourage contact , dialogue and reconciliation between nationalists and unionists throughout the island of Ireland .
The fund has made great strides in fulfilling this objective and much has been achieved .
The US has of course contributed ECU 270 million to date and the European Union ECU 150 million .
This is a significant practical contribution on the part of the European Union to forging of peace .
When the fund was put in place in 1986 many areas of Northern Ireland and the six border counties were experiencing business difficulties ; high unemployment was the norm .
Things have improved since then .
Unemployment is down but still remains unacceptably high .
The IFI jobs impact is estimated at an impressive 27 , 800 .
Most importantly , support has been given to 639 organizations engaged in promoting social and economic development , involving 7 , 600 community leaders .
I would like to pay tribute to the chairman of the fund who has brought great experience to his role and has been particularly successful in securing much needed employment in Northern Ireland and the border counties .
There is an important role for the International Fund for Ireland in supporting the development and in catalyzing the economic potential of the border counties .
All those involved in the peace process have an onus to put in place a lasting peace and the International Fund together with peace and reconciliation , a major contribution for the European Union , and Interreg all play an important role and I hope that in the years to come we will see tremendous developments in Northern Ireland and the border counties where we will have a just and lasting peace .
Madam President , the objective of the International Fund for Ireland to break the vicious circle of violence in Northern Ireland by contributing to peace and reconciliation is more important than ever at the moment .
The European Union is now a major source of finance for the fund .
I agree with the rapporteur , and I pay tribute to him here for his interest tonight , that it is vital to ensure proper coordination between the fund 's activities and those financed under Community structural policies .
I admire the way that Commissioner Wulf-Mathies has engaged with Northern Ireland .
I know her commitment to direct participation by the citizens .
In order to achieve this properly in this very difficult situation , careful monitoring of the funds and how they are disbursed is most important .
The objectives of reconciliation and peace , establishing contacts between the two communities and forging links between them have an impeccable record in the fund .
The number of community and cross-border groups brought together in projects financed by the fund reaches into the hundreds .
We hope to increase it further .
Madam President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
I think he was the right man picked for the job for he has a depth of knowledge of Northern Ireland .
I am very pleased to see the Commissioner here tonight as well because she also has acquired a good knowledge since she took office .
The IFI has had a credibility problem in the community I represent since its inception in 1986 .
When I compare this fund to the Peace and Reconciliation Fund for effectiveness , I am afraid I have to say that the IFI disappears totally into oblivion .
This , to me and the people I represent is unacceptable .
The rapporteur has called for increased transparency .
We need more accountability .
There is little doubt about that .
The IFI continues as if nothing is wrong .
It seems to me that whatever representation is made is overturned , overlooked and never given any credence .
They seem to be able to come out to Brussels and brainwash the people there .
They do not look to see where the problems actually lie in the fund .
They have made no attempt to make the fund more acceptable to the broad Unionist community .
In the next two years there must be a root-andbranch change .
Instead of hiding behind box numbers as they do at present in Belfast , they have got to come out into the open .
We need to see real transparency .
I would like to be more positive but I would be misleading this House and the Commissioner if I did not spell out the weaknesses I see in this fund at the present moment in time .
I hope we will question why the chairman and the secretariat have not been more pro-active in ensuring the IFI achieve that which it was designed to do , and that is to lend support .
Unfortunately I cannot hold out the same degree of hope for the chairman of the fund and the secretariat .
We need to get a total clearance of some of the people that are there at the moment .
We need it now , and we need the fund to achieve what it was originally designed to do .
Madam President , I want to thank the rapporteur , the Commissioner and other colleagues who are here tonight .
I think it is symptomatic of the goodwill that has been shown towards the peace process in Northern Ireland .
The International Fund , as has been said here , has played a very positive role in the quest for a lasting and peaceful settlement to the Northern Ireland conflict .
Since its inception , this particular fund has supported more than 3 , 400 individual projects and has helped in the creation of roughly 28 , 000 jobs .
There might be a perception that the IFI is an American programme while the Special Programme for Peace and Reconciliation is a European one .
I think it is time we dispelled this perception because Europe , in fact , is now the main contributor to both of these programmes .
Today we can see that we provide here , in Europe , almost half of the IFI 's annual budget .
As the managers of the fund themselves acknowledge , the European Union 's contribution represents a major international recognition of the efforts by both the Irish and British Governments to seek a peaceful solution to the Northern Ireland conflict .
With regard to what Mr Nicholson has said , I know there has been a perception in the past that the nationalist communities have benefited to some extent over the unionists , but I think that criticism has now been redressed .
I hope that the fund continues to treat , and will be seen to treat , all sides fairly .
That is very important .
Also , it is very necessary for MEPs - and not only MEPs , but the public at large - to be able to find out more about what is going on there .
Monitoring is very important .
This point has been made and I want to endorse it .
Finally , the funding must be additional .
It must not replace other public or private sources of finance .
Madam President , I want to support the rapporteur 's point that there could be a greater awareness of the European contribution to this fund .
The Delors package has not been so long in existence .
It has , thanks to the efforts of the Commission and Parliament , been better publicized in Northern Ireland .
To date the European Union has given ECU 150 million , as people have said , and has involved itself with more than 3 , 000 projects .
Given the relatively small size of the area that is Northern Ireland and the border counties , it has touched a large proportion of the population .
What is most in evidence is that it has brought voluntary organizations together and these organizations in turn have brought their public representatives into closer contact and greater cooperation with each other .
There is one big lesson to be learned from this fund operating together with the Delors package : this is that small amounts of money can very often have a bigger political impact than the investment would suggest .
That has happened in this case .
As a representative of the border region of Ireland I want to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Parliament , the various groups and the Commission for the consideration and sympathy that they have always shown with the problems in Northern Ireland .
I want to thank too the Commissioner whose name is well known in the border regions and in Northern Ireland and who has made a remarkable contribution to bringing the spirit of European goodwill and cooperation into that divided community .
The goodwill has been translated into three packages : Northern Ireland got Priority 1 status when its economic development stage would not have justified it ; the Delors package and the International Fund for Ireland all together have made a fairly remarkable contribution to getting voluntary workers to come together .
I regret it if there are people in Northern Ireland who have a feeling that one community has benefited more than the other or that the transparency that should be there is not there .
It takes a while to break down prejudices , but I will certainly support any case that is brought to me on behalf of the Unionist community , just the same as the nationalists , if it is shown that they have not got their share of this money . I am sure the Commissioner will do the same .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first express my thanks to Mr Gutiérrez Díaz for this very important report .
The Commission also thanks Parliament for its commitment to the peace process in Northern Ireland and in particular for its support of the International Fund for Ireland .
The IFI has a vital role to play in promoting dialogue and reconciliation between Nationalists and Unionists , and through this it complements the measures provided under the structural fund for the whole island of Ireland and the considerable efforts which the Commission has made through its programme for peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland .
It is especially important , in my view , that those who are acting for the IFI should be based in both population groups and should make every effort to involve both groups in the various projects .
The draft regulation now before you clearly states that European resources should be used primarily for projects which are in accord with the Peace programme and that in this case priority should be given to projects which extend across the political and religious divide .
The Commission is therefore pleased to accept the rapporteur 's proposals , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , for coordination between the IFI , the structural funds and the Peace programme .
The same applies to proposals for giving greater publicity to the work of the IFI .
This may also help to break down mistrust .
I believe it to be in all our interests that everyone should regard not only these projects but also those introduced at European level as measures designed to help both groups - and primarily those who have suffered most from the violence of recent years and months .
The Commission has already agreed with the IFI that it will give greater prominence to the involvement of the European Union in projects which are promoted jointly by Peace and the IFI or by one of the structural funds and the IFI .
As an initial step in this direction flagship projects which have a high proportion of cofinancing from EU resources shall in future be known as IFI / EU flagship projects .
I hope that this is given due attention in our publicity campaign .
Allow me yet again to express my thanks to Parliament for its support of the peace and reconciliation process in Northern Ireland and in Ireland as a whole .
Our most ardent wish is for a lasting peace in Ireland , something which will also highlight Europe 's role in the application of the principles of the Union , which are to establish , and provide long-term support for , a process of peace and reconciliation by working together for the benefit of the common good .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Practice of the profession of lawyer
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0337 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained ( C4-0440 / 97-94 / 0299 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Fontaine )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , here we are at the happy end of a long journey because , as I have been told , the legal profession has desired this directive on freedom of establishment for more than twenty years .
But if everyone apart from the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , for reasons of their specific situation , were agreed on the principle , then discussions on the content led to a ferocious clash of two philosophies , I would even say two cultures .
In brief , I would say that the liberal concept came up against the integrationist concept and the positions taken by both sides appeared so entrenched that some said it would be impossible to reconcile them .
It was in May 1995 that the Commission submitted a first proposal for a directive to our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
It was the fruit , Mr Commissioner , of worthy efforts which attempted to resolve , it has to be said , the squaring of the circle .
But this exercise in compromise had its limits .
Some could not accept that an aptitude test should be maintained for joining the Bar of a host country , even in a toned down form , because who says test says potential lock-out , with no recourse to appeal .
Others could only accept that , after practising for five years in a European Union country , a lawyer who wished to continue to practise under his home-country professional title would be abruptly sent home .
So the Committee on Legal Affairs set about taking up the challenge .
Drawing considerable inspiration from the proposal which the Advisory Council of European Barristers managed to achieve through the impetus of its chairman , Maître Weil , whose patience and talent I applaud , we proposed an ambitious approach , based on the mutual confidence already long maintained between European lawyers , in the practice of their profession .
This approach has led us , on the one hand , to replace the aptitude test by a rigorous verification procedure of the effective and regular activity of the lawyer in question over a period of three base years , added to this the possibility of recourse to the domestic courts in the case of a refusal and , on the other hand , to guarantee , for those who want it , the permanent nature of establishment under their home-country professional title .
The scope of this text must be clearly specified .
It is in no way a question of undermining the national regulations which , in each of our countries , govern access to the profession , nor the procedures for individual or group practice .
Subsidiarity rightly imposes on us respect for these rules .
It is simply a matter of facilitating the movements of lawyers within the community and of enabling them to practise their profession in a Member State other than their own , either individually or collectively .
Furthermore it is a shame that this second aspect of group practice , which is extremely promising for the future , has been somewhat overshadowed by the liveliness of the debate on individual practice .
It has not been easy for your rapporteur , or for the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs , and I would like to say to my colleagues how much their 100 % commitment to this difficult but fascinating affair , their openness , driven on by the search for a fair balance and the wish for a successful conclusion , have been a strong encouragement to me .
I would today like to thank the Commission and the Council , who have agreed to concur with our new approach and this seems to me , Mr Commissioner , an exemplary model of the fruitful cooperation between our institutions .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has attentively studied the Council 's proposal for a common position , dated 24 July last .
We are happy to note that most of the amendments voted for at the first reading have been taken up , the few differences observed having the sole objective of making certain points in the text more clear and precise .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we propose that this House approves the common position as it is presented , so that its rapid conclusion may enable the legal profession to move further towards its opening up within Europe , for which it has hoped and prayed for so long .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , in June of last year , at the time of the first reading , I congratulated Mrs Fontaine , as I do this evening , for her work and I urged the Council , without too much hope , to crystallize this work as soon as possible , for I was convinced , as were my colleagues , that if we did not seize this chance , we would run the risk of finding it extremely difficult to recommence once more the work of concluding an acceptable result for our " lawyers ' directive .
And this is what has happened today .
The Council has been able to seize this opportunity .
It has been able to take up the delicate balance proposed by Parliament , with certain acceptable nuances and with some useful clarifications .
Our rapporteur proposes we accept the common position without amendment , supported in this by the Committee on Legal Affairs and tomorrow , I am sure , by the House .
I congratulate them and I am very pleased .
We must also now look further , Mr Commissioner , and ensure the faithful implementation of the future directive .
I therefore turn to you , Mr Monti , in order to express a certain concern of the professional sector and to ask you for some assurances .
I remember the terms of the exchange , if I may repeat them : freedom of permanent establishment , under one 's home-country professional title on the one hand , and acceptance at the Bar of the host country without an aptitude test on the other .
The hope is that freedom of establishment will enable the development of the profession of lawyer at a European level ; the fear is that hindrances will remain through a too rigorous implementation of the demands of the directive , in particular the verification of effective and regular activity by the appropriate authority .
The anticipated interview must not become an examination , a filter , a barrier imposed once more .
Furthermore , Commissioner Monti , I ask you to vigilantly ensure , on behalf of the Commission , the faithful implementation of the directive in this regard and to assure us that you will not hesitate to note failures in the implementation and to punish them , if necessary , for we also have to convince lawyers , often young , that this directive is an opportunity for them and that it is an opportunity for Europe .
I believe it ; it is still necessary for it to become a reality , and that depends largely on you , Mr Commissioner .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen . Freedom of settlement has long been enshrined by European treaty .
There are certain occupational groups , however , which have until now been excluded from this right due to specific de facto circumstances .
European lawyers constitute one such group .
The reason for this must surely lie in the fact that legal training differs considerably from one Member State to the next and that differences have always existed between our various national laws and legal arrangements .
However , and this is a matter which I am keen to raise here , academic studies undertaken in the area of commercial law have indicated that almost 60 % of the laws which are in force in the various Member States have their origins in European legislation .
In this respect the harmonization of legislation within the internal market is now so well advanced that the fundamental differences which many legal experts say still exist are in reality no longer there .
In some cases it is simply the paragraph numbers and legislative machinery which differ , while considerable convergence has already been achieved in respect of the content of European regulations .
On this basis it makes absolute sense to apply the principle of freedom of settlement to European lawyers and ultimately to introduce this basic European right for the benefit of this particular professional group .
At this point may I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , on the successful outcome of her efforts .
It is mainly down to her that compromise has been achieved .
This matter has been the subject of great contention between the different national interests .
I still recall the arguments which took place in my homeland where early on the relevant technical committees in the German Bundestag refused point blank to approve the directive .
The compromise solution which has now been adopted is so well thought out that with one exception , namely the small country of Luxembourg , all Member States have agreed to it .
The professional groups concerned , which are represented by the CCBE - the European lawyers ' association - , are satisfied with this arrangement and support it unreservedly .
For me this is an excellent example of how Parliament , through its own initiative , has been able to take steps to achieve a compromise and to actually get the Council to accept its proposals .
I believe that we can regard this as a major success for this House vis-à-vis the Council and its role as a legislator . It is an achievement which should not be underestimated .
The new agreement will make it possible for those of my profession - for I too am a lawyer - to make full use of their rights and opportunities within the European internal market , under certain conditions of course .
But it will also benefit other professions and sectors in which legislative assimilation has become necessary .
I therefore leave this House tonight feeling extremely satisfied because I believe that we have achieved real progress towards European integration and the creation of the internal market - albeit only in a small sector .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , Parliament is once again examining the draft Directive on the lawyers ' right of establishment , which is of extreme importance not only to European lawyers but also to all European citizens , as potential users of the legal service .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights recently pronounced judgment unanimously in favour of the adoption without amendments of Council 's common position that accepted most of the amendments proposed by Parliament and caught the spirit of them .
On behalf of the Group Union for Europe , I hope that the part-session House will take up that position this week .
The work of the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , has in fact been persistent and useful and has enabled intelligent compromises to be reached between positions that often seemed irreconcilable .
If this House approves the motion as it left the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and in accordance with the requests of the Council of European Forensic Associations , European lawyers will be given two considerable opportunities : that of setting up , for an unspecified period , in a state other than their own , keeping their original name and providing advice on all European rights except for that of the state of establishment , and that of being equivalent for all purposes to their colleagues in the state of establishment , following the favourable appraisal of their legal competence made by the competent authorities of the host country .
This directive takes an important step forward on the path to the actual achievement of the internal market , with regard to a highly important professional sector .
I am grateful to Mrs Fontaine , both as a lawyer and as an MEP .
I would like to recall here that this year sees the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the first directive on the freedom of European lawyers to provide services , subsequently completed with few results in 1989 .
The approval and actual implementation of the new directive , for which I too call warmly upon Mr Monti , will be the most useful way of celebrating this anniversary .
Madam President , I could repeat my arguments from the first reading , but I have to say that my group , for the moment , concedes defeat .
Nevertheless , we have presented some amendments to our rapporteur 's compromise , for which we congratulate her .
I ask with insistence , Mr Commissioner and Madam Rapporteur , why , for a profession that is exactly the same as many others , for example , the medical profession , we need either a work placement or an examination ?
It is effectively because , in our Member States , professional groups want to protect themselves and have wanted to do so since the very beginning , when we demanded the freedom of establishment for lawyers as for any other group of professionals .
Now we are accepting a compromise , a rather dull one I would say , which certainly offers some possibilities , but possibilities only for a professional group which has done so much to promote the idea of Europe in the Court of Justice and in the national courts of law .
Now they are protecting themselves just like all the others , with quite weighty requests and demands .
But whilst sharing the pleasure of finally finding , once again , a certain leeway in the freedom of establishment , I still wonder why a lawyer would register at the Bar of another Member State whose law he does not know .
It is because he believes he has a future in this other country and that he has the knowledge to enable him to do so .
The fact that we now admit that the national Bar must itself impose conditions is also a form of defeat .
I am not particularly proud of this or happy about it .
But I congratulate Mrs Fontaine on having found a compromise .
Madam President , this process , which I believe is coming to an end with this evening 's debate and tomorrow 's vote , has indeed lasted many years .
The possibility of practising the profession of lawyer in a Member State other than that in which the professional qualification was obtained is indeed provided for by this draft directive , which is finally taking shape through the recommendation for second reading .
Twenty four of the twenty eight amendments that the European Parliament submitted during the first reading are already included in the common position of the Council of Ministers , since they had previously been accepted by the European Commission .
It is this Parliament that not only sketched out the more general direction but also determined the more specific solutions to most of the problems .
It would have been difficult to achieve this without the persistence , the steadfastness , and the ability of Mrs Nicole Fontaine to reconcile those things which initially appeared impossible to reconcile .
I think that my colleagues on the Committee on Legal Affairs helped her to overcome opposition and , working closely with Bar Councils in most of the Member States , to arrive at today 's report , which satisfies most people .
But the work is mainly her own and she is worthy of our heartiest congratulations .
This special directive was demanded by the profession , which had never been satisfied with the general system of Directive 89 / 48 / EC .
The solution that is presented today is linked to three significant innovations : the permanent nature of establishment with the original professional qualification ; making it easier to obtain this qualification ; the practice of the profession in the welcoming Member State and the regulations concerning the collective practice of the profession .
However , more than all this , it ensures the dignity with which lawyers who establish themselves in another Member State deserve to be treated .
Citizens of medium-sized and smaller States , such as the country I have the honour of representing here in this Chamber , or even of the larger States , such as Germany , France and Great Britain , may , in this way , look to equality of treatment in other countries .
In this way the freedom of movement of persons and the freedom to establish oneself acquires much greater substance , and the European Union gains one more reason to justify its existence .
This is no small step , Madam President .
We are , of course , conscious of the fact that this directive will not automatically solve all the problems created by certain companies of lawyers .
Nor do we ignore the fact that the moment we arrive at a European solution which is more generally accepted , the problem assumes an even greater dimension through the globalization of the economy and the guidelines of the World Trade Organization which ensure the freedom of related professionals , chartered accountants and chartered surveyors , to establish themselves in almost all countries .
However , these facts do not undermine the importance of the achievement of Mrs Fontaine , and they show the way for us to address other similar problems .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission have done their duty .
Tomorrow it is the turn of the Member States .
It is now their duty , with the assistance of Bar Councils and the ever watchful surveillance of the Commission , to fully implement and exploit this forward-looking directive , which will provide opportunities and freedom .
Madam President , at this late hour and in this almost intimate atmosphere - almost like a chat between friends - allow me to begin by recounting an anecdote . When I first came to this Parliament in 1994 , the only piece of internal Community legislation with which I was familiar was a single directive .
In fact , it was an unsuccessful directive .
Specifically , it was this directive about the free practice of the profession of lawyer . I was familiar with the discussions which had taken place in legal circles in Lisbon and Bremen , and I knew the directive had poor prospects .
Then I remember , in the spring of 1995 we finally received the text of the Commission 's proposal , and when discussions on it started in the Committee on Legal Affairs , in October or November of that same year , I said to my colleagues in the General Council for European Lawyers , " I think it is going to happen ; it will be approved within two years ' .
And they smiled at me , as if to say , " Honestly , her Euro-enthusiasm knows no bounds ' .
Nevertheless , Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Fontaine , that is what we have achieved , thanks to the particular work of those people I have mentioned - especially you and your team , Commissioner . I see that Mr de Visee is looking at me with that calm manner of his , which has been so important on many occasions .
And the rapporteur has mentioned Mr Hans Weil , to whom we all owe a great deal .
Mr Weil is the epitome of a truly European lawyer : a German by birth , living in France , and practising law of a standard and worthiness that is a source of pride to us all .
So , we have managed it , and today 's result is doubly valuable for me : we have demonstrated what the codecision process can achieve ; there has been the highest degree of cooperation between the institutions ; the Commission had the courage to issue a proposal at a time when everybody thought it was bound to fail ; this House shouldered its responsibilities and , often confronting its groups in the Member States , ensured that reason prevailed over people 's fears .
I am looking at Mr Cot and Mr Lehne , and I am thinking of other people too , who are not with us today , but who assisted us throughout the whole process .
For I do not subscribe to the opinion , Mrs Fontaine , that this matter should be seen as a confrontation between a liberal view and a protectionist view .
We have faced up to the fears of the various Member States , manifested in different ways - in one way in Spain , another in France , and yet another in Germany .
Madam President , there is not going to be a flood of immigrants from one country to another . That is not where the political value of this directive lies .
The political value of this directive is of a symbolic nature .
This matter lies at the very heart of the building of Europe .
The labelling of toys is very important , common agricultural policy subsidies are very important , but even more important is the ability of lawyers - the people who manipulate that instrument which in the final analysis is the grand instrument of integration - should feel involved , should feel European . Recalling once again the words of the Spanish king , Alfonso the Wise : they become the true spokespeople of that European Law which we are all building .
Madam President , the Commission is pleased that the European Parliament has accepted Council 's common position and the results of voting on that wording within the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights which approved it without adopting amendments .
I too wish to congratulate Mrs Fontaine in particular , who managed to draw up a text constituting an acceptable compromise for the Commission and for Council , as well as for almost all associations of lawyers .
Her task has not been an easy one as the need for the motion had initially been strongly opposed .
I wish to pay homage to Mrs Fontaine , to the great determination and balance we have been able to admire in her once again .
The directive is important , not only to the lawyers who are playing a decisive role in implementing Community law and affirming this lawful Community , but also to their clients , such as the companies operating in the single market and individual citizens .
This also represents progress with regard to recognition based on reciprocal trust between Member States , as indicated in the report on the freedom of movement of persons drawn up by the senior group chaired by Mr Veil ; the directive we are dealing with this evening is , in fact , the first to authorize establishment for professional purposes , without checking qualifications and experience .
I think that this has been an exemplary case of cooperation between the institutions . And as an extension to this cooperation , Mr Cot and Mr Florio , as a way of ensuring that the legislator 's wish is actually implemented , I undertake , on behalf of the Commission , to do what you have asked .

I believe that the application of the rules of the single market , the enforcement , is just as important as the legislative production of the rules themselves .
I should mention here the Commission 's commitment to your request .
The Commission will pay careful attention to the correct implementation of the directive ; for this purpose , my services have already met the national delegations asking for explanations in this connection and are available for further meetings .
The Commission will take any complaints made by lawyers into account .
I too congratulate this Parliament , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and you , Mrs Fontaine .
Madam President , I asked the chairman a clear question and he has not deigned to reply to it .
What I mean is that I truly wonder why someone who is a lawyer would change countries without having a deep knowledge of the legal system of the country in which he is going to practise .
The Commissioner continues to support the demands of lawyers who ask for either an examination or a work placement , yet cannot answer me .
It is perhaps his right to say he has no answer , but he cannot be allowed to ignore justifiable parliamentary questions , that is not done !
I am happy to try and answer , Mr Wijsenbeek .
As you will certainly know , in the case of doctors , training is coordinated , which is not the case with lawyers .
The problem therefore arises in a different way .
In the case of lawyers , we were faced with an initial situation that needed a directive which today is luckily nearing final adoption .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Gender issues in development cooperation
The next item is the report ( A4-0318 / 97 ) by Mrs Junker , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on integrating gender issues in development cooperation ( COM ( 97 ) 0265 - C4-024 / 97-97 / 0151 ( SYN ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the consequences of the Fourth World Conference on Women , which was held in Beijing in 1995 , was the submission by the European Commission of a proposal for a regulation on the integration of gender issues in development cooperation .
This is meritorious , but it is also inadequate .
In order to develop the concept of mainstreaming to include development cooperation , we need more than a regulation which is restricted to sensitisation measures and has only been allocated a modest budget .
Of course it is good to see something being done to promote targeted projects with a high multiplier effect .
But we can only talk of a successful concept when it is immediately succeeded by measures which correct the current deficit in practical development cooperation in favour of women .
In practical terms this means defining salient points on the basis of which the living standards of women in the poorest countries can be improved by integrating gender issues in development cooperation .
By and large there has been a distinct improvement in the lot of women in recent years , even in the developing countries , though it has to be said that this has varied enormously from one region to another .
However , the gap between men and women has scarcely narrowed .
There is still much room for improvement , especially as regards the participation of women in politics in general and their involvement at governmental level in particular .
In the developing countries equality for women is also about the redistribution of labour , wealth and power .
The worldwide processes of transformation , which have also thrown the developing countries into turmoil , and the increasing globalization have together given rise to two trends which European development cooperation fails to take fully into account - namely , the feminization of the workplace , on one hand , and the feminization of poverty , on the other .
Feminization of the workplace is the result of growing adaptability in the labour market and the transfer of jobs to the developing countries , where they are being increasingly taken up by women .
This often means exploitation under the most deplorable conditions , but it also means new opportunities for women .
Their productive capacity is an increasingly important factor for economic growth and must be considered as such .
The feminization of poverty stems from the fact that women who find themselves in materially difficult situations are responsible to a significant extent for the survival of the family and are also dependent on income from their male partner , or must often do without this altogether .
The figures bear this out .
In 1970 there were only 37 gainfully-active women for every 100 working men .
By 1990 this figure had risen to 62 per 100 .
In the developing countries there is a demand for cheap , adaptable , unqualified and non-Unionized labour .
In most cases this means women .
However , as living standards increase , witness Hong Kong and Korea , women again become threatened by unemployment , particularly when there is a demand for technical and educational qualifications , which are often denied to women .
Sustained development as far as the female population is concerned also means that women must be imbued with skills and knowledge which are geared to the future and which create permanent employment opportunities .
The worldwide extension of the services sector creates job opportunities for women , though these are often socially unsecure . We should therefore oppose this trend .
How far women in developing countries still have to go to achieve equality of opportunity can be dramatically illustrated by taking as an example the food production and supply sector .
In the developing countries women produce more than 55 % of the cultivated food , and in Africa this rises to over 70 % , yet only 5 % of the advisory services provided to farming through international development aid goes to women .
Only 13 % of the agricultural consultants in development countries are women . In Latin America the figure is 8 % , in Africa 7 % and in the Middle East a mere 1 % .
Negative statistics of this kind can be reeled off ad infinitum .
These figures must be borne in mind if we are to put a stop to this unfortunate trend , instead of just bemoaning the situation .
The international women 's movements have put the spotlight on women 's lives and have contributed much to the development of a global civilized society .
Empowerment is the watchword here . This means the participation of women in political , economic and social activities so that structural changes can be made to the economy and to society in general .
The present regulation , which to my mind still requires a number of improvements - and which I am asking you to support - , is a step , albeit modest , in the right direction .
I hope that it will lead to a general programme for promoting the political development of women , and one which is really capable of making progress .
This does not mean spending vast sums of money , in fact it would constitute a major achievement if the needs and objectives of women could only become a yardstick for all development-policy measures .
Real democracy cannot exist where women are denied legal , economic and socio-political equality , and this applies just as much to the developing countries .
Madam President , Mrs Junker says in her report that men must take greater responsibility for social and reproductive behaviour if we are to truly promote the aim of equality for women in developing countries and therefore it is right that the male Members of the European Parliament take part in this debate and support her excellent report to protest against the denial of adequate reproductive health facilities to women across the world .
One-third of illnesses amongst women aged 15 to 44 in developing countries are caused by sexually transmitted diseases , back-street abortions or pregnancy .
Around 350 million women are still denied access to safe family planning .
We should protest against the impact of poverty which is felt disproportionately by women .
Seventy percent of the world 's 1.3 billion poor are women and lone women heading households are increasing dramatically across the world .
We should protest against all forms of discrimination against women , which at its most extreme is represented by sexual violence and the female infanticide practised in India and China , which has not only perverted the gender ratio but has created a social atmosphere in which girls are seen as a curse .
Two years after the Council regulation was passed I do not think there is mainstreaming of gender issues in Europe 's development policies .
If so , Commissioner , why was gender analysis so abysmally omitted from the Lomé Green Paper ?
Let us do better in the future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , women are not being asked , but they are the answer .
Non-governmental organizations and executive bodies have known this for a long time and act accordingly , when they are allowed to .
An effective development policy cannot be implemented without the participation of women .
They are the driving force not only for their families , but also for any future development in this area .
One must in principle welcome the fact that the Commission has recognized this in its regulation and has drawn up a certain code of behaviour for practical policy implementation .
At this late - or indeed early hour , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Junker , whose appraisal of the present regulation has clearly set out the objectives and requirements of development cooperation from a woman 's viewpoint .
Our group approves the report .
Naturally , we hope that as many as possible of its noble objectives will become a reality .
This will depend on the political will generated at all levels and also on cooperation from reliable partners in Europe and in the recipient countries .
It is the women of the world , particularly in the poorest countries , who bear the burden of life and who have to endure the stresses and strains of their circumstances .
Giving them aid in the form of self-help implies more than simply assisting individual women and their families .
The promotion and participation of women in the economic , political and social process means giving the developing countries a chance for the future .
We must therefore give all due attention to this report and this Council Regulation and wish them every success .
Allow me finally to say something about the general scope of this debate .
In fact it is not really a debate at all , but rather something undeserving of the few speakers and reporters who have to be present , and I wish at this point to express particular thanks to the interpreters and other ministering angels who have endured with us to the bitter end .
No-one is listening to us here , apart from the minute-takers and the tape-recorders .
It is unworthy , especially since the important subject under discussion is one which requires our full attention if we are to find a solution , or even to begin the search for one .
I propose that we put an end to debates of this nature .
After 10 p.m. we could , for example , state that we are giving the written text of our speeches to the secretariat .
Who is listening to us anyway ?
Certainly not the world , certainly not Europe , not even our fellow MEPs .
There is no-one here but ourselves .
We all know what our opinions are .
Such debates do no justice to us , let alone to the subject matter .
Madame President , the Commission 's proposal to integrate the gender aspect as an important factor in development cooperation has the right aim .
As far as the implementation is concerned , not much has been done so far .
Karin Juncker talks about equal rights , but with the gender role pattern in the developing countries , what we need is rather positive discrimination in favour of women .
In other words , the aid must be tailored directly to women to do the most benefit .
We must support women directly through allocating ground , loans , better equipment and technology .
Women must be brought in at all stages of development work and in all policies .
The Commission 's general mainstream approach could be part of this strategy , if the principle is otherwise put into practice and does not remain empty words .
When it comes to evaluating development aid , gender-based statistics should also be used all round .
Without such statistics , there is no way of measuring the effects on men and women respectively .
The EU does not appear to be serious on gender policy .
We saw this in the Green Paper on Lomé and in the lack of priority of staff in the field , which must be increased from its present three and appointed at high level to give them some effectiveness .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , let me first express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for her presentation , which I hope has helped us make some headway .
In the last part-session we discussed reports dealing with the depiction of women in advertising and with violence against women , and I thought to myself that many women in developing countries would be only too glad to have our problems , rather that the burden which they have to bear .
They still have a very long road to travel .
When we call for women to have their fair share of power , income and so on , we are setting objectives which are still a very long way off indeed .
I would like the Commission to tell us if it is planning short-term measures to promote these objectives , such as moves to improve women 's earnings and projects aimed at easing the daily toil of women who are responsible for supporting their families and who are certainly in no position to change their traditional circumstances overnight .
The report again raises the issue of a special committee .
I now ask the Commission to ensure that this committee continues to examine the matters referred to by Mrs Junker and that it does this in close collaboration with the Parliamentary Committee on Development and Cooperation .
I hardly dare express the hope that our amendment , which proposes the participation of Parliament in this committee , will become a reality .
I therefore ask that we cooperate as closely as possible with it so that we can improve the situation and take another step towards the complete achievement of our goals .
What interests me above all , however , are the methods which the Commission is intending to adopt in order really to include those who are suffering hardship in this respect , without using the standards of our society as a yardstick for what we believe to be good for women in developing countries .
Madam President . Two years have elapsed since the World Conference on Women in Beijing and a lot has happened - but it is still not enough .
I also see that the Commission 's proposal and the proposed regulation are a step in the right direction , namely mainstreaming , and that they focus on gender issues in development cooperation .
However , while we have made a number of starts , we have seen very few practical proposals .
The Commission 's administrative services are understaffed .
There is no real support for those nongovernmental organizations in the developing countries which are providing direct aid to women .
Traditions have become ingrained and the regulation contains little about combatting violence .
We have scarcely touched on trafficking in women - a new phenomenon in our society and one which has assumed alarming proportions .
I must reiterate that if we are to achieve sustained development here , we will have to include women much more in the drafting , planning , implementation and evaluation of the projects in question .
If we are to take the findings of the World Conference on Women seriously , then we need to come up with some real results .
Let me conclude by emphasizing that women are the vital ingredient for future development .
We have already brought this out in the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Women are the key to sustained development because with them you always have the next generation on board , so to speak .
All current findings , such as the experience with micro-credits , indicate that women must be regarded as the key to future development .
Madam President , the Commission welcomes the draft report by Parliament and expresses its appreciation of the support given by Parliament to the creation of this budget line in 1990 and to policy developments since the Beijing Conference in 1995 .
The Commission 's position on the 18 amendments submitted for consideration and voting is as follows .
We can accept fully seven Amendments : Nos 1 , 2 , 4 ( as concerns articles 1 ( 2 ) ) , 5 , 7 , 8 and 11 .
The Commission much appreciated in particular Parliament 's support for the regulation 's overall approach .
This seeks to prioritize strategic sensitization functions , which can improve the overall quality of the Community 's whole development / cooperation concerning gender issues and focusing particularly on the major development budget lines rather than financing small-scale initiatives for women in isolation , which will not have an impact on the scale required .
We can also partially embrace Amendment Nos 3 and 9 .
In both these cases there seems to be substantial policy agreement with the objective of the amendment but we would suggest rewording in order to clarify the text .
We are unable to accept the following amendments : Nos 4 ( as concerns article 1 ( 1 ) ) and 12 to 18 inclusive .
The Commission 's detailed comments on the amendments which we cannot accept or where a rewording is suggested are as follows .
In Amendment No 3 to recital 17 , the amendment 's wording needs revision to retain clear criteria for the budget line .
We would suggest deletion of the word ' small-scale ' from the amended text , and that the last phrase should read as follows : ' European Union funds for operational development projects should be used more for interventions which integrate gender issues or specifically target inequalities between women and men ' .
In Amendment No 4 to article 1 ( 1 ) , consistency with existing policy and the outcome of the Beijing Conference necessitate retaining the references to mainstreaming and to intervention , as well as policies .
In Amendment No 6 , we wish to retain the reference to the need for action against gender disparities ' on an appropriate scale ' .
The extent of gender gaps in fundamental areas such as literacy , access to health care and nutrition is clear from the Beijing Conference , which also emphasized the need for large-scale action .
This does not necessarily imply additional funding but rather a reallocation of existing funds .
In Amendment No 9 , we welcome the amendment 's proposed intention but find the extension of scope too ambitious for the human or financial resources available so far .
We could accept a reference to decision-makers , and I suggest ' within the Commission and in developing countries ' as an alternative .
In Amendment No 10 , the regulation is concerned with development cooperation and cannot easily address issues of trade - at least of international trade .
In Amendment No 12 , we prefer to retain the flexibility of the references to services .
This is a standard text approved in many other recent regulations .
Restriction of cover for operating costs would cause problems for some projects covered by these budgets , particularly support for institution building which often requires some support for these items throughout the project before reaching viability .
The proposal for a new subarticle referring to the budgetary authority 's powers seems to us premature .
This question should be considered at a second reading as it is normally addressed only in response to specific Council proposals for indicative budget figures .
In Amendment Nos 13 and 14 , we prefer for reasons of consistency and legal clarity to retain the framework established in a series of recent regulations of this type .
In Amendment No 15 , we support Parliament 's desire to reduce costs to the EC budget but think that the Member States might reasonably wish to retain an option of additional representation for important or specialized projects .
We find the additional reporting requirement unnecessary as full annual reporting to Parliament is already provided for in article 9 ( 1 ) .
The proposal for the committee to coordinate bilateral and Community cooperation , is too ambitious and exceeds the competence of the committee .
Concerning the declarations of interest , the Commission does not think that inserting references in legislation is the most effective or appropriate approach .
Generally concerning comitology , and particularly in Amendment Nos 12 , 15 and 18 , we favour retention of agreed comitology for reasons of consistency , practicality and clarity .
Changes of minor detail to their organization and competence in every regulation are impracticable , particularly as these committees in practice deal with projects under numerous different regulations at each sitting .
In Amendment Nos 16 and 17 , we appreciate Parliament 's intention but these are internal administrative questions which cannot be appropriately addressed in legislation .
Let me add that the Commission 's proposals , made just a week ago to Council and also to Parliament , for the political framework for the future Lomé Convention , identify quite clearly the strategic approach in the future Lomé Convention .
I am very pleased to say that if something is underlined as a top priority , it is the mainstreaming on gender issues and , not only that , of taking it into account in the strategic approach for development that the Union should adopt according to the proposals of the Commission .
Finally , this is just a simple regulation but I think this topic merits a major debate .
I fully agree with the honourable parliamentarian who regretted so few Members were here , because this is important and deserves the full attention of this House .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 0.25 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
Very briefly , Mr Killilea raised a point of order yesterday , which in my opinion is indeed a point of order , and I would kindly request that the Bureau take note of his complaint , which says that the standing of this Parliament is damaged by some colleagues , and to respond to that .
Under Rule 108 I should actually have three minutes to reply , if my name is mentioned , and in that connection I would just like to read out a letter from the State Prosecutor of Belgium : ' In reply to your letter of 10 July 1997 ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , yesterday the Dutch member of the Court of Auditors , Mr Engwirda , gave a press conference in the Netherlands about the Court of Auditors ' report .
Dutch radio , it was conveyed to me indirectly , reported that Mr Engwirda was alleged to have said that 70 % of members of the European Parliament misuse the travel expense arrangements ; 70 % of the members of the European Parliament are alleged to misuse travel expenses .
The report of the Court of Auditors states that 69 % of the members of the Committee on Social and Economic Affairs are alleged to have committed irregularities with travel expenses , not the European Parliament .
One or the other ; either Mr Engwirda has expressed himself incorrectly , or he was quoted incorrectly by Dutch radio .
In any case , the damage in the Netherlands is yet again vast .

I would therefore like to ask , Madam President , whether the President of the European the Parliament could contact Mr Friedmann of the Court of Auditors to obtain clarification about what Mr Engwirda said , and issue a statement in which it is made clear that the Court of Auditors did not make a pronouncement about this House .
That was my first question .
The second question .
Perhaps the President can tell us why members of the Court of Auditors give out press statements in our Member States when the debate has not even begun in the European Parliament .
Madam President , I cannot say I find that very elegant .
Thirdly , Madam President , I think that we all know that the Court of Auditors is also investigating the travel expenses of this House .
I would therefore urge again , that the Bureau carries out the decisions taken by the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents in July , according to which the travel expense arrangements of this House need to be reformed .
The principal decisions have been taken .
Now they must be implemented .
It is , I think , in the interest of this House that these decisions are implemented before 1 January .
Thank you , Mr De Vries .
I can assure you that the President will do everything necessary to throw light on these matters , as you ask .
Madam President , after the excellent remarks by Mr De Vries I can be very brief , because I had wanted to speak on exactly the same point .
I totally agree with Mr De Vries , and I ask the Bureau of Parliament to make a statement about this issue which is increasingly damaging this Parliament as soon as possible .
Madam President , I believe you interrupted Ms McKenna when she was speaking .
She was properly quoting a rule which allows her to speak as her name has been mentioned .
Why did you then interrupt her and allow Mr de Vries to speak ?
I am not complaining about Mr de Vries speaking , but I think you very rudely interrupted Ms McKenna .
Mr Smith , I shall most willingly give the floor to Ms McKenna , in application of Rule 108 .
I thought it was preferable that she should be informed of the letter of the President in order to prepare her defence .
But if Ms McKenna wishes to present her excuses publicly , I shall give her the floor most willingly .
Madam President , thank you for your support on my right under Rule 108 .
I was quite surprised that I was going to be censored like this .
I am not going to apologize , I want to put on record ...
I have a right to defend myself under Rule 108 and you are wasting my time by interrupting me .
The problem is , firstly , that I still stand by the allegations I have made as regards the fact that you cannot justify the expenditure on the new building and it has to be investigated .
What I said in the newspaper was that , unless these investigations were carried out , the public were going to assume that there was corruption going on , and we have a duty in this House to get things investigated .
In that regard , I just want to read out a letter from the State Prosecutor in Belgium : ' In reply to your letter of 10 June 1997 , 020211 , I hereby inform you that a criminal investigation is under way into matters , including the possible misappropriation of funds belonging to Belgian public works contractors which took part in the construction of the European Parliament 's property complex in Brussels D1 , D2 and D3 buildings .
The investigation is focusing in part on the possible payments of secret commissions to intermediaries with a view to securing contracts .
It may therefore call into question the actions of individuals , officials and politicians , some of whom enjoy immunity .
However , at this stage in the procedure , no such persons are involved .
Should incriminating evidence emerge , it goes without saying that the relevant procedures would be implemented .
I hope I have allayed your concerns .
( Closing formula and signature ) ' .
I think that it is the duty of this House to realize that what is going on here is that the public perception of this House has to be taken into account , that we have to support any investigation , and even Members of this House have called for an independent investigation on what is going on .
The cost of the new building is unjustifiable .
We are going to be using that new building and therefore we have a duty to have these questions answered .
I cannot be totally responsible for the way tabloid newspapers report things but I am still saying that I stand by what I said .
I also contacted the journalist involved yesterday and I told him that there were inaccuracies and I followed it up with a letter of which you can have a copy .
But you are doing yourselves and this House a disservice by shooting the messenger , which is what you are doing here .
( Applause from the Green Group and non-attached Members )
Ms McKenna , I would really like to appeal to your conscience .
Do you have any consciousness of the gravity of repeating such words which cast suspicion on all the officials of the European Parliament ?
This is extremely serious .
People say either too much , or not enough .
Let the legal proceedings run their course .
If there really are people involved , they must be cited , but here , you are making unsubstantiated accusations , and you are passing on the content of this letter to the newspapers .
This will throw discredit upon the institution . It is very unjust .
I do not think we can get into a debate on this point .
We are at the heart of something very serious taking place in this Parliament . I really wanted to say that .
( Interruption from Mr Cohn-Bendit ) No , Mr Cohn-Bendit , we cannot extend ...
( Mixed react ions ) But I am not attacking him !
Ms McKenna will receive the letter from the President . She will decided what response she needs to make to the President , and then we will see .
I do not think we can prolong this debate .
Madam President , I would like to thank you and the Bureau for the swift action that you have taken in relation to this matter in inviting Patricia McKenna , as a Member of this House , to produce the evidence to substantiate the case that she alleged yesterday in an Irish newspaper .
You will know , as a Member of the Bureau , Madam President , that I wrote to you and to all of the Members of the Bureau yesterday , and in that letter I cited some direct quotations from the Member in question .
She adds today a preface which says that if these matters were not investigated then the public might feel certain things .
Regrettably that proviso did not appear in any part of yesterday 's article , nor in quotations .
Indeed if she was misrepresented or misreported in the newspapers I would suggest that , on the issue of substance on which she was actually quoted , she should withdraw or substantiate .
Can I quote for the House , because many will not know what the direct quotes said .
They said in relation to the buildings in Brussels : " There are people in Brussels getting massive backhanders ' .
Second quote : " There is serious racketeering going on here ' .
These are extremely serious criminal offences and in making these observations either one produces the evidence or one has the decency to withdraw .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , you should not be contemptuous of a colleague !
Ladies and gentlemen , as you have heard , and I note it myself with satisfaction , Mr Cohn-Bendit has just corrected the words that were attributed to Ms McKenna in the press .
I now believe that Ms McKenna needs do no more than correct her words in similar manner , in response to a request from the President , and then we will see more clearly into the whole business . It has escaped nobody that there is a world of difference between what has Mr Cohn-Bendit has just said and what we all read in the press .
We will now move on to adoption of the Minutes .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , I would like to ask if you could request the Commission to give a statement tomorrow on the situation in Iraq in accordance with Rule 37 , paragraph 7 .
Why do I ask for this statement ?
Because we believe that the situation in Iraq could , in fact , change at any moment , and any resolution we submit tomorrow could be superseded within an hour ; however , we think it is necessary for us to be well acquainted with the Security Council resolutions , in unabridged version .
That is why we would like you to ask the European Commission to make a statement tomorrow during the period which is available for urgent matters .
Thank you , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
That is a request under Rule 37 .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I want to rise , on behalf of my group , to support that request .
You may know that there was considerable discussion in the Conference of Presidents about this last week and at the time one of the questions which I and others raised was : what exactly does one say at this point in time on a very complex and sensitive issue ?
It is appropriate that , if we can get a statement from the Commission , we should have thirty minutes of questions under Rule 37 ( 6 ) of our Rules of Procedure .
This will allow us to examine and hear the views on this issue in an atmosphere which does not mean that we are adding to and exacerbating the problems .
I would endorse the request .
It is important that we deal with this before urgencies and objections because there are at present only four items on the urgency agenda .
We could indeed take this as the first item with half an hour set aside for questions specifically on Iraq .
Madam President , on this matter , I believe that a statement from the Commission would be welcome , but above all , we need a statement from the Council , as the Council has responsibility for the CFSP , not the Commission .
I do not believe the Council will be present tomorrow . And I regret that .
Ladies and gentlemen , a proposal has been made , from two political groups . It complies with the rules .
This half hour of questions to the Commission would fall within the timeslot allocated for urgent matters , and preferably before then .
The statement would then take place from 3 p.m. to 3 : 30 p.m. tomorrow .
Are there any objections ?
There being no objections , that decision stands .
Madam President , please allow me to object to this procedure .
You know the Rules better than I do .
The proposal put forward has , it appears , come from two major groups who last week refused to accept a specific point on Iraq being put on the agenda .
You have taken up the proposal on your own initiative , because you know the Rules .
Indeed , only the President can make a proposal during the sitting itself .
However , the first urgent matter before you was raised by our group , with a view to raising the question of Iraq as the first urgent matter of major importance .
Mr Pasty is quite right .
Asking the Commission questions does not mean much .
Let us have a political debate on Iraq , and let us vote , and let everyone declare where their responsibilities lie with regard to this crisis .
Mr Dell 'Alba , in reality , we are all fundamentally in agreement about having a debate on the question , which is indeed a topical subject of major importance .
I shall put my proposal to the vote .
( Parliament approved the President 's proposal )
Topical and urgent debate
Pursuant to Rule 47 , I have received objections in writing giving reasons for the objections to the agenda for tomorrow morning 's debate on topical and urgent subjects of special importance .
Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr De Vries , the objection that you raised to putting the subject of Iraq on the agenda as an urgent matter is now void , given the decision we have just taken .
Before subject I
Madam President , I would like to speak on the subject of Togo .
In fact , we all know that ...
Mr Aldo , I cannot let you continue .
The Rule is , objections regarding topical and urgent subjects are raised but cannot be debated .
This is not a point of debate , this is a point of order , Madam President .
A point of order under what Rule , Mr Aldo ?
Rule 127a , Madam President .
I request thirty seconds .
Togo is part of the Joint Assembly of the ACP and European Union , which operates under rules of procedure approved by us .
However , today , we are asked to take a vote which is in violation of the procedures of the Joint Assembly of the European Union and ACP .
This is why our group , Madam President , is opposed to any debate or vote on the Togo dossier , which was the subject of a debate and a vote in the Joint Assembly fifteen days ago , and the result of which was a rejection of the dossier .
As you have presented matters , Mr Aldo , you can be deemed to have remained within Rule 127 .
Treaty of Amsterdam
The next item is the report ( A4-0347 / 97 ) by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the Treaty of Amsterdam ( CONF 4007 / 97 - C4-0538 / 97 ) .
Madam President , this debate is the final act in a long process which began last June , when Parliament appointed Mr Tsatsos and I co-rapporteurs for the report on the Amsterdam Treaty .
Seventeen parliamentary committees , the representatives of the national parliaments - with whom we held a meeting last October - non-governmental organizations , and , especially , the Committee on Institutional Affairs have taken part in this process .
I believe that any assessment of the Amsterdam Treaty must be made from two points of view .
The first is the political circumstances surrounding the treaty .
And the political circumstances of last June were not as favourable as they could have been .
The Members will recall that various elections were taking place , and that - especially - the Member States ' attention was concentrated on maintaining the timetable for the introduction of the euro .
That was a good thing , in my view .
I believe that the euro will provide an extremely important focus for the progress of European integration , but I wish to make clear that the political circumstances for revising the Treaties were not as favourable as they could have been .
Secondly , the Amsterdam Treaty must be assessed from the point of view of its content .
And its content cannot be evaluated in relation to the expectations that existed , or even in relation to whatever aspirations Parliament may have had .
It must be evaluated in relation to what was there before : that is , the Treaty on European Union .
And , in this regard , from the very beginning , Mr Tsatsos and I wished to send a clear political message : the Amsterdam Treaty represents substantial progress for the process of European integration .
Firstly , there is progress with regard to what we term the Community pillar .
These advances are summarized in former article F , in which there are new points on the fundamental rights of European citizens and the affirmation that the Union is a Community based on the rule of law in which the principles of liberty , democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are paramount .
At the same time , however , it is a Community based on values .
It is not simply a common market : it is a Community based on values .
And the proof of this is the introduction of new policies for the environment , consumers , public health and - especially - social protection .
I recall , Madam President , that when I entered Parliament I was surprised that there were no Community measures to combat employment . A good friend and eminent Member of this Parliament explained to me that Europe was an Economic Community , and that there would never be Community social policies or measures to combat employment .
Well , five years is nothing in politics .
Now there are Community measures to combat employment .
It is true - as is frequently mentioned in this House - that they are inadequate .
That is true .
But the important thing is that the seed , the possibility , exists .
Those who say that the available funds are insufficient are right .
But there is the possibility of increasing those funds .
And experience shows that once a road begins , it widens and more progress is made .
As far as the common foreign and security policy - the second pillar - is concerned , the Amsterdam Treaty rationalizes the existing legal instruments and creates new bodies of a political nature , such as the strategic planning and early warning unit ; and the new role for the Secretary-General of the Council will increase the operational ability of the troika .
All this is positive , but , in the field of foreign policy , the most important thing is political will .
There will be no common foreign policy until the Member States ' governments feel the need for one .
And , undoubtedly , until the people of our countries feel the need for one too , the legal instruments which we desire will be worthless .
There is a need to create that political will .
Perhaps far less progress was made in the field of security and defence than we would have wished , but we have to make use of what there is .
The Petersberg Tasks can become the launching pad for a European security and defence identity .
With regard to the third pillar - justice and home affairs - nothing is so deeply rooted in the sovereignty of the Member States .
Under the Maastricht Treaty , matters of justice and home affairs are discussed in the framework of intergovernmental cooperation .
But the Amsterdam Treaty takes a giant leap forward by recognizing that these matters belong under the Community pillar , that they are best dealt with by the Community method , not the intergovernmental method .
It is true that there are limitations .
But , instead of lamenting the fact , we must try to restrict those limitations .
There are means with which to do this , and the annexed declaration along these lines introduced by Germany is , of course , a step in the right direction .
The Amsterdam Treaty also lays down important rules concerning the subsidiarity principle and the participation of the national parliaments via COSAC - and I wish to pay tribute to Mrs Fontaine , who chairs that conference so effectively .
Nevertheless , there is a major omission in the Amsterdam Treaty .
And that omission is institutional reform : the institutional reform that is necessary for the Union to be able to function effectively and democratically with 15 Member States , and is absolutely vital for it to be able to function at all after enlargement .
Mr Tsatsos and I have therefore proposed a method for preparing this essential institutional reform .
And this method is a Community method .
We are suggesting that the system of intergovernmental conferences has reached the limit of its usefulness , and we are calling for the Community method to be used to solve this problem , whereby the Commission draws up a report with proposals for the essential reform of the Union 's institutions , which is then debated by Parliament and forwarded to the national parliaments in accordance with the COSAC protocol .
At our last COSAC meeting - which took place just a few days ago , in Luxembourg - the responses of the representatives of the national parliaments were extremely positive .
They are interested in taking the Union forward politically , and I believe that we can depend on them and work together with them .
And if we - the Commission , the European Parliament and the national parliaments - succeed in drawing up a joint text , that text could be put on the table at the Intergovernmental Conference and serve as the basis for the final agreement to be adopted by the Member States ' governments .
Parliament does not wish to alter the meaning of article N. It does not wish to do anything outside the strict framework of the treaties .
What it wishes to do is contribute to resolving a problem that is currently outstanding in the European Union .
And the way for it to do that is for it to move from playing the promotional role that it has played in the past to playing the codecision role envisaged for it in the Amsterdam Treaty .
In continuation , Madam President , I wish to thank Mr Tsatsos - with whom I greatly enjoyed drawing up this report ; and I think that our duo worked extremely well - for his patience with me , as well as thanking the Committee on Institutional Affairs , the secretariat , which did a marvellous job , and all my collaborators .
I should like to end by referring to the vote this afternoon .
I do not wish to address those who are going to vote against , because they will always oppose the progress of Europe .
Rather , I wish to address those who are good Europeans , who have always been in the vanguard of European integration , but who are currently tempted to abstain or vote against because they believe that the Amsterdam Treaty is inadequate .
I would recall the words spoken by Ortega y Gasset , in a speech that he made in Berlin , with reference to Miguel de Cervantes , who said , when he was old and tired of life , that there are times in a man 's life when he has to choose between the inn and the road . Choosing the inn means not moving , standing still .
Choosing the road means moving forward . The Treaty of Amsterdam is a road .
Undoubtedly , it is a road which is too short for our ambitions .
Undoubtedly , it is a road which is too narrow - many of us would have wished that road to be a broad avenue .
But it is more important to choose the road and move forward than to choose the inn and stand still . I would therefore urge all those who have always wanted to take Europe forward , who have always been in the vanguard of European integration , to reflect on this and join in building that road .
Madam President , I will limit myself to the structures and logic of the resolution .
The draft resolution that we are being asked to decide on refers to the past , the present and the future .
First of all , Mr Méndez de Vigo and I have attempted to assess politically the vital elements of the past .
In this respect we have stressed the pragmatic and decisive influence that the European Parliament has had on the content of the new treaty .
This influence , although it cannot rely on its - unfortunately non-existent - consolidation , has been won through the tenacious political activity of the European Parliament , chiefly through its previous resolutions .
Secondly , the draft resolution makes a political assessment of the historic present .
The people of Europe must be informed of the reasons why the European Parliament considers the albeit qualified ratification , but the ratification nevertheless , of the treaty , to be a historic duty .
On this point the report underlines the crucial steps that have contributed to the European issue without , however , suppressing omissions and errors .
Thirdly , we politically assess the draft resolution with regard to a historic future .
Our criticism of the treaty is not only by way of a protest but is chiefly constructive in nature .
With our eyes firmly fixed on the future , we are demanding that those steps be taken that have not yet been taken and we are proposing a new methodology for the future , as my colleague and friend , Mr Méndez de Vigo , has already mentioned .
I shall now come to the basic philosophy of the resolution .
Our first objective was to put before you a consensus view on Europe .
We believe that Europe is not only a union of peoples but also a union of states .
Processes of unification must , of course , lead to deeper understanding , which , however , must respect national constitutional governments .
Only as long as the peoples of Europe are actively reconciled with the idea of a European Union , only as long as the peoples of Europe do not consider the process of integration to be a danger to their national and cultural identity , only then will Europe successfully move forward .
Anyone who imagines European integration to be outside and beyond the will of the people , is guilty of fundamentally misunderstanding the European question .
For this reason , we strongly welcome the fact that the treaty transfers a number of chapters from the third to the first pillar ( the social package , a large section of the Schengen report , coordination of employment policy ) and also the fact that the treaty treads with care in areas where national identity is a particularly sensitive issue .
In the Amsterdam Treaty the issue of unemployment is of primary importance for the European Parliament .
Of course , as rapporteurs , we know that what has been agreed does not constitute a political reality just because it has been agreed .
As my co-rapporteur has stressed , we need the corresponding political will for it to take shape .
The draft resolution takes a critical stance on institutional reform . Institutional reform has not , in essence , come about .
For this reason , I move that the European Parliament clearly states that , before each enlargement of the European Union takes place , there has to be corresponding institutional reform .
Allow me to mention two examples : the transition from the principle of unanimity to the principle of majority voting during the taking of decisions in the Council is necessary chiefly because of the projected enlargement , At the same time , however , this transition is meaningless if we do not maintain some basic exceptions in support of the principle of unanimity in constitutional matters .
The realigning , or reweighting , of votes in the Council is generally considered to be necessary .
For this precise reason , a method of implementing this must be studied and debated to ensure that it will not disturb the balance between small and large States , which is the outcome of the fundamental principle of equality among Member States .
I shall now come to the historical perspective , which my co-rapporteur , Mr Méndez de Vigo , has already given a thorough account of .
The development of European institutions must cease to be , chiefly and exclusively , a matter of diplomacy and bureaucracy .
It must form part of the political process .
The basis of a new revision procedure that we are proposing will be the initiative of the European Parliament , of national governments , and of the European Commission alike .
This means that the visions of the citizens that we represent will be those that will form the basis and the framework of the decisions of the next conference .
Only in this way can we entrust the fate of these institutions to their natural channels .
With our proposal , however , the ability of the national governments to pass legislation will be fully exploited and , at the same time , the cooperation of national parliaments will place the issue of Europe at the centre of national political debate , which is something that we have sought for years , but without success .
Madam President , my colleague , Mr Méndez de Vigo , and I have aspired to push for a new role for the European Parliament , a role it will share with national parliaments and which will justify its place as the vehicle and the champion of a new democratic idea in Europe .
Madam President , in presenting my opinion on this Treaty to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I said that it was like a glass of water : you could describe it either as half empty or as half full .
In terms of the common foreign and security policy , this treaty does not give us as much as we would want , and certainly not as much as Europe needs .
I do not believe that we have passed the crucial point at which we will have a coherent ability to influence world affairs .
I and my committee are suspicious of the decision-making formulas generated in Amsterdam .
But on the other hand there is some progress on which I believe we can , as a Parliament , build pragmatically and help the Union forward .
We welcome the establishment of the Analysis and Planning Unit .
It gives us continuity and it is based in Brussels .
It may help us to escape intellectually from the ' tripartite ad-hocery ' of the existing system .
Similarly , I welcome the new role for the Secretary-General of the Council , again an individual specifically located and identifiable , and someone with whom we can build an intellectual and an ongoing relationship .
I echo what Mr Tsatsos has just said about working with national parliaments .
That is particularly important in the development of a common foreign and security policy because between us - between all the parliaments of Europe - we need to destroy the myth of executive exclusivity that has too long dominated discussions of foreign policy .
I believe there is much that this Parliament could do , but we will only be able to do it if we build on the quality and the consistency of our own comments on foreign policy .
I believe we took a good step forward in our decision taken earlier this morning to ask for a Commission statement on Iraq .
The weakness of the system is shown by our inability to obtain a Council statement on Iraq .
We can welcome the inclusion of the Petersberg Tasks in the treaty , while regretting the delay in the architectural restructuring of our defence in terms of the involvement of Western European Union with the European Union .
In summary , I would say that in its common foreign and security policy aspects the treaty is pedestrian .
It is to an extent disappointing .
But it is worth having .
To echo Mr Méndez de Vigo , this is a road worth travelling even if it is a road that we still travel largely in hope .
Madam President , in its opinion annexed to this report , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development makes a negative assessment of the Amsterdam Treaty , specifying the inadequacies of the draft treaty 's agricultural provisions and making clear its disappointment .
Our committee considers it a very serious matter that the European Parliament 's legislative and supervisory powers in the agricultural sphere have not been widened .
It believes that the fact that a Community policy like the CAP remains excluded from adequate democratic control by Parliament means that a serious democratic deficit still exists in the Union , requiring the extension of the codecision procedure to include agricultural policy .
Nevertheless , this report manages to steer this criticism and these demands in a positive , forward-looking direction , enabling the Committee on Agriculture to change its initial " No ' vote into a " Yes ' vote for the Tsatsos-Méndez de Vigo report , which genuinely serves to mitigate the inadequacies of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Thus , ironically , what is actually a critical report by Parliament becomes the best tool for rectifying the shortcomings of this new treaty .
The co-rapporteurs and Parliament have produced an excellent piece of work which will enhance the value of this problematic treaty .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it was easy for the Committee on Budgets to examine the Treaty of Amsterdam , as nothing came out of the treaty which met the expectations raised by and commitments entered into by the governments themselves when they signed the agreement on institutional affairs in 1993 .
They undertook jointly with us to deal with budget matters , the revision of the budget rules and principles so as to achieve a clarification of procedures , simplification , better concertation , and so far as possible the disappearance or at all events the elimination of this archaic practice of differentiating between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
They had undertaken to examine all these matters , undertakings which were repeated at the opening of the Turin Conference , and as was time and again requested by the Parliament .
In spite of that , nothing took place at Amsterdam .
Commissioner Liikanen knows this very well , we all know this , and that is why , from that point of view , our task is easy .
We have of course stigmatized the attitude of governments and the results of Amsterdam , and have requested the measures contained in the report of Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , namely the paragraph which raises the demand that , in the budget field - and that includes the European development fund - there be a jointl , properly operating and democratic relationship between the two branches of the budget authority , and that the system of own resources be reviewed and subject to the approval of Parliament .
This is in my view an important point of the Tsatsos report , which reflects the concerns of the Committee on Budgets on this point .
Of course the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy must be very disappointed - to put it mildly - that no energy chapter has been included in the treaty , especially if you consider that energy will be a priority in the internal politics of Agenda 2000 .
We now have the single market for energy , after all .
And , of course , you have to criticize the fact that Euratom has been totally overlooked too .
The issue here has nothing to do with Safeguard , but the entire nuclear industry , and in this area Parliament has absolutely no participation rights , a fact we deplore and are constantly complaining about .
All that happens is we are kept informed - and this in an area of policy that provokes very different reactions in all the Member States !
We would have , therefore , found it very beneficial - and we must continue to insist on this - if these two key policy areas which we are all so dependent upon had been incorporated into the treaty .
It is becoming urgently necessary that Parliament receives full participation rights here and that we do not just have the appropriate funds at our disposal .
Otherwise , democratic control is impossible , and without democratic control there can be no acceptance and still less any credibility .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the principal demands on foreign trade have been laid down in several resolutions of the European Parliament : the object being to bolster the links between foreign and security policy , foreign trade policy , and development and cooperation .
We demanded the introduction of a common foreign trade policy , including commerce , trade , services and capital transactions , intellectual property , investments , freedom of establishment and competition .
We demanded a definition of the provisions made for the Union 's participation in international economic organizations , especially the World Trade Organization .
We further demanded that Parliament 's powers be strengthened when it comes to formulating new strategies , negotiating mandates and monitoring talks in the area of foreign trade .
What is the outcome ?
I personally am of the opinion that the European Parliament has achieved a lot .
In terms of foreign trade policy , however , we have been disappointed to the point of humiliation .
The Commission in particular has been humiliated .
I hope the Commission for its part will do something about the miserable effect of applying article 113 .
In international negotiations - as occur within the framework of the world trade organizations - it will not be possible in future for the Commission to speak with one voice for the European Union on the question of telecommunications and services , I regret to say , since the attempts to implement this have been rejected .
The main problem was with extending article 113 's area of application so as , if need be , to clear up any ambiguities that might exist as to the respective jurisdiction of the Union and the Member States , and to place the Union in a position to speak in unison at the negotiations of international organizations .
The original motion was initially weakened and finally dropped entirely .
The reasons for this are no doubt numerous .
In conclusion I would like to say that for the European Parliament the demand that we adapt to new challenges will be the most important point on the agenda .
The politics of international competition require a unanimous approach in the relevant negotiations .
I hope that this can be implemented in practice .
Thank you for your patience .
I want to start by congratulating Mr Méndez De Vigo and Mr Tsatsos for their excellent , comprehensive report on the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I recognized much of what the Social Committee has wanted to raise in the past . As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I believe that the Treaty of Amsterdam is a success , and that it offers new opportunities for a social Europe .
Whether the treaty will succeed will depend primarily , however , on the way the Member States and European institutions implement it .
We are particularly pleased with the inclusion of the social protocol in the treaty , as well as with the inclusion of a number of other social provisions .
This signals that social policy in Europe will be raised to the same level as economic policy . Even though there are still too many issues which will need unanimous decision .
Instead of an economic and monetary union we will now get a social and monetary Union .
In other words , not EMU , but SMU .
The inclusion of social protocol means social dialogue now forms part of the treaty .
We submitted an amendment for this , which has also been included in the report , as interinstitutional agreement on this needs to be reached very urgently .
A second important improvement is the inclusion of the employment chapter in the new treaty .
This means that guidelines can be adopted , and that trial projects can be set up .
Madam President , what matters now is that what we have achieved in social and employment policy is actively implemented .
Parliament , together with other institutions , will have to do a great deal to get his going .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I would first like to say that I believe that the Amsterdam Treaty has positive aspects and represents a victory for Europe , progress for Europe .
People might say that it is a Pyrrhic victory , a limited victory , but the time of great leaps forward has passed and this draft treaty represents a significant , though modest , advance .
I shall restrict myself to referring to the regional policy aspects .
First , the draft treaty recognizes the fact that the outermost regions present the European Union with significant and unique problems .
It also refers to the specific problems faced by certain regions because they are islands - even regions which could be classed as rich , such as the Balearic Islands , which I represent .
I also welcome the fact that importance has been attached to crossborder problems .
For the first time , a reference to cross-border cooperation - which , let us not forget , is one of the building blocks of European integration - has been incorporated into the Treaties .
As Robert Schuman said , borders are the scars of Europe 's history .
It is important that Parliament should consult the Committee of the Regions on cross-border problems , because this means recognizing that it is at the level of the regions , at the level of the institution that is closest to the people , that such problems can be dealt with most effectively . I therefore welcome this reference to cross-border problems in relation to the Committee of the Regions .
On the other hand , I too regret the fact that the draft treaty does not provide for the right of regions with legislative powers to bring proceedings in the Court of Justice .
Nevertheless , I consider that this draft treaty represents a positive step forward as far as the European Union 's regional policy is concerned .

Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs , Mr Tsatsos and Mr Méndez de Vigo , on their excellent work .
On behalf of the Committee on Development , I would like to make the following comments .
First , we welcome the extension of the codecision procedure to the common development policy and we regard this as being a positive innovation of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Secondly , we regret that the European development fund has not been incorporated into the Community budget , and also that Community competence in the area of developmental cooperation remains limited and outside the policies implemented by the Member States .
Thirdly , we consider that the new treaty has not made sufficient progress with regard to the expansion of the cohesion and the coherence of external activities , which include , of course , developmental policy .
Fourthly , we consider that the new treaty unfortunately does not contain adequate means and recommendations for facing many of the enormous challenges of the twenty first century , a large number of which are mirrored in the developmental policy .
Finally , notwithstanding all the above , since we agree with the view expressed by both the rapporteurs that , despite all its problems , the Amsterdam Treaty is a step in the right direction , we declare ourselves in favour of the ratification of the treaty .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the treaty has become a legal Frankenstein 's monster . Everyone adds to it as they see fit , everyone gives it the shape and interpretation that suits them , and that is particularly evident and disturbing with the third pillar of the common justice and home affairs policy .
The powers of the European Court of Justice have as many holes in them as a Swiss cheese .
The Schengen Agreement is a source of imponderables , and the new treaty fundamentally changes the constitutional order of the European Union because it massively strengthens the position of the executive over that of the legislature .
To talk about this in the one minute allocated to the advisory committees is frivolous .
Hence I invite you to read through the unanimously approved report of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs because in the report of the Committee on Institutional Affairs there is not one line from it .
I have experienced a lot in my time , but nothing quite like this !
The special committees have been advising for months on the Amsterdam Treaty , which has been under negotiation for years , and then the Committee on Institutional Affairs dismisses all the amendments with a wave of the hand .
All of them !
Parliament could conduct itself ad absurdum in this way .
I am very sorry to have to say so , but the outcome is fixed from the start .
What is not allowed to be , does not happen !
This attitude does nothing for our credibility .
The Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has decided unanimously that we cannot declare ourselves in agreement with the result .
In doing so it is correct in both form and substance .
Madam President , the Amsterdam Treaty could not make friends with Blue Europe .
Even forty years after signing the Treaty of Rome , only legal scholars and other experts in Community law are likely to find the fishing policy in the treaty creating the European Community , and then to find it hidden , in fact , once in article 38 and a second time in annex II , chapter 3 between edible slaughtered waste , birds ' eggs and natural honey .
From a purely legal point of view , fishing is included in agricultural policy .
Anyone who has been carefully following the debates in this House will understand that we do not have to wrestle with surpluses as farming does .
On the contrary , we have to contend with the catastrophe of oceans being fished empty .
Consequently , in their Intergovernmental Conference resolutions , the Committee on Fisheries and the European Parliament have called for the inclusion of a separate chapter on this issue in the new treaty .
A chapter that sets out the fundamental objectives of a responsible fishing policy .
Sadly , the Heads of State and of Government at Amsterdam have failed to comply with this .
The same applies to codecision .
Fishing was unable to benefit from the extension of this procedure .
That is why I am grateful to the rapporteurs and the Committee on Institutional Affairs that the resolution calls for this procedure to be extended to fishing policy .
One final point : international agreements are a most important part of the common fishing policy .
Hence , this coming Friday , for example , we will be debating four international agreements at the part-session here , yet despite this - contrary to our demands at the Intergovernmental Conference - only the consultation procedure will be used .
Here , too , I am grateful that the resolution demands that the procedure for approving key international agreements be extended .
The next intergovernmental conference will not be far away , and our demands for a policy on fishing will not be far away either !
Madam President , the Committee on Women 's Rights is convinced that the draft Treaty of Amsterdam represents a step forward politically , since it codifies the principle of non-discrimination according to sex as a fundamental principle of Community law , and quotes equality of the sexes as one of the objectives of the Treaty on European Union .
It should especially be congratulated on its promotion of equality between men and women in Community posts and on recognizing the importance of mainstreaming and active equal opportunity policies in all Community actions .
The Committee on Women 's Rights also considers that the distinction it makes between employment and the wider concept of work shows that it has attempted to include all aspects of women 's activities , in addition to paid employment .
It appeals to the Commission , and especially Commissioner Oreja , to aim its information campaigns in favour of ratification in all Member States specifically at women , thus raising levels of awareness of what they have to gain under the proposed treaty .
Finally , the Committee on Women 's Rights calls for a conference , to be organized jointly by the Commission and the Parliament , to inform and mobilize the greatest possible number of women on elected bodies and NGOs in all Member States to campaign for the ratification of the treaty .
Madam President , the Treaty of Amsterdam contains significant advances on issues relating to fundamental rights , non-discrimination , freedom of movement and citizenship and also guarantees of those rights through control by legal institutions and the right of petition itself .
Our main concern is to ensure that these rights can be effectively exercised , and we therefore fear that insufficient institutional reforms in Amsterdam will prolong the ineffectiveness of the decision-making process designed to implement the rules of the treaty .
Our approach therefore has been to read the treaty objectively , without either wildly over-stating its advances or being hyper-critical of it as a whole because there is insufficient evidence of institutional changes in the light of the proposed enlargement of the Union .
The treaty takes some positive steps towards meeting the specific interests and aspirations of its citizens .
The Parliament should therefore give a it a positive signal that will make it easy for the public to back it at a time when they are preparing for the great qualitative change represented by the single currency .
The institutional strategy we are now proposing , especially regarding a new method of reviewing Treaties , less intergovernmental and closer to the processes by which they are created , through more effective intervention by the European Parliament and , I might add , national parliaments , deserves my full support .
I cannot however say the same , nor should I do so , of the objectives of the institutional reform which is recommended , since these are limited to the decision-making powers of governments , raising the spectre of a Directoire of major states in the face of public opinion and regrettably overlooking other major institutional issues which are relevant to enlargement , such as the reform of the Community budget and the role and resources of economic and social cohesion policies .
Nor can I approve of the recommended strategy of making enlargement conditional upon those institutional reforms , taking the peoples of the candidate countries as hostages in the power- struggle strategies of the existing Member States .
Madam President , any opposition to the treaty on the grounds that it is not sufficiently pro-European and prointegration may contribute to the strengthening of anti-European criticism and mistrust regarding changes which , although limited , are moves in the right direction ; a more democratic Union , better able to regulate its economic processes with the object of ensuring equity and cohesion , more closely bound to the values of states that are governed by the rule of law , and closer to their citizens .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft treaty rightly involves extending joint decision-making to the European Parliament .
This is to be welcomed from a democratic point of view .
I must , however , point out that , in essential areas which are important for the functioning of the single market , the codecision procedure is not guaranteed .
This applies particularly to industrial policy , to the banking and finance sector , and to questions of taxation .
It would really be significant if coordination were more efficient in this area , if only in the interest of employment .
There is a need for improvement here .
What is most regrettable is the fact that very definite instruments are not provided for in the draft treaty .
As with monetary union , there should also have been instruments coordinating economic policies better .
That is why the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy believes it to be especially important that we still manage to arrive at a European strategy for cooperation and coordination in the interim .
We need to give tangible shape to the economic union and safeguard its method of operating .
This will very much require the involvement of the European Parliament , and we will need to insist that article 103 is given concrete form , if need be by interinstitutional agreement by the time the treaty is next amended .
After all , we want an economic policy within the European Union which is both efficient and democratically secured , while equally oriented towards employment objectives .
We should not forget that non-coordination of economic policies in the years from 1991 to 1995 caused a drop in growth of 3 % , to the detriment of employment in the European Union .
We cannot afford this !
Even if the Amsterdam Treaty , fortunately , has not involved any retrograde steps in economic policy , we nevertheless have to say that the key policy areas of business , employment , and fiscal and monetary policy lack bite .
Hence it is vital that an extension of the Community 's powers , the concretization of its political instruments and the principle of majority voting are implemented at the next amendment to the treaty .
Madam President , the Socialist Group will today vote in favour of the Amsterdam Treaty and urge national parliaments and , where appropriate , through referendums , the people of the Union to vote in favour .
For my group there have always been two priorities with regard to this treaty change : firstly , that it must meet the needs and aspirations and the hopes of the people of the Union more appropriately ; and , secondly , it must prepare the Union for enlargement .
We in this House know and are deeply involved in the complexities of European Union decision-making .
We in this House crave institutional coherence and common sense and the present treaty , we also recognize , is not sufficient in that context .
Whilst we recognize the changes that Amsterdam brought to the treaty by extending in some areas qualified majority voting and codecision and by introducing other minor institutional changes , we , who are so deeply involved , also recognize that not enough was done to create a decision-making structure for twenty-plus Member States .
That is why we insist in this vote today that enlargement is impossible without further institutional change .
That is not just our view in this Parliament , it is also the view of the Commission , it is also the stated view of several Member States of the European Union .
We should be clear as well about the advantages which this treaty brings and the significant progress it makes in reconnecting Europe with its people .
Since June we have been involved here in an unbelievably intricate argument about how we can force a new round of institutional changes .
This is important , I do not doubt , but it is hardly the stuff to convince those outside this Parliament that we care about the agenda which most people are talking about .
So if we want ratification of the treaty across Europe , and I believe we do , then let us at least make clear what its benefits are .
Let us be glad of the employment title which I hope will be given its first basic framework this very week at the Luxembourg Special Summit on employment .
Let us be glad of the new competence to combat discrimination which , I must say , as I have gone round the Union in the last few months , has been widely welcomed , particularly in this European Year Against Racism .
Let us be glad about the steps forward on equal opportunities , the environment , public health , consumer protection .
Let us be glad of the developments on transparency and openness , the reduction in the number of decision-making procedures , the enhancement of the fight against fraud and the improved customs cooperation .
This is a long and significant list .
Some argue that the public are gravely disappointed about the Amsterdam Treaty .
Some argue that the deafening silence on the treaty since June demonstrates it is a non-event .
Perhaps rather , it demonstrates that the treaty does not frighten them .
As we know to our cost in this House , good news is often not regarded as news .
I hope that the people of the Union will see the treaty as yes , institutionally modest , needing change before enlargement , but largely dealing in a serious though undramatic way with their major concerns .
The search for jobs , the coherence of our society , the protection of our planet , the extension of citizens ' rights , openness and democracy - my group votes for that agenda .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their erudite report which has united this House .
We will support this report and , with it , the recommendation to ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This treaty , however , has failed to meet the aim of providing the groundwork for enlargement .
It satisfies the condition that we should begin negotiations , but not that we can conclude them .
This has mainly to do with the fact that the efficiency needed to increase the size of the Union by 5 , 10 or 11 Member States is lacking as a result of not extending the principle of the qualified majority vote far enough .
If the Ecofin Council says there should be no competition in taxes , then it is correct .
Yet better still would be to apply the majority principle to fiscal policy to achieve the harmonization necessary in the areas needed .
The same goes for structural policy and for the impossible situation found in the area of foreign trade policy , to name but a few key points .
We should not only press for these institutional reforms at the next intergovernmental conference to be held prior to the next enlargement , but instead we should make it a priority that those legal and domestic policy areas which have become Community responsibility are given over to majority voting or codecision five years into the treaty .
It is not so much that we need new powers within the European Union .
What we do need are the instruments to make sensible use of the powers we already have .
We want to make this clear and carry it through by using the treaty appropriately .
Clearly , we should not just talk about the negative aspects .
We should look to the arrangement that , in future , Parliament enjoys codecision in those areas of the first pillar in which the Council decides with a majority .
And I consider this a major breakthrough for the rights of Parliament .
Parliament has finally appeared on the European stage where legislation is concerned .
The only exception is agriculture and fisheries policy , both in legislation and budgetary policy , and this will need to be revised in the next round , so as to achieve parity in this area .
We need to realize that the relationship of the institutions will change in the long term through the right of the European Parliament to elect the Commission President .
In future the Heads of State and of Government will consider which candidate has the majority here .
This will lead to a politicizing of this organization and will also affect the future relationship of Parliament and Commission in a particular way .
I believe this is something we should be working on .
Some of the things I have heard from the reports of individual committees should be reconsidered .
It is not a case of incorporating each particular area into the treaty by means of special rules ; we actually need fewer special rules and greater simplification of the treaty to bring all policy areas under the same rules .
We must not end up with a huge treaty , but at a smaller treaty .
We need in the long term to arrive at a constitution because this is the only way to really make progress .
This treaty offers the chance to make basic social and civil rights the legally verifiable basis for evaluating our legislation .
This is a major development !
In the next round we want to implement individual rights to litigation on the strength of basic citizens ' rights , but this first step is a great and positive step , which we should make proper use of .
The inclusion of the social chapter and the employment chapter in the overall treaty gives the social dimension to this European Union .
We are called upon as the European Parliament to make use of these instruments too .
The European Court , contrary to the opinion of Mrs Roth , has been strengthened by this treaty , and to make large parts of legal and domestic policy Community responsibility , that is all areas dealing with the setting of norms and standards , is a breakthrough for the Community Europe and acts as a counter to intergovernmental Europe , and we should continue with this work .
With foreign and security policy we have new areas and new procedures .
Practice will show whether these really bring progress .
If I bear the planning unit in mind and see how it is talked about in certain Member States , that it is only a COREPER body in which the countries are represented by one person , then that is not progress .
This planning unit should not be an intergovernmental organization at ambassador level or below , but rather a true Community solution fully involving the Commission , or else it will not bring success .
We will have to see to it that a motion as sensible as this is tabled , and Parliament will approve nothing less .
We have exhausted the present method of the intergovernmental conference .
Europe needs to be involved in a political dialogue and should not be held back by the doubting Thomases found in the offices of the national ministries .
Only then will we be in the position to bring about a new order for Europe , and this is something we should be working towards .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , Mr Commissioner , I would first like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , for their analytical work of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which is contained in the introduction to their document .
My regret is all the greater , in that the resolution which is the outcome of their work , is not on a par with their thinking .
To call on Member States , in the first paragraph to ratify the treaty is more of an injunction than a balanced reflection on a treaty which in truth merited such reflection .
Who can dispute the correctness of such an assessment ?
Does this House need reminding that this House itself passed several resolutions strictly defining the absolute priorities that had to be met prior to the challenge of any enlargement profoundly modifying the Union , and that account was also to be taken of economic and monetary union and the completion of Agenda 2000 ?
Eighteen months of negotiations have given birth to a mediocre and disappointing document , which contains advances where we did not expect any . Among these were the first steps towards a social policy , employment , human rights , equality between men and women , power for the European Parliament .
But also , what dramatic inadequacies there are in essential fields ! The absence of any preamble to the Treaty of Amsterdam - and this is the first time that this has occurred - is an expression of the very disturbing inability of the fifteen Member States to agree together on the objectives of the European Union of the Third Millennium , at the very time when ten states are knocking on our door for admission into a project whose name , aims , means and values escape us .
As regards institutional reform - already a necessity for the fifteen Member States , and more than ever absolutely essential when there are twenty - for the second time I say that the Council has admitted that it is powerless , and simply said that it will do better .
A common foreign and security policy , and this is a matter of the external visibility of the Union , has been put to the test and has failed in Yugoslavia and elsewhere in the world . But The Union is now endowed with better intergovernmental tools , whose efficiency will depend , as the resolution emphasizes with a cruel realism , on the goodwill on each of the Member States , each of them possessed of the anti-Community weapon par excellence , the right of veto .
Neither in the field of internal affairs or of justice , nor in the area of reinforced cooperation , which is itself also subject to veto , is there any more cause for optimism .
Ladies and gentlemen , the attitude adopted this afternoon by the majority of Parliament of acquiescing to this draft , which is virtually unanimously considered inadequate , will be no more honourable than a possible alternative strategy , consisting of postponing our vote until after the European Council of Luxembourg , and asking that Council to make a clear announcement of its intentions on the future of Europe .
If we had done that , we would have applied point 19 of the Méndez de Vigo and Tsatsos resolution , and Parliament would have exercised its rights and that would have been true politics .
Tomorrow will be the time for reflection , and for getting back to work on these issues , with , let us hope , with a Commission which is more up to its task , with a Council which is more united around a common objective , and a Parliament which assumes its role as a pioneer , an inspirer of European construction .
Madam President , I wish to pay tribute to the good job done by the two excellent rapporteurs , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos .
Nevertheless , I have to say that I am disappointed by this somewhat florid debate .
When there are no results , metaphors abound - and Mr Méndez de Vigo used the especially elegant metaphor of the inn and the road , taken from Cervantes , because his report is based on the philosophy of the step forward .
There are always steps forward .
However , I would like another type of debate .
Not a populist , opportunist debate , of course , but a clear , political and responsible debate .
A debate which does not necessarily end in an obligatory yes vote by Parliament , which can decide to vote for , or against , or abstain , after a responsible appraisal from the position of responsibility conferred on it by the citizens .
I should therefore briefly like to set out my group 's position on the Amsterdam Treaty , then on the report .
Objectively , we believe that the Amsterdam Treaty is a failure .
Subjectively , it is disappointment for both Parliament and the other institutions .
Why ?
Because it makes inadequate provision for either social protection or the regulation of the market in the face of the predominance of , not so much the economic , as the monetary sphere - the monetarist logic ; because it does not endow the Foreign Policy and Justice and Home Affairs pillars with the minimum Community characteristics that are necessary at this political moment ; because it does not provide for the minimum institutional changes that are essential before enlargement , and were the principal goal of the Amsterdam Summit ; and lastly , as has already been said in this Chamber , because it was drawn up using the traditional method employed for drafting treaties - a diplomatic , intergovernmental method far removed from the citizens and even their representative parliamentary institutions .
The report , which is technically very good , plays up the positive aspects and plays down the negative aspects of the draft treaty , although I recognize that it contains significant criticisms .
It proposes using the Community method , and we agree with that .
But that is not the vision set out in the draft treaty .
It is a proposal for the future .
Lastly , it recommends that the Member States ratify the Amsterdam Treaty .
In political terms , I find it unreasonable that Parliament , which does not have the right to give its assent to the draft treaty , because it is denied that right by the Member States ' governments , should now feel obliged to recommend the ratification of such an inadequate treaty .
Consequently , on the basis of the declaration by the Governments of Belgium , France and Italy , we are requesting that , first , the necessary steps be taken to prepare for enlargement and significant undertakings be made to the European Parliament , the national parliaments and the citizens of the European Union .
Madam President , I believe that by voting on this resolution , the European Parliament is going to add a new chapter to its story of conformity with the governments and its refusal to carry out a role of political initiative in the process of constructing Europe .
At the moment , we are observing a rite which , in its timing and in its principal content , has been imposed by the need of the governments signing this treaty which we can say has not been executed ; governments which , to appease any MEPs and reluctant , disconcerted and misinformed public opinion , need to be able to use the favourable opinion given to the ratification of the European Parliament , which is absolutely irrelevant , however , as it is lacking in political consequences .
In fact , we are voting to give our governments a headline : " European Parliament says yes to Treaty of Amsterdam ' , or " Important new stage in construction of Europe ' .
We all know that the truth lies elsewhere , all of us in this Chamber know that the Treaty of Amsterdam cannot achieve any of the objectives the governments had set themselves .
We know that the European Union will not control the impact of the enlargement and monetary union will be at risk , without a change in the balance and operation of its institutions .
Beyond the absence of any overall , forward-looking view of this least ambitious of all treaties that have gradually marked the stages of the construction of Europe , beyond the fair criticisms we have heard in almost all opinions from the committees involved , I believe that this treaty provides a good representation of modern times in Europe .
An integration crisis , a prevailing trend towards renationalization , a discussion of several basic principles and several clear roles acquired by the Commission and the Court of Justice , despite what Mr Brok says , a dangerous game of Russian roulette on expansion which , if developed under current institutional conditions , would penalize the Union 's inability to make decisions .
On the Committee on Institutional Affairs , some of us have tried to suggest a more political , less conformist road for Parliament , more in keeping with a logic of Parliamentary independence .
We have tried to suggest the road of deferring opinion , to ask and try to obtain , before giving an opinion , by the Council of Luxembourg , the undertaking to place on site and execute , before the new accessions , the institutional amendments not made in Amsterdam , as three Union governments are already asking .
Not only has this request been dropped , but the inclusion of a somewhat diluted political content in the form of lukewarm calls to the governments has had to overcome unusual hostility and a surprising closing by the rapporteurs , not to mention the hard resistance to any change , particularly from the German delegations of the two largest groups that have guided the relevant groups in the noble undertaking to make a clean sweep of any political ambition held by the European Parliament .
We have thus witnessed the incomprehensible failure of traditionally unshakable positions held by Parliament , in a realistic logic whereby any initiative the governments do not like should not even be attempted .
This is what our rapporteurs have been telling us for months .
In this framework of attacking the independence of the role of Parliament , the political fragility of the Tsatsos and Méndez de Vigo resolution is no surprise .
It is an ambiguous text , with no political view of the future of Europe other than a request to the governments to implement the treaty properly , with no careful assessment of the Amsterdam appraisals .
Mr President , to use an English expression , this evening the whips will guide the vote of their own disciplined troops and there will be no surprises .
Unfortunately , we are only left with one vote against this resolution so far from the ideals on which the European challenge is based and the associational method that produced it , convinced that the way to honour our mandate is to do so as servants of Europe and its democratic growth , and not as government spokesmen .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , permit me , and here this in no mere ritual on my part , to pay my respects to the often difficult work of the two rapporteurs , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , who have defended their vision of things with brio .
I must admit that our respective points of view were initially quite far apart , and have now become somewhat closer . Unfortunately , not enough for us to be able to vote in favour of their report .
I shall not speak about content .
I shall never tire of repeating that the European Parliament , alas , does not have the power to ratify treaties .
The task which is ours is a purely political one , and this should leave us far wider scope in our judgement .
Most unfortunately , I have to observe that the work of the rapporteurs was from the very outset conditioned by the final message which they wished to get across , at no matter what cost , and even if getting that message across meant passing over the immense shortfalls in this treaty .
I myself remain convinced that a more critical approach to the treaty was not incompatible with the call for ratification by national parliaments , which we support .
As regards the link between institutional reform and enlargement , let us recognize that the report has been very substantially improved .
After the institutional fiasco of Amsterdam , it is quite unacceptable for the European Parliament not to pitch with all its weight into such a reform , prior to any enlargement .
Failure to do so would mean that we risk not only delaying enlargement , but also imperilling the operation and survival of the European Union itself .
However , we do not find in the report this determination to ensure that the Parliament wields its full influence .
The guarantees given in this respect by the institutional protocol annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam are also inadequate .
Hence the questions we raised a few months ago in this very House , remain as burning now as then .
Has the time not come to say clearly that enlargement cannot be undertaken on a satisfactory basis except accompanied by the wide-ranging institutional reform of the Union , and that monetary union needs to be completed by substantial progress towards a political union , and possibly also economic , social and tax union ?
As regards matters of form , and the same criticisms apply as to matters of substance , the general tone of the report seems to us to be something of a step back from the positions that have been expressed by the Parliament over the last eighteen months , and we regret this .
I appeal to the political intelligence of the two rapporteurs to improve this result somewhat , by accepting a number of amendments .
But there is also a question of strategy .
The European Parliament must one day stop being a mass of institutions trailing in the wake of events , and break the umbilical cord which ties too many of us to the purely nationalistic positions of our respective governments .
Why should we , on the eve of the European Council of Luxembourg , give governments carte blanche , and take position here and now on the Treaty of Amsterdam , when we know that there is an unavoidable link between the Treaty of Amsterdam and the opening of official negotiations for enlargement ?
Why do we have to take a position today , when the national parliaments have a timetable which will allow them to pursue their own strategy ?
I remain convinced , like Mrs Spaak and Mrs Aglietta , that it would be preferable to come back with an opinion on the treaty at the beginning of 1998 , which would enable us to exert some pressure on the Luxembourg summit , and give an opinion when the full facts were available to us .
The rapporteurs have not agreed with this point of view .
I ask them at least - and we raise a call in this direction - to accept one of the amendments , whose aim is to reinforce paragraph 4 of the resolution .
Those are the few considerations that I wish to express before this House , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
Madam President , the report from Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos recommends that the Member States ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam , in spite of its shortfalls .
But what are those shortfalls ?
And are they without consequence ?
The accusation is first raised that the treaty does not adapt Union institutions for future enlargement . But this is an error that we could perfectly well make good in the years to come .
On the other hand , there is another failing in the treaty , which is not so easy to put right , which should cause us to reject the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The treaty makes for less democracy in Europe , as it tends to strip national democracies of their powers , without there being at the Union level any equivalent controlling authority .
The blame for this is not insufficient extension of powers of codecision with the European Parliament , as we occasionally hear , for codecision with the European Parliament could only be fully democratic if there were a single European people .
However , not only is this not the case , there is even reason to doubt that there exists among the peoples of Europe the wish - alleged - to integrate in the strongest sense of the word , that is , the merger to which the European parliament attaches so much importance .
Under such conditions , the approach of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which increases the number of cases where codecision or majority voting in the Council takes place , which reduces the role of national parliaments and affirms the superiority of Community law , even when derived , over national constitutions , appears totally artificial and quite out of touch with real society .
Here is the root cause of insufficient democracy .
The promoters of the Treaty of Amsterdam have put their money on the fact that it is possible to transfer powers to insufficiently democratic European institutions , hoping to be able to correct them at some future date .
But has anyone given any thought as to whether this date might not be very far off , and that it might never even happen !
A risky bet if ever there was one !
Alternatively , democratic Europe can be built today , and substantial power transferred to it .
But everybody here knows that this is impossible .
Or again , we should look at the situation face-on , and construct European Union on the basis of national democracies . But at all events , we have to put an end to the dangerous manoeuvring which is proposed by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
That is the reason why we are launching the ' SOS Democracy ' appeal .
That is why , for the good of the peoples of Europe , we are refusing to ratify this illegitimate treaty , and as regards France , we shall demand a referendum .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must first congratulate you for the quality of the report on the Treaty of Amsterdam , drafted in the name of the Committee on Institutional Affairs by Mr Méndes de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos .
This is a substantial document , which places the Treaty of Amsterdam in its historic context , and underscores the considerable progress made with respect to the three pillars .
I also thank the Presidents of the committees and the speakers delegated by the political groups , the majority of whom have recommended adopting the present treaty .
I would like above all to note the generally positive turn of the draft , which is in the spirit of the resolution approved by vote of the European Parliament the day after the meeting of the European Council on 16 and 17 June in Amsterdam .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs indeed recognizes the major advances of the treaty signed on 2 October in Amsterdam , even if some things remain to be done , in particular , with a view to the forthcoming enlargement .
This incidentally is not disputed by the signatories of the treaty .
The Presidency has had occasion to express its opinion before you regarding the results of the Intergovernmental Conference , and it is not my intention to return to the details .
I must , however , on this occasion , reaffirm that the over-hasty criticisms expressed in the aftermath of the Amsterdam meeting - and your discussion has just demonstrated this - could not withstand ever so slightly an attentive and objective a study of the results .
It appears to me that as weeks go by , this assessment seems to be ever more correct , and I am delighted .
The draft resolution accompanying the report opens with a recommendation to the Member States to ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Allow me to emphasize the political importance of the recommendation made by the European Parliament , which is the institution representing the peoples of the Member States united in the Community , and two members of whom participated in the work of the Intergovernmental Conference .
This shows that the Parliament sees in the Treaty of Amsterdam a continuing process which started with the earlier treaties , and that the Parliament rightly calls incomplete . But it is nevertheless part of the process of construction of European political union .
Of course , as the European Parliament has emphasized , this new stage in the process of European integration will only produce tangible results if a clear political will arises in favour of a common approach within the Union .
The need for such a common approach is clear , today more than ever before .
Honourable Members have alluded to the method of treaty revision . In response , I say that an end to the procedure under article N can only be achieved by a unanimous vote .
There is no other solution . Any alternative method - and there are some - will not obviate the need to confront the real problem of ratification by national parliaments .
The Treaty of Amsterdam will help us , as it provides a response to the multiple challenges confronting the European Union .
The future enlargement of the Union is only one of such challenges .
Indeed we must also and above all work to reduce unemployment in Europe , reinforce instruments combatting organized crime and the plague of drugtaking , ward off the threats to public health .
Generally speaking , we must bring the Union closer to its citizens , by making it our strong priority to deal determinedly with the citizens ' day-to-day concerns .
I entirely share the considerations of the draft resolution , according to which advances in European integration must be assessed in the light of the progress of the Union , not only as a common market , but also as a system of values , and in the light of the improvement in the quality of life that such advance makes possible .
I note with pleasure that the Committee on Institutional Affairs acknowledges the progress made in this respect by the draft treaty , for the purpose of developing Union policies in the interests of the citizens .
More than anything else , the question of unemployment directly affects the life of millions of European citizens .
With 18 million people workless today in the Union , the new treaty had an obligation to make the promotion of a high level of employment one of the objectives of the Union and to define an European strategy in favour of employment , while allowing Member States to define their own national policies with regard to employment .
Joint action at the Union level aims more at elaborating a strategy for the coordination of policies of employment , which include the adoption of guidelines for employment , along the lines of the mechanisms already in force for the economic policies of the Community and the Member States .
This action also provides for an annual evaluation of measures adopted at the national level .
I need not emphasize the importance that the Presidency of the Council attaches to the effective and rapid implementation at Union level of instruments combating unemployment and promoting employment in Europe .
Witness the extraordinary summit of the Heads of State and of Government devoted to this question , which will be held tomorrow and the day after in Luxembourg .
This Extraordinary European Council will specifically deal with clearly identified proposals in the field of guidelines for employment , as expressed in quantifiable and verifiable objectives .
Furthermore , the insertion into the treaty instituting the European Community of the agreement on social policy will provide for the creation of a single market in social and labour affairs , contributing to the development of a consistent policy at the Community level and , I emphasize this , with respect to applicant countries .
Inspired by the same considerations of concern for the citizens , the Treaty of Amsterdam substantially reinforces provisions relating to the protection of public health , enforcing high standards of quality , and the protection of citizens as consumers and inhabitants of an environment which must remain clean .
The objective of the free circulation of persons was already a part of the treaty setting up the European Community , and it was therefore logical to take steps so that asylum seeking , visas , immigration and external border controls might now be part of Community rules and procedures .
Similarly , it is significant that the manuals and procedures developed over the last few years by the Member States in the Schengen system , for whom the free circulation of persons was already a reality , should be incorporated into the Union .
Freedom to circulate within a border-free area should not nevertheless reduce the security of persons living in the Union .
Criminal activity , like terrorism , like crimes against children , drug trafficking and fraud , do not stop at national borders .
Hence the Treaty of Amsterdam has established cooperation between police forces , customs departments and other law-enforcement organizations of the Member States , which will be developed to prevent and detect criminal activity .
The operational capacities Europol will also be considerably improved .
The concrete improvements provided by the Treaty of Amsterdam in the field of foreign policy and common security , which the Committee on Institutional Affairs recognizes , should of course be assessed in the light of experience .
Unanimous voting will remain the rule for PESC , but in those cases where the Council can come up with common positions , or launch common actions , the scope for qualified majority voting has been enlarged in article J-13 .
The Council last week gave an update on the preparations for the introduction of the planning and rapid alert unit , and on the integration into the treaty of the Schengen manuals .
Institutions were not the main theme of the Intergovernmental Conference , although the institutional results of that conference were what the judgement of many people targeted , to the exclusion of all else .
These modifications include very significant advances , some of which have been alluded to by the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
In the eyes of many , these modifications are a failure , simply for the reason that there was no agreement on the weighting of votes in the Council or on the composition of the Commission .
Simply , by way of a parenthesis , I would like to remind you that the European Parliament has never formulated precise proposals with regard to the composition of the Commission , nor with regard to the weighting of votes within the Council .
The reinforcement of the powers of the European Parliament , by codecision and the extension of the competencies of the Court of Justice and of the Court of Auditors , have not been sufficiently emphasized .
The same applies to the new procedure for reinforced cooperation or flexibility , laid down in the treaty .
I think it is time to put this into its proper perspective .
The results of Amsterdam have clearly shown that public institutional reforms are necessary prior to the forthcoming enlargement .
This is the very direction of the protocol on the institutions annexed to the treaty .
However , it would be an error to measure the results of Amsterdam solely in the light of the foregoing , just as it would be an error to isolate the reforms from all the other measures that will need to be taken to ensure the proper preparation for enlargement .
Here I am thinking in particular about the reform of our policies and of the way our institutions operate , setting aside the way they are made up .
It is clear that both the Council and the European Council examine with interest any contribution that the Commission and the European Parliament would like to make to the debate , to ensure that such reforms can be carried out under the best possible conditions , without slowing up the process of Union enlargement .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would , as I draw to a close , like to warmly welcome the resolution of the European Parliament to intensify contact with the national parliaments .
Such a decision is supportive of debate in the member countries , with a view to enabling rapid ratification of the treaty .
This appears to me all the more important at a time when , as now , it is more than ever necessary to explain to public opinion the initiatives undertaken at the Union level .
Let us together try , in the words of your own report , to optimize the results of Amsterdam in the interest of European citizens and , to paraphrase Mrs Pauline Green , if we want the treaty to be ratified by national parliaments , let us emphasize its beneficial effects .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to say how pleased I am to be able to participate in this debate to evaluate the Amsterdam Treaty , on the basis of the report presented on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , whom I congratulate most warmly on their excellent work .
The motion for a resolution , through its methodology , and through its overall evaluation , its reflections on the legal bases and , above all , its proposals for a future strategy , clearly identifies , in my view , what the outcome of the European Council 's meeting in Amsterdam represents .
I should also like to thank the representatives of the different committees and all other speakers - including those to come - for taking part in this debate . This demonstrates the importance of this debate .
You are well aware , ladies and gentlemen , that throughout the Intergovernmental Conference I engaged in deliberations with , and shared the disappointments and hopes of , Parliament and the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
No more than two months would go by without me attending a meeting of the Committee on Institutional Affairs to listen to the views of the different political groups and parliamentarians , as well as to set out the Commission 's position on the various issues .
And you are also well aware that on the very day that the European Council 's meeting in Amsterdam ended - at twenty to four in the morning - I left immediately for Brussels and met with you at ten in the morning to convey to you my response to the draft treaty , with the tiredness that is natural after an 18-hour meeting , and perhaps with the haste that is inevitable at moments like that .
At that time , I expressed to you - and , a moment ago , probably quite rightly , the President-in-Office , in a way , criticized this for being too hasty - my personal dissatisfaction .
But I also spoke to you later - and I shall it repeat now and repeat it continually - of my commitment , and the Commission 's commitment , to carrying on the fight . Indeed - as we all know - the European project did not end in Amsterdam , and the immediate future will be full of events which require our undivided attention .
In the view of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Amsterdam Treaty must be judged by what it really means .
We believe that it means significant progress in a number of fields - which have been underlined today - especially the field of citizenship , in the broadest sense .
As an unfinished job with a lot of loose ends , it is undoubtedly unsatisfactory in a number of other respects , especially - as has also been underlined today - as regards the institutions and foreign policy .
Faced with this situation , we clearly have a number of options . One is quite simply to say that we are completely satisfied with the draft treaty .
Another is to reject it .
A number of speakers have announced that they are going to reject the draft treaty , describing it in a variety of ways : Mrs Roth called it an inflatable monster ; Mrs Spaak said that it was mediocre ; and Mr Méndez de Vigo called it a failure and a disappointment , adding that metaphors abound when there are no results .
That is undoubtedly one possible response to the draft treaty .
However , alongside the options of quite simply accepting the draft treaty unreservedly or rejecting it , there is a clearly a third option , which is that presented in Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos ' report : we can undertake , as of now , to seek solutions to the outstanding problems .
This will require us to do a number of things .
Firstly , we shall have to create the institutional conditions necessary for enlargement .
Almost everyone has said that .
We will not be in a position to tackle enlargement unless the necessary institutional changes are made .
The fact is that those institutional changes were already envisaged in the Maastricht Treaty , and were one of the principal reasons for negotiating the Amsterdam Treaty . But this issue was then sidetracked and left unresolved .
Consequently , we must create the institutional conditions necessary for enlargement .
Secondly , we shall have to adapt the political institutions to a Union that will have a single currency whose stability will be constitutionally guaranteed , so to speak , by the European Central Bank .
And we shall have to acquire the means to carry out - as everyone agrees , and Mr Spencer said earlier - a common foreign and security policy that is commensurate with our ambitions and responsibilities .
As the House will understand , the Commission does not wish to make a pronouncement at present on either the various amendments , judgements and criticisms put forward - many of which I support - or the objections expressed in relation to the draft treaty .
In my view , ladies and gentlemen - and here I am following on from what the two rapporteurs said - the important thing is to attempt to exploit the possibilities offered by the draft treaty to the maximum , utilizing the protocol on the institutions itself to prepare the necessary reforms .
The proposal to reopen the debate - which , in my view , is one of the most interesting and incisive elements of the report - has the political backing of the Commission , which undertakes to draw up the report requested in the motion for a resolution .
In this regard , I wish to remind the House that the Commission proposes in its document , Agenda 2000 , to take immediately the political decision on the weighting of votes in the Council which must accompany the reduction of the number of Members of the Commission before the first enlargement .
It is also recommends convening a new Intergovernmental Conference as soon as possible after the year 2000 with a view to carrying out a comprehensive review of the provisions of the treaties on the composition and functioning of the institutions .
What we must not do is what we did last time .
We must not stick rigidly to an event , and then find that we do not have time to resolve the institutional problems . Let us leave aside the event .
Let us resolve the institutional problems calmly , efficiently and resolutely ; and , once we resolved them , we shall be in a position to move towards enlargement .
I should also like to recall that the Commission has undertaken to submit a proposal amending the decision on commitology in June - and to do so in close cooperation with Parliament and the Council .
Our goal must be to draw up a proposal which enables us to resolve a problem which has existed for years , and which was not resolved with the introduction of the codecision procedure .
There can be doubt that the introduction of the codecision procedure was a step in the right direction , but it was clearly insufficient to resolve the commitology problem .
This has been an outstanding issue for a long time .
We have to tackle it with decisiveness .
The 1994 " modus vivendi ' agreement cannot go on for ever . We must make the procedures more effective ; and we must fully involve the national administrations , whilst fully respecting the rights of all the institutions .
I also wish to tell the House that I am personally convinced that it is necessary to initiate a debate on the method of revising the treaties .
A great many of speakers have referred to that today .
Clearly , as the President-in-Office said a moment ago , we are restricted by article N : the amendment of any article of the treaties , not just article N , requires unanimity .
Nevertheless , I believe that it is important for both Parliament and the Commission to be able to explore ways of changing the method of amending the treaties .
I consider that we have reached the point at which the system that we have had for many years has outlived its usefulness .
I believe that it is necessary to explore other ways .
There is therefore highly important work for the Commission , Parliament and - of course - the Council to do to improve the current procedure .
I consider that the procedure must be made more democratic , since - although not formally - it is partly constitutional in nature .
Furthermore , there is a need to increase efficiency with a view to enlargement .
Naturally , Parliament , the Commission , the Council and the Member States ' governments will be the main players in this debate , along with the national parliaments and civil society .
A great many speakers , including the rapporteurs , have referred to the role of civil society and relations with the national parliaments .
In my view , this is very important .
This is new language .
I remember well when we were gathered together in November 1990 - I was a Member of the European Parliament at the time - at the celebrated assizes of Rome ; although , as the House well knows , the least that can be said is that they were not a great success .
I believe that we must revive that idea , with the European Parliament fulfilling its role completely - and it can do so much more successfully with the powers conferred on it by the Amsterdam Treaty - but also ensuring a dialogue with the national parliaments , like the one that the European Parliament is conducting .
And ensuring a dialogue with civil society , because civil society - as Parliament , which has organized two sets of public hearings , well knows - cannot be ignored . It cannot remain on the sidelines , leaving it up to ministries alone - or Parliament or the Commission alone - to do everything .
Civil society must also participate .
And it is therefore worthwhile drawing attention to the quality of the proposals submitted to us by civil society .
In short , ladies and gentlemen , we have a lot of work ahead of us .
Firstly , we must perfect the implementation of the provisions of this draft treaty .
Secondly , we must address important issues such as unemployment , which is a fundamental problem , and the most serious problem currently facing the European Union .
We are on the eve of the Luxembourg meeting of the European Council on matters relating to the single currency and enlargement , and I confess that I am convinced of the urgent need to make progress .
I would therefore echo Mr Méndez de Vigo 's call to the House not to dwell on the details of the draft treaty , which , for all its defects , will enable us to continue making progress .
Lastly , I should like to make an appeal to all those who believe that our countries and their citizens only have a future in a Europe of peace and solidarity , and that we must act together with determination and resolve , as well as with enthusiasm , courage and patience , for the fight ahead will be hard .
Quoting Cervantes , Mr Méndez de Vigo said that we must choose between the inn and the road .
I should also like to quote our immortal national author and say that the wizards may try to steal the adventure from us , but with courage and effort we will not let them .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with the Méndez de Vigo / Tsatsos report , the European Parliament has today sent an important political message to the Member States to ratify the Amsterdam Treaty .
As Members of the European Parliament , we do so with increased self-confidence . For in the run-up to the treaty reform the European Parliament led the way for the discussions that followed as an engine for further integration .
I am thinking here of my colleagues Mr Bourlanges , Mr Martin , Mrs Dury and Mrs Maij-Weggen .
The European Parliament was able to play an important role in the discussions on treaty reform both with respect to the discussions themselves and in regard to public provision .
Special thanks should go to our former President , Mr Klaus Hänsch , the incumbent President , Mr Gil-Robles Gil Delgado , and the Members Elisabeth Guigou and Elmar Brok .
The European Parliament has come out the winner in the results of the treaty reform .
75 % of the legislation will be codecided by us , and we will also elect the Commission President in future .
In actual fact : Amsterdam , following the Single European Act and Maastricht , was an intergovernmental conference at which , once again , a difficult compromise between the various interests of nation states had to be reached .
There is no doubt that it was only the change from Conservative to Labour government in Britain and France that made a social policy without opt-out and an employment chapter at all possible .
If we consider the scale of what has been achieved , we can see already that it is quite considerable .
First , with employment we have progressed via a chapter of our own to coordinating the policies of the Member States , to facilitating financially assisted incentive measures and to creating a committee on employment .
Second , the agreement reached on social policy has been integrated into the treaty and improved .
We now have a real chance to actively implement equality between the sexes .
Third , where the environment is concerned , sustained development has been taken up as a treaty objective and the ecological goal for all Community policies implemented in the treaty .
The same applies to improved provision in the area of health care .
Fourth , home affairs and justice .
We now have an express safeguard for the basic democratic and constitutional structures at Union level and a guarantee of basic rights , with assured legal protection through the European Court of Justice .
We have begun to apply Community-wide procedures in the areas of asylum , immigration , control of external borders , status of non-EU citizens and customs collaboration .
We are also seeing the procedures of intergovernmental cooperation moving towards those of the Community and thereby witnessing a more precise definition of duties and powers , particularly in the area of crime-fighting .
I am thinking here of greater support for Europol .
Fifth , foreign policy through the creation of an identifiable figure in the form of the Secretary-General of the Council , strengthening of the structures through the setting-up of an analysis and planning unit , and a new troika formula including the EU Commissioner .
The funding must occur in accordance with general budget requirements in conjunction with our inter-institutional agreement .
There are approaches to majority voting within the framework of the jointly approved strategies and , above all , the inclusion in the EU 's responsibilities of the Petersburg agreement .
That is one side of the coin .
The other side is - let us be open about this - that a lot of the proposals were much too timid .
In many areas , especially home affairs and justice , foreign and security policy , only slight progress has been made , and the three pillars have not been surmounted .
The European Parliament has come out in favour of a tree as the symbol of a growing community and not for three rigid pillars .
This also applies to the deficiencies where the coordination of economic policies is concerned , and to the fact that majority decisions involving equal representation on the part of the European Parliament have not been included in the legislative procedure in general .
Above all , important institutional reforms are lacking in regard to the Council and Commission .
We contend that this is not going to make today 's European Union capable of enlargement .
The European Parliament is generally critical of what has been achieved - and rightly so , for a whole series of our demands have not been realized !
Still , we should not get into the habit , neither internally nor publicly , particularly where questions of European integration are concerned , of only registering successes in silence while constantly carping on about the questions left open .
That will not take us forward in Europe !
And I say to you that , in my judgement as a trade unionist too , the positive aspects outweigh the negative .
That is why we can give our consent in Parliament .
I also say this following the discussions with the national parliaments we have heard here .
I also say this following the discussions we have held with the representatives of non-governmental organizations .
For us there were only signs of approval .
There were no signs that Parliament should reject this treaty outright .
That means for me as spokesperson for the socialist group that we will be giving our political consent to it today in this House .
I am very conscious of the heckling from colleagues among the Greens .
I deeply regret that you want to vote against ratification .
I recall that a number of you brought an action in the Federal Constitutional Court against the Maastricht Treaty , while others fought against your country joining the EU .
It lacks credibility if you only welcome the European idea in its mature form and shirk responsibility on a central question and timidly vote no .
The European Union today is on the threshold of making some of the most important decisions in its nigh-on fifty-year-old history of integration - treaty reform in 1997 , entry negotiations in 1998 , euro currency in 1999 and a new financial framework from the year 2000 .
To achieve this , we need the political vision for further institutional reforms to make the European Union work better following enlargement .
That is why the reforms must take place before enlargement , but the reforms should not delay this process either .
Not at all !
This is not an attempt to square the circle , but the situation should not be solved with the methods employed to date .
Hence , it is important for the European Parliament to develop concepts now for the next steps towards integration .
Thanks to my colleague Mrs van Putten , I had the opportunity to talk to journalists , officials and others at the Amsterdam Summit , in the Central Bank and on the fringe of the negotiations .
I sometimes thought that if the citizens of Europe witnessed this type of negotiation , they would not understand Europe in future .
We need to turn Europe into more of an open process , where controversy is debated , and help bring about greater involvement of those who have been elected for this purpose in their own countries , that is to both the national parliaments and the European Parliament , In this way the resolutions needed are not lost in a long night beset with internal problems or the institutional reforms do not fail on the pretext of those who wish to hold the new democracies in central and eastern Europe hostage for their national interests .
Europe , that means its citizens .
Their consent to the Community depends on the success of the Community 's policies .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has a host of advantages .
The ruling of the European Court on women 's equality is a great encouragement set against this background .
The European Employment Summit needs practical success .
It should not founder on the blockade of the German Federal Government .
We all know that nationalism results from unresolved European problems .
National problems can only be solved jointly , that is on a European scale .
Hence we need to strengthen the European Union , and Amsterdam makes the European Union stronger !
Mr President , a French politician - now somewhat forgotten , although undeservedly so , because his healthy cynicism was so refreshing , President Henri Queuille - once said that politics is not about solving problems , but keeping those who raise problems quiet .
I fear that the shade of Henri Queuille may have loomed unnecessarily large over the work of the Intergovernmental Conference and the European Council of Amsterdam . For you have enforced silence on those who raised problems - be they states , institutions or some sectors of opinion - by satisfying them on some points , by fobbing them off with words when they wanted concrete reality , by dangling long term goals before them when they needed instruments by which to act , anything so long as action was avoided , lulling minds in a general incantation .
But solve problems you did not , and you know it .
There were three problems that needed to be settled. first democratization , and on this point I grant you , progress has been made .
Then deepening the Union , that is , the implementation of institutional measures giving strength and vigour to the policies proclaimed in Maastricht , but which had remained dead letters since .
Here you merely shifted the same pieces about the board , you came out with more procedures , but changed nothing with regard to fundamentals .
Finally , there was the ' massive ' problem of enlargement , where I regret , Mr President of the Council , you are on record as saying that this was not the main purpose of the treaty .
How can we get a European Union of more than 500 million inhabitants , how can we get a European Union of nearly 30 Member States , how can we get a European Union as heterogeneous in political , cultural , economic and administrative terms as the one we are on the way to constructing , how can we get this Union to operate ?
Here you have nothing to say .
You remain sterile .
You have not settled the essential problem !
Some say that the work of Amsterdam was worthless .
I do not think so .
I find it is merely mediocre .
Above all , I find that it is off the point . And as a teacher of literature , I say that any work which is off the point is unsatisfactory .
This report proposes an approach which I broadly approve , at the stage where we now are . It can be summarized in three words .
The first is protection .
Protection of what we have achieved . As parliamentary soldiers , we have to build up our reserves , wherever we can lay our hands on them , in preparation for the campaigns that lie ahead , and that is the meaning behind the call for ratification .
The second is criticism . Here we criticize the fact that we have fallen out of step in our joint march to enlargement and deepening of the Union through its institutions .
The rapporteurs do not go far enough , although they are going in the right direction .
Finally , proposal . This is where this report makes its major contribution , I believe .
The diplomats have failed , it is now down to the citizens to take up the challenge , while respecting article N , I agree , but this provides for plenty of flexibility .
This is the essential contribution of this report .
Here , ladies and gentlemen , is why I approve the report , at this point in time today . But I do not for all that discharge the European Council of its responsibility .
The Council has not kept its promises . Incidentally , we do not see how it can keep its promises any better tomorrow !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the coverage of the Amsterdam summit has been largely negative , and that impression has lingered .
The new treaty is supposed to be a superfluous measure , or just a tiny step forward , and it would hardly matter if it was ratified or not .
The negative impression , colleagues , has been caused in particular by the failure to reach an institutional agreement .
Isn 't it ironic that commentators and observers , who had up until then not attached any importance to the institutional issues , suddenly saw nothing else .
It made the task of the rapporteurs difficult , but they have accomplished it in an exemplary way .
A sober , yet correct analysis and evaluation of the treaty and a recommendation which , as Jean Racine put it , contains neither this excess of honour nor this indignity .
Their detailed report , 269 points over 72 pages , contains an excellent analysis and evaluation of the treaty , and proves the need for ratification .
I will support that call , as will the majority of my group .
But it has been shown just as strongly that the entire institutionalization process has yet to start , and that it will have to happen quickly .
Quickly , so as not to not slow down the enlargement .
Because , Commissioner , colleagues , Mr President , this enlargement is the greatest challenge which this Union has faced during peace time .
A weak Union would collapse under such a confrontation , it would not be able to cope with such a confrontation .
It follows that enlargement and intensification of the Union are by no means mutually exclusive ; on the contrary , they are complementary .
I have noticed recently how a gap has been growing between those who think that those things are mutually exclusive .
I can imagine that the gap is regarded with great satisfaction by all those who want neither intensification , nor enlargement .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , we must get to work immediately , to make clear that we want both enlargement and intensification .
I am delighted that the rapporteurs suggest this is done together in conjunction with the national parliaments .
I am somewhat proud that I have been able to make a small contribution to this during the previous parliamentary session .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whether the ominous , much cited glass of water is half full or half empty can only be gauged by the thirst of the person looking at it .
I can assure you , the thirst of the Heads of State and of Government for European democracy in Amsterdam was , God knows , very slight .
The thirst for European democracy , for a basic social order in Europe , for ecological progress , must have been very slight to make the glass seem half full to many of them .
I can at any rate assure one of the previous speakers , Mr Janssen van Raay , a glass of Mouton-Rothschild tastes different .
What this House will resolve today about the Treaty of Amsterdam is legally of no consequence .
Many people , quite rightly , are complaining about this .
So , we can only offer the electorate one course which counts in politics as basic , namely the truth about the Amsterdam Treaty and the future state of the EU .
That is the only opportunity , the only power and the only duty this House has .
Yet what is the truth ?
Is it the contention of the rapporteurs that the Amsterdam Treaty is a step towards the building up of Europe , or are we not closer to the truth if we open another report , a very discreetly treated one , a very secret one , conceived in this House too , the report from the Intergovernmental Conference working party to the President of the European Parliament ?
This says that all in all , the new treaty only represents the measure of the national and even nationalistic electoral aspirations of its signatories without any forward-looking objectives . Do we not come closer to the truth when we follow this report further and it states that above all , the Amsterdam Treaty represents a strikingly clear failure compared with the original mandate of the Intergovernmental Conference and the three axes around which it was constructed , namely greater popular responsiveness on the part of the European Union , the reform of the institutions in a more democratic and efficient Union and the bolstering of the Union 's capacity to act externally .
It may be true that we have only the truth to offer the people of Europe today .
That might not be much , but we should not make it anything less !
We should not owe that to the people as well !
For this truth will be the basis for whether we find a way out of the crisis in the Union .
Either this House will find this way out or no-one will find it .
That is the task facing this Parliament , and it should not withhold the truth to achieve this .
It will not be able to cover up the failure of the national governments .
As to the failure of Parliament , today 's sitting will decide .
Amsterdam has already decided on the failure of the national governments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my fellow group member , Mr Saint-Pierre , has already outlined the reason why our group will not approve the report .
Amsterdam was above all a vain attempt in the face of necessary institutional reforms .
The Union continues only to have to dialogues with unitary Member States , even though they no longer have any legal powers in many areas .
In Belgium , for example , only the federal states of Flanders and Walloon each for itself and separately have constitutional powers over culture , education , planning , the environment , scientific research , structural funds , transport , and so on .
These federal states have become constitutionally independent with their own address , own house , own budget , own management .
Yet the Union continues to send its invoices and minutes to the old address of their parents .
A Union which cannot even keep up with a change of address is structurally hopelessly out of date .
That is why Maastricht was a missed opportunity on this issue as well , and Europe is too dear to us to say yes to this report .
Mr President , with the Amsterdam Treaty you and other Britons are getting a written constitution without democracy .
Perhaps that is better than having a living democracy without a written constitution anyway .
And the other 14 countries in the EU are getting a new constitution , a new basic law , this little bagatelle in fact , which will replace this little bagatelle , the Danish Constitution .
To the extent that the Union constitution conflicts with the Danish Constitution , we know of course that it is Union law which takes priority .
The Court of Justice made that up as a principle , and what is new about the Amsterdam Treaty is that it is written into the protocol on subsidiarity .
There it is written that the relationship which the Court of Justice has developed between national legislation and Community legislation shall not be touched , and account must also be taken of the Treaty on European Union , which says that the Union shall provide itself with the means necessary to attain its objectives and carry through its policies .
So this is not a principle of subsidiarity , but the opposite .
It is the principle of the supremacy of Union law , even over national constitutions , which is now being written into the treaty itself for the first time . And that is why it is a new written constitution , which Great Britain is now getting for the first time in your lives and in the lives of other Britons .
So , is the constitution we are getting a fine constitution ?
No , it is not . It is not a fine constitution with fundamental rights inscribed in the first chapter and with provisions on institutions and democracy in the following chapters .
It is a constitution which does include fundamental rights and social rights , but they are spread around the treaty .
But the basic principle is that the fundamental rights of the Member States in the national constitutions are being exported , and with them the practice of the Commission on Human Rights and the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg , to the Court of Justice in Luxembourg and to the Union 's authorities , which shall act in unison .
As far as content is concerned this is a constitution , but as far as form is concerned it is a normal international agreement .
I hope nevertheless that the Member States will treat it as a constitutional amendment and therefore give the voters the opportunity to have the final word .
Mr President , the new treaty has not solved the difficult problem of the competence and duties of the Institutions .
The small steps taken in the improvement in the structural requirements of the European democracy will never manage to make good the deficit we have reported for years which we have been fighting since the Treaty of Maastricht .
The current institutional structure is no longer able to govern the unification process appropriately .
The failure to execute the institutional reforms causes a fortiori a slowdown in the decisions on the expansion of the Union .
I share the attitude held by France , Italy and Belgium , which emphasize the inadequacies of the treaty in the prospect of expansion and make new accessions conditional on institutional development .
The opinion held by the Alleanza Nazionale for years is confirmed , in that , failing a reformed institutional framework , failing a political union , any new accession increases the state of operational and decision-making inadequacy of the European Union .
The hierarchy of the rules is a problem the treaty leaves unresolved and is not bureaucratic but affects the nature of the Community acts closely .
Who should decide in each individual case ?
What competence can be transferred to the executive bodies ?
Who supervises the delegated legislative business ?
How can the legislative bodies exercise this essential function of control ?
The protocol regulations include the social protocol that gives the Union 's social policy a greater consistency and unity .
The inclusion of the protocol is not yet a policy : the history of the Community is full of protocols , charters and declarations on social rights !
A real development in the social policy only took place during the period of economic development and the growth in production in our countries in the ' 60s and ' 70s , which means that , with no expansion of the economy and with no increase in the GDP , the social policy remains a protocol of good intentions .
With regard to the foreign policy and policy on justice and domestic affairs , we are far from beginning a real political union , without which the Union will remain imbalanced in favour of the single currency , not resolving the problems of imbalance and disharmony of the unification process .
Finally , the Treaty of Amsterdam has started down a road , taken a few short steps in the right direction , but the road is a long one , too long !
It does not come up to our expectations and does not convey any message of hope to the citizens , which we are sorry about .
At the October sitting , during the debate on the state of the Union , we said that Amsterdam was a big disappointment ; today we would like to add that it was a lost opportunity .
We believe this Parliament should finally note that it should move in the direction of the strongest citizens , because otherwise the treaties will remain a dead letter and political union will remain a dream .
Mr President , the new treaty has just been signed by the Union 's Ministers of Foreign Affairs and is today undergoing its final examination by the European institutions .
Up to now the treaty has lived in its creators ' aseptic cocoon , its contents filtered through speeches by the specialists and diplomats who , for the last three years of often contradictory advances and retreats , have been trying to breathe new life into the old Maastricht Treaty .
But on attaining its majority today the text of the Treaty of Amsterdam goes to each of the States of the Union to be subjected to the risks of debate and national public opinion and , subsequently and consequently , to acceptance or rejection by the citizens of Europe .
The die is cast , therefore , as regards the fate of the treaty , from the moment of our vote today .
We count ourselves among those who will wish it a prosperous future , and will , therefore , vote in favour of the opinion of the European Parliament ; who hope it will be speedily ratified to make it possible to set up a stabilized institutional framework , with clear and enduring rules , to face other challenges confronting the Europe of the Fifteen .
From our point of view there must always be a balance between stability and reform .
We must constantly assess where the priority lies according to Europe 's historical interests .
In our view this is a time for stability .
To rush into amending a treaty which has not yet reached adulthood might be tantamount to throwing out the baby with the bathwater .
It is therefore more important to be calm than to agonize over it .
It is more important to publicize and immediately ratify an amended treaty than to amend it again .
Mr President , there is a saying in my country that cats in a hurry give birth blind kittens .
Let us not be blind .
So before revising the treaty , before revising what has already been revised , we must first win the argument .
Mr President , the Treaty of Amsterdam has been received with little enthusiasm by the public .
What should have been a thorough renovation of the European Union 's house , has resulted in a little wall here , a shed there , and a nice dormer window .
Achievable adjustments have been implemented , but the necessary conversion , necessary , too , for enlargement and to keep the Union workable , did not take place .
What should the European Parliament advise national parliaments on their duty to either ratify or not ratify this treaty ?
In itself it is very positive that the national parliaments , or at least some of them , have asked for our opinion , and do not want to proceed to approval before they know this opinion .
That , incidentally , shows that the relationship between the national parliaments and the European Parliament is much better than many people think , and that is a good thing , because we have many common interests .
The cooperation between the national parliaments and the European Parliament will increase , and become increasingly necessary to improve the democratic calibre of the Union .
I am pleased to say that on that front we have reason to be somewhat satisfied . Because precisely as far as the participation of the European Parliament in deciding legislation important leaps forward have been made .
We owe this partly to our colleague Mr Brok and our former colleague Mrs Guigou .
In fact we can say now that 80 % of European legislation is now subject to participatory procedures , and that is a substantial improvement .
At the same time it is regrettable that this democratization was not implemented for agricultural budgeting and agricultural legislation , but it is sensible to say yes to this treaty , merely for the sake of that step forward , because there is more democracy .
That way at least the small amount that was achieved in Amsterdam is landed .
Otherwise we cannot always be satisfied , unfortunately .
An achievement has been made with regard to the rights of citizens .
The anti-discrimination article has deservedly been mentioned several times .
A small step forward has also been made regards the transparency of institutions , because the Council minutes will be made public in the future .
And in the social sphere a step forward has been made , but we will have to see at the employment summit this weekend whether the content will prove to be positive or not .
Sadly far too little has been achieved in the area of internal security and in foreign and international security policy .
The large gap is institutional .
Everyone recognizes that .
That is the reason why the excellent report by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos recommends us to make a takeover in that area , too , that is to say , to organize another round to ensure that there will be solutions in that area , before new entries are discussed .
That is a sound proposal .
And it should not be attempted in the usual way , through the IGC , in the usual European way through proposals from the European Commission , through advice from Parliament , and on that basis there will be a result .
Until then enlargement cannot really justified .
The European Union will become a mess if we implement the enlargement before these institutional problems have been solved .
In that respect we can say yes to the treaty , but we must hope that at a later stage the steps will be taken which should have already been taken in Amsterdam .
Mr President , in the spring of next year there will be a referendum in Ireland to decide whether or not to ratify the Amsterdam Treaty .
During the course of the debate leading up to the referendum vote together with my colleagues in the Fianna Fáil political party , I will be campaigning enthusiastically for a strong ' yes ' vote .
I hope that the Irish people will once again give a strong endorsement for my country 's continued participation in the European Union as they have done on each of the three previous occasions when a European referendum has been held in Ireland .
I had expected that the Members of the European Parliament would be given an opportunity to cast a vote on the changes to the treaty being introduced following the Amsterdam Summit .
If this had been the case , I would have voted in favour of endorsing the new treaty .
I very much regret that Parliament is not being asked to vote directly on the contents of the treaty but instead , is being asked to consider the merits of a lengthy opinion from the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
The document tabled by the Committee on Institutional Affairs should have confined itself to a simple recommendation to vote for or against the Amsterdam Treaty .
I hope that when a similar situation arises following the next intergovernmental conference , our procedures are changed to facilitate such a vote .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs ' report contains many elements with which I am in total agreement .
However , it also contains comments with which I profoundly disagree .
It is not necessary , for example , for this text to complain about the policies which are not in the new treaty .
There is no need to reopen the argument concerning the membership of the Commission .
This issue was discussed at length prior to the Amsterdam Summit and , in my view , the correct position was taken by the Heads of State and of Government to maintain the present practice whereby each country has the right to nominate a Commissioner .
Secondly , the Heads of State and of Government took the view in Amsterdam that there was no compelling case to involve Parliament in the administration of the common agricultural policy .
The present system whereby the Commission operates the CAP on a day-to-day basis subject to the overall supervision of the Council of Ministers has been satisfactory and should be maintained .
The Heads of State and of Government also took the view that there was no compelling necessity to have a common defence policy at this time and did not include it in this version of the treaty , a decision which I fully endorse .
I fail to see the need to reopen this debate in the context of this report .
For this reason and for the reasons I have already referred to , I propose to abstain on the final vote on this report while at the same time , firmly recording my support for the Amsterdam Treaty .
Votes
Mr President , as I pointed out to your services and while I understand the reasons that inspired the authors of the amendment , I nevertheless believe that the reference to a protocol which is now somewhat ' old ' , if I may say so , is not necessary at this stage .
I will therefore ask you to proceed to a separate vote , the first part of the amendment being word for word identical to the text of the Rules Committee .
I will ask this House , and I will leave it free in its wisdom , to decide to also vote through the second part .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Mr President , Mr Pimenta was the author of this resolution in the Environment Committee .
He has to be in Lisbon today because of ill health in his family and I ask your permission and that of Parliament to introduce a four word oral amendment to clarify the meaning of paragraph 2 in order that we can maximize Parliament 's support for the Union 's position in Kyoto .
I want to insert the words ' after the Kyoto conference ' following the opening phrase which says ' Calls on the European Union ' to convert the Commission 's recent communication into a binding commitment in order to give substance to our commitment .
It was not Mr Pimenta 's intention in drafting this , or that of the Environment Committee , to bind the Commission 's negotiating hands in Kyoto .
By adding that phrase ' after the Kyoto conference ' we make that clear and I hope the House will then be able to support the revised text .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , as you well know there is an unfortunate tendency on the continent to mix up England and Britain , something which you and I feel is an important distinction .
Unfortunately the services have made a mistake in Amendment No 41 : the word ' anglaise ' in the original French text has been translated into ' British ' .
This is highly regrettable .
I should like this to be recorded .
We will ensure that all the language versions are correct and these important distinctions are adhered to .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that Amendment No 45 , which we introduced , should read in the second part of the German version : ' advocates maintaining a cohesion fund ' and not , as was incorrectly translated , ' demands for its part the maintenance of a cohesion fund ' .
It is a very important point that the words are reproduced exactly as I uttered them , or else there are likely to be problems .
The discussion in the groups and in the Committee was very intense .
It is important to have the same , correct version in all languages .
Mr President , to avoid all doubt , I would call for the Spanish version , which is the version negotiated , to apply .
I can read it out if you wish , since it is very short : " Notes that the Commission proposes that the cohesion fund be maintained in its present form ; is in favour of maintaining a cohesion fund ' .
Mr President , I would like to point out that at this point the first part of the original text should be taken , and this reads : ' advocates maintaining a cohesion fund ' .
This is the common text which was discussed by everyone .
Now the translation of what my colleague Mr Izquierdo Collado said into German was still such that there could have been some ambiguity .
I insist that this wording ' advocates maintaining a cohesion fund ' is correct in the second part .
I understand that this is important but we cannot hold a linguistic discussion at this point .
I have checked and discovered that the original version was in English .
We shall therefore as is the usual practice ensure that all languages correspond to the English version .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I wanted to make a point of order because I wish to congratulate you on your patience on taking us through this vote .
However , I have to say that in committee we had 275 amendments to this report and we managed to bring it through with virtually no amendments .
I am disappointed with the I-EDN Group which chose to table amendments and ask for split votes , thus taking up valuable time in this House .
It would suit them better if they attended committee and put their energy and effort into committee work instead of taking up your time .
After long negotiations , the Conciliation Committee has finally reached an agreement relating to the internal market for postal services .
We need to guarantee a universal postal service and , within the necessary framework of the liberalization of this market , determine which services should be reserved to universal service providers , and which should be the unreserved fields , open to competition .
European quality standards will be fixed in the interests of the consumer .
Public service must absolutely be guaranteed , even in an open market .
Some domains are reserved to public service : letters and packages of a certain weight , as well as letters which are registered or have declared values .
Furthermore , this protection forces public service providers to comply with certain quality standards , that is , ' access points ' ( letter boxes ) in sufficient number , reasonable frequency in the collection and distribution of mail , continuity of service , and pricing to allow the use of postal services by all .
Out of concern for transparency , the directive will force postal companies to operate their accounts in such a way that they separate accounts for reserved services from accounts in services open to competition .
The decision for liberalization in direct mail services and cross-border mail has been deferred to 1 January 2000 , when the Council and Parliament will have to decide on whether to pursue liberalization in this sector .
Finally , the directive has struck a just balance between the all-out liberalization practised in certain parts of the world , and our perception of public service .
The new provisions should guarantee consumers better quality services and more competitive tariffs , without calling into question the universal service and the public administrations which provide for it .
Seen from this point of view , the compromise of the Conciliation Committee is an acceptable draft which will still need to be transposed into national regulations , without adversely affecting the structures that have proven their worth in Luxembourg .
In my opinion a deregulation of postal services should not be a subject of debate at all .
Postal services in society are based on public service .
The Post Office should reach everyone everywhere .
People living in cities should help to subsidize postal services in sparsely populated areas .
If this is opened up to profit-driven companies in the area of postal services , it will only lead to the profitable activities being hived off .
The profits will then go to the private companies instead of helping to subsidize the socially beneficial services .
It is with regret that I am forced to make a decision on this report today .
However , I know that the rapporteur has done everything in his power to soften the negative effects of this proposal as far as possible .
My group objects strongly to the procedure being followed at present .
It may be that Council and Parliament , as institutions , have reached a high level of agreement . It is , however , known to all those concerned that this agreement was not reached without a fight .
First of all the Commission submitted a proposal that anticipated far more liberalization than was present in the text which is we are now waiting to vote upon .
After ten long years of resistance from national monopolies in numerous Member States the Commission has given up the fight and thus forsaken its duty as implementer of Treaties , and as defender of a free internal market .
This resistance on the part of Member States has arisen from considerations of two kinds :
as long as there is a monopoly , there is no need to take account of inefficiency and postal services can thus be used for all sorts of improper purposes such as giving away public jobs and bestowing political reward ; -in a few Member States which have to wrestle with depopulation in rural areas , maintaining post offices is seen as a social service , which provides a number of essential services to an aging and decreasing population cheaply , which would otherwise have to be taken care of by an socio-administrative public service .
However , these Member States overlook the fact that for example in Sweden and Finland maintaining both essential services and privatization of the postal services go hand in hand perfectly well .
However , this should not happen at the expense of tariffs which might be seen as a subsidy given by densely populated areas to thinly populated areas.Both Council and Parliament also overlook the established fact that , whatever they protect in reserved sectors , competition will raise its head anyway .
Not only will delivery services , which are able to operate more cheaply than the top heavy postal services , increasingly be able to find ways to by-pass the monopolies , and not only will business customers make increasing use of this , but it is also absolutely certain that the liberalized telecommunication services such as fax and Internet will replace the traditional post , also for the private user .
Businesses who of necessity have to make use of physical delivery services , such as direct mail and mail order companies , will soon reach the point where they will take care of such services themselves , or make use of the services of others .
For the liberal group the most unpalatable aspect continues to be the embargo on cross-border postal services other than those provided by official postal services , and this against prices which could be described as extortionate .
This means that the principle of the free internal market is violated in such a way , that this point alone might be considered a reason for our voting against .
That not one of the Member States has not regarded this as a reason for voting against may be regarded as a sign of the birth of the integration ideal of Europe .
Everyone from the political groups and institutions knew that the liberal group had these objections .
I myself have stated this explicitly and in front of the entire conciliation delegation under the Presidency of Mrs Fontaine .
We should have at least been given the opportunity to announce this at a public meeting .
All we can do now , is to do this in an explanation of the motive behind our vote , and to make clear that the Council and Parliament are not as united as the larger groups and the large Member States would like to make us believe .
Fontaine report ( A4-0337 / 97 )
Once again , the European Parliament has demonstrated its inability to understand the problems of the smaller countries .
At the first reading , Mr Fayot and myself took the liberty of proposing an amendment stating the concerns of the Luxembourg legal environment with regard to the formalities required for the registration with the competent authority of a foreign advocate .
This amendment was rejected , and I continue to deplore this .
I am nevertheless convinced that any regime for free circulation of advocates must be defined in a manner such as will guarantee that consumers have protection in all circumstances , meaning by this that the consumer can be sure of obtaining legal assistance from an advocate with qualifications in the law of the Member State concerned .
However , this objective cannot be met if a Member State has no right to check the knowledge of advocates in the national law .
I would like to yet again raise the fact that the vote on the Fontaine Report will not in any way change the rather more than special situation of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , which is at the crossing point of several legal systems .
Hence , the constitutional and administrative law is essentially of Belgian inspiration , whereas civil and commercial law are influenced by France and Belgium .
Tax law originates in German tax law , and the decisions both of the government administration and the courts are made with reference to German jurisprudence .
Another difficulty resides in the fact that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is a trilingual country .
However , the language problem is an essential one for any advocate who works professionally in the Grand Duchy .
It must also be noted that very many residents of Community countries who are qualified in foreign laws are currently registered with the Luxembourg legal authorities ' training course , and successfully meet the requirements of the end-of-training examinations .
Having said that , I believe that the current system enables advocates of European citizens to offer their services and to set up in Luxembourg without difficulty , while ensuring that they are sufficiently qualified to give advice on Luxembourg law .
Luxembourg citizens do not understand why this situation should be changed by a directive , and this is the reason why I shall vote against the new report .
I nevertheless acknowledge that Mrs Fontaine has gone to much trouble to understand the Luxembourg problem , and for this reason I would like to thank her at all events .
I wish on the one hand to congratulate Nicole Fontaine for the excellent work that she has carried out on the subject of this proposed directive , examined under the codecision procedure .
On the other hand , there is reason to congratulate ourselves on there being a common position , which was precisely the wish of our parliament in the first reading .
Indeed , the amendments made by the Council of Ministers do not go back on the spirit that the European Parliament wished to give to the directive , and that is the reason why I voted in the favour of the decision approving the common position .
The examination of this text by the European Commission , the Council , and the Parliament shows that the three institutions can , with calm deliberation , implement the principles of negotiation , which prevail in community legislative procedures , and end up with a highly satisfactory result .
I am all the more pleased with this good result , as the draft is of major importance , insofar as it contributes to the effective introduction of the European Union , and more particularly , to a concretization of the principles of free circulation and freedom of establishment .
Dell 'Alba report ( A4-0345 / 97 )
I voted yes to the report .
There are great opportunities to coordinate the European project through increased cooperation between the EU and the Council of Europe , especially the two bodies ' parliamentary assemblies and their committees and delegations .
This could lead to a more firmly based European cooperation and reduce unnecessary duplication .
A wider study should be carried out jointly between the two European institutions on how this cooperation should be deepened .
Jöns report ( A4-0352 / 97 )
With this explanation of vote we would like to emphasize the fact that in the final vote we supported the report .
After the inability of the Member States to produce a directive for many years , the agreement which has been negotiated between the ETUC , CEEP and UNICE is of great importance for millions of workers in the European Union .
It is therefore vital that the European Parliament supports the agreement in its opinion .
We also believe there is cause to reiterate , as the report does , Parliament 's request to the Commission that it should ensure that a directive is put forward for other atypical work .
There are , however , a number of paragraphs in the report with which we cannot agree .
Among other things we believe the report contains criticisms which cannot be regarded as entirely factually accurate . For example , the criticisms made in paragraphs D , H , 4 and 6 .
These mainly concern criticisms directed against the agreement on the question of failings in establishing minimum rules and failings in the scope of the agreement and on the question of what can be regarded as objective criteria .
We also think that the criticism of articles 3 and 4 in the agreement on social policy , as it is presented in paragraphs 12 and 16 , is unwarranted .
We believe , on the contrary , that the role of European partners in drawing up rules for the labour market are of great significance for the development of a European social model .
We are also sceptical in principle about the idea that the parties in the labour market should be liable to report to the Commission , as stated in paragraph 21 , in an area which falls under EU law .
Finally , we consider it inappropriate to do as paragraph 22 does and propose changes to the text of the framework agreement itself .
It is particularly inappropriate because the report sets out with the ambition of trying to make its own interpretations of what could be described as objective criteria and to define who is a part-time worker .
In spite of these objections , there was never any doubt that we would support the report in the final vote .
The Danish Social Democrats are voting against the report by Mrs Jöns , in spite of the fact that it contains a lot of good elements .
It is important that the European Parliament presses for corresponding agreements to be made for employees in other types of atypical employment .
And it is good that attention is being drawn to the areas where the agreement could have been better .
But social dialogue is a precondition for creating a more humane and just society and a European Union with a more human face .
The agreement on part-time work is an important step forward for the establishment of a social dialogue at the European level .
To try to restrict it at its tender birth could have catastrophic results .
It is therefore regrettable that the Commission in its legislative proposal has set the stage for interference in the agreement .
We should instead allow the agreement to remain in force without changing it , out of respect for the social partners ' negotiations .
We are also concerned about the wording of paragraphs 17 and 19 of the report .
We do not believe there is cause for concern about the way in which the social protocol has been written into the Amsterdam Treaty .
And there is , in our opinion , no immediate need to expand the circle of social partners beyond those who are already involved in the social dialogue .
24 million people are employed part time in the European Union . Women , young people and the least qualified are those most affected .
The rise in the number of those working part time is especially marked in certain countries , such as the Netherlands and Great Britain , where part time work accounts for 25 % of the whole .
Too often , part time working is enforced by companies and not chosen by employees .
The framework agreement between the European social partners has set out as its first objective the recognition of the principle of non-discrimination between part time and full time workers .
This should contribute to improving the conditions of employment of part time workers and give them better conditions of service .
But there are too many shortfalls and grey areas , particularly with the absence of provisions relating to equality of treatment in the field of social protection .
This lack of clarity leaves the door open to differences in interpretation and , above all , the possibility of too many derogations for ill or undefined ' objective reasons ' .
I am delighted that the report of the Committee on Social Affairs has also deplored these discriminatory derogations .
The framework agreement appears unbalanced .
While it provides some assured conditions of service , albeit limited and subject to derogation , to part time workers , it encourages flexibility in working hours in the context of the development of part time working .
From this point of view , it is part of the approach of the Commission in the run-up to the European Council of Luxemburg on employment .
Our group is opposed to this approach , which aims at greater labour market flexibility in a manner which exclusively favours the interests of companies .
To develop employment and improve the conditions of life and work of the employees , our group proposes that the reduction of working hours be one of the central themes of the European Summit on employment , and so give European employees the strong signal that they expect .
A decision on 21 November in Luxembourg to open up the prospects of reduction in working hours could also mark a new start in building Europe and a move towards a Europe of progress , peace and security , which would make social progress and employment the motors of a new form of development .
The outline agreement signed by our social partners subscribes to some of the objectives to which our group attributes great importance .
The struggle against the discrimination which afflicts part-time workers , who are victims twice over , furthermore , because they arrive in that situation by way of a process that penalizes them , the improvement of their working conditions , and the placing of emphasis on the voluntary sector as a basis for the development of this type of work - these are indeed objectives for which we are all genuinely fighting .
We must however express our regret , as we did in the amendment we submitted , that the principle of nondiscrimination against part-time workers is subject to general exceptions in the agreement , and those exceptions leave the way open for the principle to be disregarded .
Furthermore , we cannot accept the underlying philosophy represented by the enshrinement of the so-called flexible organization of time which , in reality , means that job security becomes precarious and there is a real tendency to treat the workforce as merchandise .
Even those aspects of the agreement that can be considered positive do not extend to other forms of work which until recently were considered unorthodox .
It will be said , as the Jöns report claims , that the outline agreement is a first step towards the creation of a range of legal measures which will gradually eliminate existing forms of discrimination .
It would be nice to think this is true , but the agreement is so timid and hesitant that there is a risk that it will be accepted as such - as a first step - and that the illusion will be created that we are on the right road when we are actually going against the interests of workers .
These are the reasons for all our reservations why we are voting as we are .
I am backing adoption of this agreement as reached between employers and trade unions in June this year .
Countering discrimination at work faced by part-timers , improving their working conditions as well as the promotion of part-time work and flexible hours as useful options for many people are all things which we can enthusiastically support .
I accept that the rapporteur may feel that the agreement could cover other types of work and even social security systems .
However , speaking as a British Labour Member , I feel that we should back agreements reached by the two sides of industry wherever possible .
Agreements reached by those who will carry them out might well be better able to last and evolve than anything we as politicians could devise on their behalf .
Of course we can have our say in these policy areas in future .
But we should support the social partners in their gradual development of policies which can benefit our fellow citizens at their places of work .
I for one do so with enthusiasm rather than reluctance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last July , our Assembly adopted a resolution on the reinforcement of the Community strategy for improved air safety .
The text on which we are today to give our opinion is part of this set of measures .
By analogy , the Committee on Transport and Tourist is asking for the application to the air transport sector of what is being done in the maritime sector .
We are requesting that third world countries respect the safety standards of the Chicago Convention and the rules of the International Civil Aviation Organization .
The European Union must have a strict position in this .
We know that many aircraft do not respect elementary safety rules .
Proof of this is the ' airports of convenience ' which are being developed in order to circumvent obligations .
This we cannot accept , as nobody can play around with personal safety .
Finally , we also know that some countries , particularly the least wealthy , will be adversely affected by this safety code .
We will therefore have to devise means of cooperation with these countries , through technical assistance .
Knowing the difficulty of a technical report of this kind , I would like to congratulate our colleague Mr Gonzalez Triviño on his serious work .
I am a supporter of the conclusions and the features of this directive , which deals with the safety of non-Community aircraft .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that henceforward , we must concentrate more on the airlines than on the airport authorities .
I support the key undertakings of this directive , and I appreciate its determination to impose enforceable measures on operators , who on occasion use aircraft flying in hazardous safety conditions .
I support the amendments of the initial draft , whose purpose is to make public information on grounded aircraft .
This desire for transparency is praiseworthy and necessary . It must be imposed on all and in all fields .
More transparency will contribute to giving citizens more confidence in those who take decisions .
The report of 1 March 1996 by aviation experts from the Union shows that increasing numbers of countries are shirking their obligations to implement and uphold international safety standards . This objectionable omission , which has already cost large numbers of human lives , must be challenged actively .
In order to protect the safety of their own citizens the European countries must be careful when entering into aviation agreements with third world countries .
It would be advisable if they adopted the policy of USA , which only enters aviation agreements once the authorities in the countries concerned are able to guarantee the safety of the air fleet .
Aviation competition in Europe tempts the Member States into adopting a flexible attitude towards unreliable airlines from third world countries .
We therefore agreed with the SAFA procedure , as suggested by the Commission .
When a breach of the safety regulations is suspected to have taken place , aeroplanes from third world countries should be checked within the Union , and if necessary , should be grounded .
That way the Commission will be able to prevent policy competition at the expense of safety .
It is desirable that a Member State proceeds to platform inspection when there are serious complaints or when there is legitimate suspicion on safety grounds .
Considering the above we supported the amendments to the González Triviño .
We regard in particular Amendment No 12 , which would like to see the publication of the details of grounded aeroplanes , as a good addition to the proposal of the Commission .
Citizens need to be able to know which airlines are not totally safe .
Junker report ( A4-0318 / 97 )
I have voted yes to the report because it is important for decisions in an EU context to be based on a perspective of the role of the sexes and equal opportunity .
The Committee 's addition about an EU control group with national representatives at a high level to integrate questions of gender into development work are good .
However , the setting up of a number of well-paid expert services at the Commission 's DirectorateGeneral and other authorities must be rejected .
The Commission 's proposal should be received positively .
It has the right objective - to integrate gender issues as an important factor in development cooperation .
But implementation , turning it into reality , is another thing .
And not a lot has happened on that point .
Mrs Junker talks about equal rights .
I would instead like to argue for a form of ' positive discrimination ' for women .
The western way of thinking about equality between men and women does not hold up when you are talking about developing countries , especially not where Africa is concerned .
We must accept that , unlike in Europe , people are not people first and men or women after .
In developing countries it is often the other way round , and we cannot change that .
We must consciously make a distinction and tailor the help directly for women , because that it where it does the most good .
For example , everyday life for most African women is a life on the land , often without a husband , who is perhaps dead or working somewhere else . And it is far from certain that a woman will see anything of her husband 's money .
It is her responsibility alone to get everyday life at home to work .
She tills the soil , fetches water , cooks food and has need of money for the children 's schooling , medicines , tea , sugar , bus fares and shoes for the older children .
But , unfortunately , help from the EU often benefits the men , not the women , where it would do most good .
We must instead support women directly through the allocation of land , loans , better equipment and technology .
Women should be included in all aspects of development cooperation and in all EU policies which have to do with developing countries .
It is not enough to have individual success projects . The involvement should be a constant feature in all stages .
The Commission 's general mainstreaming approach could be part of this strategy , if the principle is carried out in practice and does not remain empty words .
Help for the Third World will simply be wrongly organized and not benefit the right people if we do not give weight to women in the development cooperation .
In evaluating development assistance we should also use genderclassified statistics throughout .
Without such statistics we cannot measure the effect on men and women respectively .
You have to doubt how serious the EU is about gender politics .
We saw that in the Green Paper on Lomé , but also in other agreements .
Nor is any priority given to staff in the area .
At the moment there is one person in DG IB and two people in DG VII , of which one is an expert on temporary loan .
The staff should be permanent employees at a high level to have clout .
The gender issue should be involved everywhere in development cooperation . Only in that way can the aid be effective .
The gender issue must become part of development .
In many countries it is women , after all , who not only keep the economy running , but who also support society .
If our development policy is to be in the slightest bit effective , then it is important that women benefit fully from it .
Unfortunately that is not all that these days .
After all , men control the political and international , bilateral and multicultural agenda in the south , too .
In itself the proposal of the Commission contains useful suggestions , which chiefly amount to capacity-building for women .
Key words are thus advice , methodology , procedures , guidelines , training , etc .
I would like to emphasize that these are all useful proposals . But they are by no means sufficient .
In addition money absolutely must be allocated to support concrete women 's projects .
That at least will achieve something !
It will definitely help to engage women more in the decision-making process , because they will start feeling stronger once their socio-economic position improves .
Fortunately Mrs Junker argued for the same thing .
This is expressed in the amendments .
My group will vote wholeheartedly in favour of this report and hopes that the Commission will implement these amendments .
Gutiérrez Díaz report ( A4-0317 / 97 )
I hope that not only British , Northern Irish and Irish Members but our colleagues from across the EU will be happy to support this report .
Although the EU is already the largest contributor to this fund , I share the rapporteur 's desire to ensure that the money provided from it is additional to , and not a substitute for , other public or private funding .
Of course it is also right to ask that this money be coordinated with that already committed to Ireland and Northern Ireland by the EU 's structural policies .
The EU was originally founded on the basis that by living and working in peace alongside each other , old enemies across this continent could secure a prosperous and safe future for future generations .
At this time the cross-party talks process inside Northern Ireland is at a crucial early stage .
This practical gesture from the EU to continue its funding support for economic and social development inside Northern Ireland and in its relations with the Republic is welcome news .
My colleague John Hume has spoken eloquently in the past of the example this city of Strasbourg has set as a place of reconciliation between old enemies .
The jobs and projects helped by this fund build bridges between the old enemies of Ireland .
Let us remember the victims of all sides by building a ' bridge for the living ' . To quote Philip Larkin , a British poet .
' Always it is by bridges that we live ' .
Linkohr report ( A4-0343 / 97 ) and Kyoto conference
Mr President , I did not vote for the Linkohr report .
It is not certain to me that climate change in the form of global warming is taking place , and even less clear is the part played by human activity or specifically by carbon dioxide .
Parliament should be wary of trying to solve something that may not exist .
Precautions can only be taken successfully against a known problem .
If , however , carbon dioxide is a threat to the world , then the Green position has logic on its side : an end to the use of all fossil fuels , oil , gas and coal .
However , last year the world consumed more coal , more oil and more gas than in 1995 , and by significant amounts , and not only in developing countries .
My concerns are to reduce atmospheric pollutants which are life-threatening - CO2 is not - and to place maximum emphasis on energy efficiency .
Finally , we should remember the two billion people , 40 % of the world 's population , who have no access to any commercial energy supply whatsoever .
For them climate change is not a priority .
The report from our colleague Rolf Linkohr is at once determined , comprehensive , serious and of high quality .
I would like to congratulate him .
The Parliament has , on many occasions , had laid before it problems relating to the environment in general and to gaseous emissions contributing to the greenhouse effect in particular .
This is a major problem both for today and over the next few years .
Not long ago , we voted in a resolution whose aim was to reinforce mechanisms of surveillance over CO2 and other gases .
Not all are pleased about this , and some may even be of the opinion that we do far too much in this field .
For my part , I believe that we should ceaselessly work to preserve our environment and the quality of our air .
In the strict sense of the term , this is a vital question .
I support Rolf Linkohr in his determination at the Kyoto conference to forge an ambitious position for the European Union , particularly as he is doing so with a keen sense of his responsibilities with regard to the economy and to employment .
As this date draws closer , I am astonished at the lack of enthusiasm by some countries for ratifying vital and minimum commitments .
These same countries are much more prompt when it comes to imposing their own visions , whenever unbridled liberalization bears down on individuals with all the weight of the sacrosanct law of profitability .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , we do have to envisage measures of constraint , to enable the effective putting into practice of actions to achieve our proclaimed targets .
We should not forget that in this field , most unfortunately , the question is not how to improve the current situation , but to avoid it becoming too very much worse .
We are all beginning to suffer the consequences of climate change .
Even the most reluctant can no longer deny the scientific and factual evidence of this alarming fact , which was announced years ago .
Emissions of greenhouse gases , especially carbon dioxide , have increased by 3.4 % in the United States , but this does not deter the Clinton Administration 's incomprehensible attitude towards the conference or the disappointing cuts announced by Japan .
The EU delegation is going to the conference with a positive approach and the mandate of the Fifteen to seek the inclusion in the new protocol of the target of reducing emissions of greenhouse gases by 15 % by 2010 compared with 1990 , with a reduction of 7.5 % by 2005 .
The Union must ensure that these objectives and this timetable , as well as the future strategies , are binding for everyone .
We are agreed that a failure at Kyoto would have such dramatic consequences that the industrialized countries ' sense of moral responsibility must prevail at the conference .
The climate conference in Kyoto should be a starting point for being able to limit world emissions of greenhouse gases .
Unfortunately , both the USA and Japan have a very intractable position when it comes to getting to grips with the problem .
The EU 's position is in the right direction , but in my opinion it does not go far enough .
I do not share Commissioner Bjerregaard 's and Council representative Lahure 's view that , in order to really be able to do something about the problem , the EU should not take a lead and introduce binding commitments unless other industrialized countries also do so .
Comprehensive measures are needed in the areas of energy , agricultural and transport policy .
I think it would be better for us to take these measures now rather than wait until it is too late .
We have to adapt to the limitations of nature to a much greater degree than today .
Comprehensive measures will also give companies in EU countries a competitive advantage against those of other countries if in order to reduce emissions they develop new technology which can be sold to other countries .
The EU 's demands are in fact on the low side , but they are nonethe-less far more realistic than those of the USA and Japan .
I voted yes in the final vote , but no to the amendment on support for nuclear power .
Mr Linkohr deserves praise for his report on the energy dimension of climatic change .
It is good to learn that anthropogenic climatic change is being taken seriously and that the horrific scenarios which are put forward by scientists about the climatological effect of greenhouse gases on the world are not being ignored .
A sensible energy policy should aim to change behaviour at all stages in which greenhouse gases are produced .
Many of the greenhouse gases which alter the climate come from large industrial plants which can easily be regulated and which can easily be inspected .
Centrally-directed solutions are in order here .
Mr Linkohr 's report gives many excellent examples of that .
However , we have to be aware that there are also very large emissions of greenhouse gases from domestic animals , traffic and other small producers which are difficult to control .
You can of course counter this to a certain extent with increased controls and by making administrable demands on the local authorities and the supply businesses which are in direct contact with the citizens .
But we must go even further .
If we really want to solve the problem of emissions which are difficult to control , we must use financial incentives .
It should be financially beneficial for individual households or farmers to save , and it should be financially beneficial to convert to using sustainable energy in households , trade and industry .
However , I am very unhappy with the energy priority which the rapporteur is proposing as a solution to anthropogenic climatic change .
It is proposed that you can let nuclear power replace existing CO2-contaminating power stations , because nuclear power is one of the cleanest sources of energy which does not emit greenhouse gases .
I do not agree with that .
Technical advances in recent years have greatly improved the efficiency of sustainable sources of energy , and instead of supporting and giving so much money to the European nuclear power industry , as the Community notoriously does , we should reinforce efforts to promote sustainable sources of energy .
Nuclear power might be cheap , but the low price should not be a reason for us to forget to think on new lines .
The many nuclear power installations also represent major safety problems for our environment , and it is true that the management of uranium mines in Canada , Mexico and Africa is far too poor .
The uranium mines are often left in an unprotected condition and are a great danger to the surrounding environment .
It is in the areas where there are uranium mines that the indigenous peoples live who are entirely dependent on nature .
They no longer dare to eat game which has been deformed by pollution , and they are themselves exposed to radiation which is making the death rate from cancer , among other things , alarmingly high .
In addition there are the problems connected with the disposal of spent reactor waste .
There are still no sensible methods of storing the spent waste .
Nor can I support the rapporteur 's proposal to introduce an energy tax at the EU level .
I am an opponent of allowing the countries which wish to go forward to be held back by the less progressive countries simply because there should be joint solutions .
Tax policy should not be made an EU concern .
It would be unfortunate , for example , if Danish energy taxes were harmonized ' down ' to , for example , the Belgian level .
What we need is a system in which the minimum rules are constantly raised and requirements are toughened for all Member States .
BSE
Mr President , while welcoming the debate yesterday on BSE and the subsequent resolution , this House should not forget the human price of past negligence .
Twenty-one people have died of the new variant of CJD , the human form of BSE , in Britain since 1995 .
Last Friday I met the parents and boyfriend of one of the victims in my constituency .
Mr and Mrs Sinnott lost their 23-year-old daughter , Nina , to new variant CJD last May .
They and the other parents of sons and daughters who have died deserved an explanation .
The last government is guilty of a cover-up and they have been warned by the Royal Environment Commission back in 1979 and the Southwood report in 1989 , but failed to act .
The Sinnotts and the public have a right to know the facts .
Parliament 's work should be followed up by a public enquiry in Britain .
As a member of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE , and the Temporary Committee to follow up the Recommendations of the European Parliament relating to BSE , I would like to draw your attention to a particular point in the dossier , at a time when fifteen months of work are now being completed with the vote on the Böge report .
We have , over time , brought to light on a number of shortfalls and failures .
Now , this long and painstaking work has enabled us to set up a new strategy at the European level to guarantee our citizens food safety at all stages of the food chain , from animal feed to the table .
This was an absolute necessity . We could not have done otherwise .
All the food production sectors , like the consumers themselves , have understood the full import of this drive to clarify matters .
In the future , we will of course not be satisfied with this .
The work that has already been done will need to be continued , so that each one of us , and in particular those who , like me , are members of the more sensitive committees , such as agriculture and health .
The conference on food safety and consumer safety which will be held twelve months hence will be one more opportunity to continue with this very strict monitoring .
However , we need not seek to go too far in all fields .
Here , I essentially have in mind industrial uses , where procedures are so tried and trusted as not to present any dangers to end users ' health .
For example , industrial applications that use tallow by-products as raw materials .
This occurs in sectors other than foods , in pharmaceuticals and cosmetics , and in industrial activities and detergent production , paint manufacture , lubrication , or public works .
Such sectors would inevitably be affected if excessive measures were implemented .
In the light of their implications in the field of employment , we have to be particularly vigilant when applying directives , to avoid being overcautious , once we can be sure that consumer health is satisfactorily guaranteed .
I therefore approve of the Böge report .
This should be an opportunity for the European Parliament once again to meet the expectations of the European population in the fields of health and food fields .
The threat of a censure motion demonstrated how effective our control over the Executive can be .
I also share the opinion of the rapporteur , when he says that he is delighted at the effort undertaken by the European Commission , which has an obligation every six months to give us a regular and ongoing report .
This is progress in the right direction , even though there is still a long way to go .
Since the first report to the European Parliament on mad cow disease , which was adopted in February 1997 , the discovery of a number of massive frauds has shown that the embargo on British beef can be got round with a disconcerting ease .
At the end of September , it was estimated that more than 10 , 000 tonnes of prohibited meat had been sold and consumed in the European market .
This fraud is all the more dramatic as it has just been proven virtually definitively that the infectious agent causing bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE , or mad cow disease ) has crossed the species barrier , and caused a new form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in man .
Given this situation , what are the European Commission and the Member States doing ?
Out in the field , inspection is still inadequate , particularly in the transportation sector .
In particular , the dogma of the uncontrolled circulation of products ( the so-called ' free circulation ' in the biased language adopted by Brussels ) is so strong that it paralyses all our defensive reactions .
The European Parliament monitoring committee report states that " measures and controls of the Member States and of the Commission , insofar as they are possible within the framework of the single market , have not been enough to prevent circumventing the embargo on British beef ' , and that ' the Commission and the Member States have therefore been unable to protect the health of the population from the sale of potentially infected meat . '
To date ( end November 1997 ) , the Commission has still not presented to the Council or to the European Parliament any proposal aiming at improving border controls , and there has not even been introduced a system of compulsory notification of all meat and animal transportation from the United Kingdom .
It is therefore clear that , once again , the Commission is giving the concern for free circulation of products a higher priority on the internal market than consumer health .
However , I do not want to insinuate that the Commission has done nothing in this field .
It has ensured that the works of its expert committees are more transparent , and has undertaken a certain degree of regulatory activity , for example , regulations on the manufacture and use of animal meal , on the prohibition of potentially hazardous products in animal feed and in the human food chain , and the voluntary labelling of beef ( this should become compulsory in 1998 , instead of the year 2000 ) .
But the move to regulations is hampered by three contradictory factors .
First contradiction : the Commission is unwilling to call into question the dogma of total abolition of internal border controls , as I have already said ; such abolition was an error , and it will one day have to be recognized as such .
Second contradiction : the Commission is too much wedded to the idea that , in order to combat the risk to health , the powers of the Commission should be increased , and the rights of the Member States to self-defence be reduced .
A reflection of this is , for example , the stupefying amendment to article 100a , proposed to the Council of Amsterdam and accepted by it .
In the future , when taking national measures of protection in the fields of health or environment , and when making derogations to Community rules ( and therefore to the rule of free circulation in particular ) , Member States will need to make a request under very restrictive conditions , where the Commission enjoys full latitude in its assessment .
Hence , the Member States will have no means of independent defence against the inertia , prejudices , and failures of the Commission , all of which have , as everyone knows , been the major difficulties we have been faced with in handling the mad cow affair .
At a time when the whole business should have served as a lesson to the Council of Amsterdam , to set a new balance in the relationship between the Commission and the Member States , it has been used by the dominant ideology to reinforce the powers of the Commission , and to shift the burden of guilt a little bit more onto the Member States .
Third contradiction : while trying to use Community regulation to ward off the danger of other epidemics in the future , the Commission is continuing to water the seed bed in which such epidemics can grow , by proposing a framework for an ultra-productivist agriculture , based on the lowest prices in the world market , in its Agenda 2000 programme .
For our part , we want an agriculture which respects natural mechanisms , and so supplies the peoples of Europe with hazard-free food .
However , such an agriculture will not be possible unless in future commercial international negotiations , there is recognition of the legitimate rights of regional zones of preference .
This is the reason why we are calling on the European Council of 12 and 13 of December next , which will be examining the Agenda 2000 programme , to reject the agricultural proposals of the Commission . We are calling for a firm orientation in favour of community preference , with a view to what is already being called the ' Clinton Round . '
We are calling for a revision of the dogma of elimination of internal border controls . Finally , we are calling on all the peoples of Europe to refuse to ratify the revision of article 100a , and therefore for this very serious reason ( although this is not the only one ) to reject the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I voted in favour of the Committee of Inquiry report on BSE because of the important balance that the report reflected between reminding us of the disastrous history of BSE in Britain , under the last Conservative Government , and the measures that are now being taken by the new Labour Government and by the Commission to ensure the health and safety of the public in food and agricultural policy from now on .
Much has been written about the whole question of food safety following the BSE crisis and we in Ireland , with a substantial food industry , are interested in any improvements the EU may introduce in order to enhance consumer confidence .
The Commission has recently put forward a proposal which would include primary agricultural products within the scope of the existing EU product liability directive ( 85 / 374 / EEC ) .
Consumers will therefore be able to seek compensation for damages caused by defective primary agricultural products such as meat , cereals , fruit and vegetables .
Farming groups in Ireland are concerned by the possible costs of this proposal to their members .
Consumer groups have pointed out that it is notoriously difficult to trace a disease back to the primary agricultural product .
The Commission is therefore contemplating introducing a measure which does not have the whole-hearted support of two major groups relevant to food safety - producers and consumers .
Has the Commission learnt nothing from the BSE crisis ?
You must get the support of all of these groups if you want to have an effective regulatory regime .
In 1995 the Commission assessed the impact of introducing such a proposal to the agricultural sector and stated that ' it would not adversely affect the agricultural sector ' .
I am calling on the Commission today to further investigate this situation , before this extension of the Product Liability Directive is enacted into law .
The Commission has established a Food and Veterinary Office in Ireland .
This study is the type of work this new EU office should be completing and I call on the EU to commission such a study / report immediately .
One of the main tasks of the Food and Veterinary Office is to monitor the observance of food hygiene , and veterinary and plant health legislation within the EU and elsewhere .
It will cooperate with the many existing national food agencies , including the Food Safety Authority of Ireland .
I call on the present Irish Government to speed up the process to get this agency up and running by passing a bill in the Dáil establishing its powers .
The Fianna Fáil party during the recent general election stated that it would scrap this body .
They should not be playing with people 's health while at the same time leaving the Irish food industry in the dark about what powers the agency will have .
In the original FG / Labour / DL proposals the agency was to have the power to carry out audits on food companies and ultimately fine the companies if they were not adequately following hygiene legislation .
Fianna Fáil instead believed that the ultimate decision over whether a company should be fined would be taken by the responsible Minister for Health .
Consumers will not have confidence in such a scenario .
We know that pressure can be put on Ministers not to fine a company .
I call on the present government to maintain the independence of the Food Safety Authority as that will be good for consumer confidence in the short term an for the reputation of the Irish food industry in the long term .
Since the setting-up of a Committee of enquiry on BSE , the European Parliament has been able to exercise a really effective control over the executive .
To date , we note that the Commission has taken up most of the recommendations of the Parliament , either by directly applying them , or setting deadlines for their implementation .
We have now set up a date with the Commission for six monthly assessments on work in progress .
Considerable progress can now be observed , and although relations between the Parliament and the Commission have been tense , it now appears that they may end up by being mutually beneficial , and I hope that this will continue into the future .
We of course know that there is major dissension with regard to certain specific points , on which we have taken positions - and rightly so - in our resolution , which I wish to support .
Having said that , it is fundamental that we continue with our joint efforts , with the Commission , with the Council , and with the Member States who so wish , to correct the errors of the past , to change the order of priorities to a degree , and to place public health , and hence product safety and quality , at the very top of our list of concerns .
Everyone , or nearly everyone , now agrees on this basic principle .
However , to meet this objective , there has to be a real change in mentalities .
This change must now and will need in the future to take place in the form of a number of choices that we will have to make at the European level , particularly with regard to new production and processing techniques , or in the decisions that we will need to take with regard to Agenda 2000 .
This change will also need to translate into the responses that we can give to the many questions raised by the BSE problem : can herbivores continue to be fed with animal meal ?
If so , can this meal really be made from the recycling of sick animals , whether the sickness be BSE or rabies or anything else .
If not , what do we do with the carcasses of the animals destroyed ?
Are the funds allocated to research and health inspections sufficient ?
How can we provide for efficient control of the food processing chains from the farmyard to the table ?
How can we reconcile the legitimate demands of our consumers with some of our international commitments ( hormones , labelling of genetically modified organisms , etc . ) ?
We will need to set up a real ongoing process of vigilant oversight on every occasion where we need to make choices which can have repercussions on public health . We need to be sure that all these fundamental questions are the subject of public debate in each of our Member States .
The real cause of the BSE problems for the UK was a series of actions by the UK Thatcher Government .
1.The agri-feed industry , generous donors to the Tory Party , were given the benefit of deregulation ; thus the feed bags to farmers did not have to list ingredients ( unlike even the modest tin of beans ) .2.Renderers were given the benefit of removal of stringent temperature rules .
Commissioner Fischler , in a meeting with myself and Allan Macartney , agreed to the principle of regional lifting of the ban but the Unionist parties and the Farmers ' Unions of England and Scotland both refused this saying the Scots had to sink or swim with England ! Scotch beef is desired in EU markets but London has prevented this .
We have not taken part in the BSE vote today , for a number of reasons .
The first is that , under the procedure in force , the Group of the European Radical Alliance was involved neither with the work of the monitoring committee , nor with the drafting of the common proposal within that committee , so failing the most elementary rules of democracy .
This has prevented our voice being heard and prevented us affirming our position as we did in the temporary committee of enquiry into BSE .
The second and probably the most important reason is that the draft is a reflection of a soft and quite politically correct compromise , which is no honour to this House .
We are not opposed to the majority of points raised , but we cannot by our vote in favour lend our support to what has been passed over in silence .
Do you not think it is odd that in no place is there mention of the overwhelming responsibility of the United Kingdom in the management of the BSE crisis ? Or of the reticence of the Council and of certain Member States with regard to the adoption or at the very least compliance with the regulatory measures which are essential to the protection of public health ?
Or of the scandal of the fraudulent breaking of the embargo ? Or of the uncertain wherabouts stocks of potentially contaminated animal meal ?
Do you not think it is strange that the victims of the new form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and their families have not been indemnified , at a time when we clearly know who has prime responsibility for the crisis and its origin ? Do you not think it is quite illogical that the resolution fails to mention that the European Commission has not explored all means available to it to institute legal action for damage and interest against the United Kingdom ?
The third reason is that we profoundly regret that the Parliament has not pursued its ambitions to their full extent , and is unable today to go beyond the analysis contained in the Böge report and to draw the true political and institutional conclusions which must be drawn .
This was the time , now or never , for the European Parliament , as an independent political organization , with the ability to overcome national constraints and divisions , to impose its authority .
Even so , I would wish to remind the House that we are otherwise delighted at the actions and initiatives already undertaken by the European Commission in order to introduce a European Community food safety policy and we exhort it to continue that action .
We hope that the Council will support its efforts and that the Parliament will be truly associated with this drive .
In spite of a real charge sheet from the Committee of Inquiry on BSE some months ago against those with responsibility for the crisis - including the British government and the Commission - the majority of the European Parliament refused to censure the Commission , and gave it a few more months .
At the time , our group , which was in favour of the censure motion , saw in this decision of the Parliament a failure on its part , evidence of a lack of necessary political will to send a clear and strong signal to governments and to the Commission which had ' given priority to market management , at the expense of health . '
I recognize that the Temporary Committee monitoring the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry has given positive results .
The Commission has effectively taken a series of decisions in line with the recommendation of the Parliament .
I am delighted in particular that financial resources have been released for the families affected by Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .
But these improvements remain technical and do not go to the heart of the problem that the mad cow crisis contributed to revealing .
Here I am talking about the design itself of European construction , which sets greater store on profit and free competition , at the expense of public health and the interests of livestock breeders .
This is the essential reason why I am abstaining from the final resolution . Even if the resolution notes the responses of the Commission and the Commission 's shortfalls , it does not draw all the lessons of the mad cow crisis .
It in no way calls into question the orientations of the Commission relating to CAP reform .
As part of the same logic as that adopted in 1992 , the resolution may well lead to further intensification of farming , which may adversely affect the environment and product quality .
Measures of a totally different scope should be taken , both in terms of CAP reform and for the circulation of goods , which should take more into account both the environment and consumer health .
The temporary monitoring committee , which took over from the committee of enquiry , has just completed its work , and its conclusions are damning as far as the Commission is concerned .
The Commission for a long time had serious scientific information at its disposal which showed the high risks of transmissibility of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease to man .
The most recent scientific work has but confirmed this analysis , and the draft final resolution , presented by Mr Böge , naturally takes account of this .
The Commission needs to be kept under strict control , and this is the first lesson to be drawn from this sad business . In this field , our Parliament has a legitimate role to play .
It must do so with far more firmness , clearly setting down the priorities which must be enforced on all .
Should not concern for the public health of European citizens naturally prevail over the old ideological behind-the-scenes deals which have some of our colleagues to the most regrettable self-censorship ?
Should we turn a blind eye to the scale of the Commission 's responsibilities in the BSE dossier , on the excuse that we should not , in the name of a shared federalist ideology , diminish the credit of the ' objective ally ' that the Commission is thought to be ?
This surveillance of the Commission by the European Parliament appears all the more indispensable as the mad cow problem has revealed the very special malleability of European functionaries when faced with to pressures of a certain kind .
In order to dispel the merest hint of a hindrance to the extension of the single market , to the ratification of the Maastricht treaty , to the setting up a single currency , they have relegated to a secondary consideration , the priority concern which should have been the health of consumers .
To keep rigorous control over the Commission , we do not need , as is proposed in the compromise resolution - with which we do not agree with on this point - to extend codecision to agricultural expenditure .
This proposal is quite foreign to our debate . Adequate instruments of control already exist .
All we need is the courage to use them , at a time when the Commission 's responsibilities , as is the case here , have been clearly established .
We can but regret that 118 members only have supported this proposal , which was put forward in this Parliament last spring by Philippe de Villiers , in a call for a vote in favour of censuring the Commission , in the wake of the very serious failings which were brought to light by our Parliament 's commission of enquiry .
We must not therefore let up the pressure .
This is the reason why , in the person of our colleague , Édouard des Places , we have stated that we would be paying the greatest attention to monitoring this dossier and that we would hold the Commission responsible at the plenary session of November 1998 , by putting forward a new motion of censure , if it has not before then undertaken the indispensable reforms .
We are happy to note that the Green group , which did not support the censure motion last spring , now supports this proposal .
Vigilance in our control will be of benefit to all , and will once again enable our Parliament to act both legitimately and effectively in a field which is really part of its competency .
I am supporting these reports from Parliament 's special BSE enquiry committee as I think it has done excellent work on behalf of the people whose interests we are sent here to represent .
Thanks to parliamentary pressure , confidential documents can now be seen by MEPs , monitoring of food policy has been separated from other parts of the Commission , new laws to ensure better food quality controls are set to be proposed and we have the Commission 's support for a greater say by this elected House on agricultural legislation .
This last point is one of the most important to emerge from the tragic story of the BSE crisis .
Had there been more involvement and knowledge within this Parliament about agricultural policies in the past , we might by now have a less costly common agricultural policy as well as one which takes consumers ' interests at least as seriously as those of producers .
It is taxpayers ' money which funds EU agriculture to such excessive amounts - it is high time that their interests were taken properly into account .
For the amount of money they contribute , the least they can expect is safe food to eat .
Menrad report ( A4-0354 / 97 )
The report proposed by our colleague at the very least , reveals much cultural diversity in Europe .
The introduction of a minimum system for participation of workers is a difficult matter .
It is certainly regrettable that this text is short on ambition .
It is the result of two important cultural factors : language and relationships between managers and employees , both being the result of history .
Differences in the field of relationships are substantial .
This is not the place to draw up a list and to distribute good and bad marks to each of Member States , at least at this stage .
One thing does appear to me to be important : the acknowledgement by the European Parliament and by the European Union of the importance of negotiation , and of the need to lay the basis for workers to express themselves .
I do not have too many illusions : this discussion is heavily charged with ideology .
I am a socialist member of Parliament , and I believe that the participation of workers should enable the regulation and influence of the great free market which is being imposed upon us .
Once again , I shall repeat myself : the globalization of the economy should be done with and on behalf of citizens , who are also workers .
Gentlemen crusaders of ultraliberalism , giving more power to employees and their part in the process of production goes hand in hand with economic growth . As far as I am concerned , this is one of the conditions of such growth .
Ultraliberalism crushes democracy .
It manufacturers poverty , just as surely as it increases the wealth of some . This is the reason why I shall continue to fight for the dignity of the employee , of the citizen , against the totalitarianism of money , which wishes to bear down on all , and particularly on the weakest !
The European Parliamentary Labour Party expressed its opposition to elements of the Menrad report on the Davignon Conclusions concerning European systems of worker involvement .
We find the mechanism which calls for compulsory reference rules an unacceptable element of this otherwise voluntary approach to a European company statute .
In this respect we have voted against paragraph 9 ( original text ) and Amendment No 4 ( a ) ( new ) which introduces punitive measures .
Hernandez Mollar ( A4-0353 / 97 )
We have objections to three paragraphs in the report .
In paragraph 10 the Member States in general are called upon to reduce the total tax burden for individuals by transferring taxation from work in the direction of consumption in areas like the environment and energy .
This is a far too general and ill-considered demand , which we cannot support .
In addition , paragraph 23 makes general demands for increased flexibility in the market for goods and services and in the labour market .
It claims that without this flexibility the current levels of social protection will not be able to be maintained .
To support such an abstract demand willy-nilly is impossible .
Paragraph 24 emphasizes the importance of monetary union for employment .
However , the opposite is the case . EMU is going to mean a tough blow for regions affected by decline , and is going to force citizens to be more mobile to find work .
Unemployment and social exclusion are two of the greatest problems confronting the Member States of the European Union They are problems which urgently need to be solved . If they are not , one of the main pillars of the construction of the New Europe , economic and social cohesion and solidarity between Member States will be placed in jeopardy .
The recent inclusion of a section on employment in the Treaty of Amsterdam represents an important basis for the construction of a coordinated strategy between Member States to achieve a high level of employment .
But in addition to writing it into the treaty , we must therefore define specific quantifiable objectives with practical applications at European , national and regional level , and governments must prove that they are committed to achieving those objectives , as they have been doing in relation to the convergence criteria .
Among the various suggestions made by Mr Hernández Molar , I was pleased to note the proposal for territorial employment pacts , his call to the Commission to give priority to projects in the peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions designed to create lasting jobs , involving the various social partners in a partnership scheme .
The Autonomous Regions of Madeira and the Azores are privileged regions for the promotion of local employment initiatives , particularly in the fields of tourism , the environment , crafts and atypical work .
The feasibility of these projects will depend on the financial support of the structural funds .
It is to be hoped that initiative and innovation will be in evidence .
On the eve of the Luxembourg Summit on employment , the report from Mr Fernandez Mollar broadly satisfies me .
I completely agree with him when he emphasizes that growth is a necessary , but no longer sufficient , condition for job creation in Europe .
Growth must be accompanied by structural measures which will create more flexibility in the labour market .
Success by our enterprises will also depend on the increased coordination of budget policies , but also on fiscal policy at the European level , whose purpose is so far as possible to prevent distortions in competition arising from discriminatory fiscal measures .
I subscribe to the need to move from passive to active measures in the labour market , to promote the spirit of initiative and to fight against loss of worker motivation , which is also an explanation for our high rates of unemployment .
On the other hand , I would like to temper the words of the rapporteur on two points :
I am favourable to a reduction on the tax burden on labour ; but for this measure to be effective , it should not translate into a transfer of taxation to other taxes such as indirect taxes , and in this respect public and social expenditure in general should be reduced , in order not to increase the budget deficit ; -As regards the targets for jobs , it seems to me to be difficult to make a parallel between the criteria for economic convergence and criteria for jobs .
Job creation cannot be quantified in the same way as the reduction of budget deficits .
On the other hand , these data can be considered as benchmark indicators , so making for easier statistical comparison in Europe.Apart from these two points , I shall approve the report of Mr Hernandez Mollar .
For us the report is a disappointment .
It is of course good that we are studying how to create new jobs in the EU countries , but unfortunately there is no mention of the fact that we must also try to prevent the disappearance of jobs , particularly in the public sector .
Unfortunately , the EU 's policy , through the goal of economic and monetary union , means that many jobs are being cut in the public sector where many women work .
The report entirely lacks an analysis in this area .
We cannot agree with paragraphs 3 , 4 and 24 , which concern the necessity to coordinate economic policy at the EU level .
We do not believe this is a way to create more jobs , mainly because , among other things , the industrial structures in the EU countries look very different .
Of course there are also parts of the report which are positive , including the request to study unemployment among the young and to put forward proposals which the Member States can use to do something about youth unemployment .
It is also important to have a switch in taxes so that tax on work is reduced while tax on energy and raw materials is increased , which is a policy the Green Parties are pursuing in the Member States .
A reduction in working hours is also a good way to reduce unemployment .
I am abstaining on the report by Mr Hernandez Mollar , as it does not deal with macro-economic orientations , which are of determining importance for employment .
The convergence criteria , which are absolute and sustainable constraints since the adoption of the stability pact , have deprived Europe of the economic recovery which is essential if mass unemployment is to be reduced .
Employment is the inevitable result of choices which are above all financial and monetarist in nature .
The dangerous and recent decision to increase interest rates , taken by the central banks , bears this out , alas !
The report does not go sufficiently onto the offensive with regard to the urgency of a European growth policy , growth through recovery of investment , by providing substantial European funding to launch a programme for major works , as proposed by the Commission in 1993 , and still not implemented , growth by supporting recovery in consumption , the Achilles heel of our countries , by revising our tax system and by supporting wages policies .
Nothing will be possible without redistributing the wealth of capital towards labour , without European taxation of capital movements , without reducing VAT on essential products , in certain job-creating sectors or in sectors with a future .
Finally , the report does not sufficiently or vigorously affirm our determination to stop the current social deregulation .
Europe requires real social convergence , such as the European principle of a guaranteed minimum wage , fixing the legal working hours at 35 for the year 2000 , reduction in maximum working time , etc .
The recent lorry drivers ' conflict in France highlights the risk of social dumping , of an open market , without commonly accepted social and labour relations standards .
If the Luxembourg Summit does not take decisions and put them immediately into force in favour of employment , for a minimum regulatory framework , and for a pact for economic recovery , Europe will not accept an automatic move to the euro .
For monetary union without a reinforced political Europe , without social Europe becoming a reality , means that we labour under a major risk for the future : we shall have a diluted Europe , which is powerless when faced with unemployment , and far from the aspirations of the people .
Izquierdo Collado ( A4-0324 / 97 )
Mr President , I voted against maintaining a cohesion fund in this report because I believe that - should we have monetary union by 1.1.1999 - you can no longer justify subsidizing countries that are not involved in monetary union .
I think it is particularly important in regard to the vital EU enlargement eastwards that we save money here which we urgently need for enlargement in the East , and these ECU 3 billion annually can be very usefully employed for this .
Moreover , I consider it a disadvantage for the future new Member States from central and eastern Europe if we continue to subsidize countries not involved in monetary union while at the same time the new Member States fail to enjoy this cohesion fund .
That is why I have voted against this amendment to maintain a cohesion fund in contrast to the majority of my group .
Mr President , the report presented by Mr Izquierdo Collado formulates proposals whose intent is to improve the way Community policy in favour of greater social and economic cohesion currently operates .
Of course this report rightly emphasizes the need to preserve the principle of additionality , and to concentrate Community initiatives which have to date been too scattered , to pay attention to the increasing number of people who are in situations of economic precariousness and exclusion , and work for better respect of the environment , and reinforced support to small and medium-sized companies .
The report finally touches on the theme of misappropriation of subsidies .
However , our agreement on these points should not make us forget that we refuse the rampant federalism which is characteristic of this report .
The group of independents for Europe of the nations cannot concur with the act of faith recited by Mr Izquierdo Collado at the foot of the altar of monetary union , affirming that monetary union will be beneficial for the whole of Europe , provided it is associated with close economic coordination between the Member States .
Yes , we refuse any unacceptable slide towards a single European government , as is currently being prepared for under the economic approach .
And we similarly reject any propaganda in that direction .
Furthermore , the present report demonstrates as clearly as could be wished a concern to encourage cooperation with regional and local authorities in order to cut the ground from under the feet of the nations .
The only real interlocutors of European institutions in our view must remain the Member States , whose wishes are the fountainhead of the legitimacy of those institutions .
On the other hand , the financial proposals in the report leave the disagreeable impression that the intention is to give everyone a little bit of something to keep them happy , hence a glaring contradiction with the declared determination of fighting against piecemeal interventions .
No more funding for the cities .
No more funding for the information society , no more funding for research .
No more funding for the cohesion funds , etc .
Now we understand why the budgetary framework of Agenda 2000 was not bold enough in the eyes of the report .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations believes that common policies and structural policies should be kept separate , and would appreciate the Community concentrating its financial effort on common policies for cohesion , such as the CAP , and the PCP .
The Community should for example avoid scattered efforts in the labyrinth of urban deprivation , where it will inevitably be no more than window dressing .
In the immediate , you will understand why , for all these reasons , our group cannot vote otherwise than against this report .
Mr President , I would like to explain why I voted as I did on paragraph 51 , Amendment No 16 , referring to the policy to be adopted for the islands of the Aegean .
I voted against the amendment that was submitted by Mr Ephremidis since the subject of the policy on behalf of the islands , about which we naturally agree and which is included in the Amsterdam Treaty , is mentioned at another point in Mr Collado 's report .
In no way does my vote mean that I do not agree with the implementation of an integrated policy on the part of the European Union , with the aim of giving equal opportunities for development to all the islands of the European Union including , of course , the islands of the Aegean , which are sorely in need of special support to enable them to participate on equal terms in the European Union .
The report is very full .
It makes a number of very good demands , but unfortunately it also contains a number of statements whose points of view we do not share .
Above all we do not believe at all that the common currency is going to have beneficial effects on all regions in the EU .
What paragraph E of the draft report points out is important , i.e. that even though the differences between the Member States have been reduced , the differences in income between the regions has remained practically unchanged , while at the same time the differences in levels of unemployment have increased .
With this result there is reason to wonder what the point of all the work on cohesion policy is .
Nor do we believe , as paragraph 14 of the report states , that a liberalization of the transport and telecommunications sectors will automatically bring advantages for consumers and companies .
Deregulation has often proven to lead to the weakest members of society being hit the hardest .
Nor do we agree with paragraph 30 of the report on repudiating all attempts at renationalization of structural policy .
On the contrary , we believe that a lot of regional policy could be simplified if this part was returned to the Member States .
However , the most important question for us concerns the future of the objective 6 area .
It is regrettable that the report did not touch on this topic .
We shall never renounce the demand that the current support for the objective 6 area for arctic and subarctic regions should be maintained at the current level and that the criteria for these regions should remain unchanged .
We also ask to be allowed to point out that big promises were made to the Norrland region of Sweden in connection with the referendum .
These promises must be kept .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for a good job on the report .
With this explanation of vote we would like to stress the importance of maintaining aid in the area currently covered by objective 6 aid even after a change in the structural funds .
We would also like to stress the need for a thorough overhaul of the aid currently given to the agriculture and fisheries sectors .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , economic and social cohesion by definition translates into a desire for solidarity going out from the richer countries to the poorer countries .
However , the excellent report of our colleague discloses shortfalls in this field , serious shortfalls in the perspective of Agenda 2000 .
While , in ten years , revenue disparities between the Member States have certainly been reduced , regional disparities have remained virtually unchanged .
Worse still , unemployment has risen from 17 % to 22 % in the poorest regions !
What can be deduced from this ?
All the evidence shows poor coordination in many Community policies .
Such coordination is essential if we want successfully to take up the gauntlet of enlargement .
The Agenda 2000 shows some ways ahead , which must be the subject of reflection with the relevant actors .
Do not let anybody say that we have to reduce the number of structural objectives , that would only result in excluding the eligible regions who need them .
Disparities would become still greater .
At attentive and meticulous examination of what is being undertaken in these regions , with economic actors and politicians - I emphasize that - is essential , so that we can find solutions together .
In recent years , the objective of economic and social cohesion has been pursued with good planning and a certain political will , favouring a continuous development of the European regions .
Despite that , the regional disparities within the EU and the individual States have deepened .
The distance between the richest and smallest regions has grown by around 7 % .
An examination of the official documents shows an inconsistency and a lack of coordination of many Community policies with regard to the objective to strengthen cohesion .
We need to ensure greater consistency between the regional policies and the other EU policies because , even if considerable financial incentives are handed out in the scope of the structural funds , we have come to a dead end : that is not to say that quantity leads to quality .
The success of the economic and social cohesion policy should be examined not only in the light of the infrastructures constructed , but also in the light of the economic convergences , the development of human resources and productivity , and the employment statistics .
And in recent times there has been a constant loss of ground in the battle against unemployment .
It should be recalled that the policy of cohesion , aimed at favouring the adaptation of the structurally weak regions , will supplement the single market by offsetting the negative effects produced by the rules of an open market and seeking to reduce the differences in income between the states .
Moreover , when the new countries become full members of the EU , there will be an even greater difference in development within it than at present , which is already considerable , jeopardizing economic and social cohesion .
For that reason , there should be closer cooperation between MEPs , governments , European Commissioners and representatives of local authorities , with greater involvement of the regions and local partners , so as to considerably increase the efficacy of the policy of economic and social cohesion .
Without a concerted action , the EU 's ambitions for the twenty-first century will be frustrated and it will inexorably head for fragmentation .
Beating the challenge of cohesion means enabling a new concept of solidarity and intra-Community unity to triumph , thanks to which the EU will not sink to the ranks of a vast free trade area .
I share the fundamental preoccupations of our colleague .
The report is frank and well-constructed in its content .
In a word , this is good work .
I fully agree with the concern to harmonize levels of technology in the various regions .
I hope that this aspect will be supported by the European Parliament and by the Commission .
The general philosophy of the report is good : it is necessary to reaffirm the vocation of the European Union for structural adjustment of the regions and the Member States .
Union enlargement , if it is to be beneficial , must take into account these priorities .
For this reason , we must maintain and reinforce the cohesion funds .
If we concentrate over-much on the internal market as part of the global market , we shall lose the political dimension of European construction , which was so dear to the heart of the founding fathers .
This report requests that more allowance be made for local authorities when meeting defined objectives .
I approve of that orientation , as this partnership would promote a better matching of proposed actions to the reality of the lives of local actors .
This would guarantee better visibility with regard to the commitment from the European Union to the regions who have vital requirements .
The image of the Union would be reinforced and enhanced .
The European Union , if it is to be strong when facing the new challenges , must be united and coherent .
If some regions are left to fall behind , there is a risk of fragmentation , which would be detrimental to the future .
We should not lose sight of this idea , and of the necessity of this point of view , when we come to the study of the reform of the structural funds .
I wish to explain my vote on the report by Mr Izquierdo Collado , as it relates to a subject which in my view is essential for the future of the Union , and that is economic and social cohesion .
The first three-yearly report on economic and social cohesion threw light on the persistence of considerable disparities between the fifteen countries of the European Union , this being so in spite of the acknowledged efficiency of the structural policies undertaken for a number of years .
The report also emphasized the lack of coordination which may exist between the various Community policies with regard to the objective of cohesion .
Mr Izquierdo Collado is not content with analyzing these conclusions , but goes further , by placing the future reform of the structural funds within the perspective of the two major challenges of years to come , the enlargement of the Union and the single currency , and on this basis developing a number of recommendations for the future of cohesion .
I supported the Izquierdo Collado report , as I am , like him , convinced that economic and social cohesion must remain one of the priorities of the European Union , and that substantial resources must be employed to that end .
Account must be taken of this when establishing the financial prospects of the Union , and defining other Community policies .
Indeed , while specific policies are carried out in the name of social and economic cohesion , it is also necessary to develop synergies with the other Community policies - whether these are policies in the field of research and development , transportation , communications or competition , or contribute to meeting the objective of cohesion fixed by the text of the Union treaty .
Furthermore , while structural policies remain , of course , a privileged instrument of cohesion , their forthcoming reform naturally raises a number of expectations among all actors in the Union .
Mr Izquierdo Collado is in his report setting out a number of priorities , which I subscribe to overall .
But I would simply add that I believe it is necessary for the European Commission to inform us as soon as possible of its detailed and precise proposals in this field , both as regards the definition of new objectives , and the phasing out , or the development of partnership , so that we can give all the care and attention that they deserve to the examination of these questions , and not act over-precipitately .
In the vote on Amendment No 16 of the Confederal Group of the European United Left I abstained , though not because I believe that the islands of the Aegean should not get support . Quite the contrary .
However , I believe that this particular paragraph concerns clause 227 , paragraph 2 of the Amsterdam Treaty , which does not mention the islands of the Aegean .
Therefore whatever position Parliament were to take on this point would be meaningless .
Furthermore , there is a special reference to the islands of the Aegean in paragraph 52 , where the Commission calls for immediate measures to be taken on behalf of their inhabitants .
Neither the declarations of good intentions which were shown in this report , nor calls for social cohesion , can hide the terrible social reality .
While it clearly appears that there are continuing disparities between regions , there is something which is more serious still , which is the general state of social , economic and demographic disintegration of most of the countries of the Union , and to begin with in France .
The economic policy of savage competition and of the opening of our markets enforced upon us by the Commission , the unceasing flow of immigration from outside Europe and the exorbitant social security charges which weigh down on labour are plunging our country into a crisis of employment and into an enormous social crisis .
Unemployment , insecurity , immigration , tax , drugs , loss of identity , ageing of the population : this reality is not social cohesion , but generalized social disintegration .
You propose continuing down the same track , bolstering up the same policy , ever more generously financing the same actions .
But the Commission has gone down the wrong road .
We need another policy and another Europe , in order to set up Community preference , in order to protect our markets from social dumping and from immigrationcolonization , and to re-establish security in our cities , free tax payers from tax slavery , and guarantee a true family policy .
Your Europe is one of failure and crisis . We want nothing to do with it .
In spite of investment in economic and social cohesion through the structural funds , the cohesion fund , the social fund etc . , the injustices largely remain in Europe between the poor and the rich , between those who do and those who do not have work , and between the strong and the weak regions .
The Commission 's suggestion that the problems are going to be solved through the introduction of EMU and through further efforts on the route already taken does not inspire confidence .
Nor does the report , which largely recommends the same solutions .
A reduction in the number of objective areas in the structural funds is justified , but under no circumstances should it be at the cost of the aid itself as such .
The proposal to incorporate the objective 6 area into the objective 1 area must not be allowed to lead to reduced regional aid for Sweden .
It is good that the structural funds are being used more extensively to increase employment .
To merge objective 3 and objective 4 in order to concentrate solely on re-education and training appears panicky .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

On a point of order .
Mr President , I would like to bring to the House 's attention an incident that happened at lunchtime today .
During the voting at lunchtime , one of the Members of this House claimed that during the translation of certain amendments one of the amendments had been incorrectly translated into English from the original version in French .
He claimed that the text should have read ' English meat ' instead of ' British meat ' .
Can I point out to this House that I have a copy of the original amendment , signed by that Member , which quite clearly states ' la viande britannique ' , which quite clearly points to British meat .
That Member was misleading this House and I wish the record to be corrected .
Treaty of Amsterdam ( continuation )

The next item is the continuation of the debate of the report ( A4-0347 / 98 ) by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , I really would like to admit to our two rapporteurs that the Treaty of Amsterdam has brought benefits and developments in its wake .
However , historically , we must concede that the governments and leaders of the Member States have failed in the historic dimension insofar as they have not managed to give the European Union of the Fifteen greater decision-making powers , nor have they succeeded in making it capable of enlargement .
That is the historic failure of the governments , not Europe , but the governments .
What we are now faced with , and what I really fear , is a very difficult dilemma , that on the one hand the political situation could develop in such a way that the institutions will not get to be reformed and that , on the other , enlargement will be postponed , or even declared to be impossible , in view of the lack of institutional reform .
This dilemma is the legacy of Amsterdam .
We should admit this quite openly .
The following course seems advisable to me . The most important point is that we do not let the political discussion about institutional reform peter out .
The European Parliament needs to ensure , together with the national parliaments , that political pressure is maintained in the direction of institutional reform .
If we cannot manage that , then the thing I really fear will be upon us , with the result that neither enlargement nor a consolidation of the European Union will happen .
The reason for us getting into these difficulties still lies in the fact that in reality there is no consensus about the aim of European integration .
That is the original cause of our difficulties .
We need to show commitment to bolster support for the political union publicly , in our own countries , because this is not just a central responsibility , but also the crucial point , if we want to move forward with European integration .
Mr President , like the majority of my group , I am going to vote no to the report in question and advise the Member States against ratifying the Amsterdam Treaty .
The treaty means that even more powers will be transferred from the elected representatives in the national parliaments to the EU 's institutions ; institutions which are under much weaker democratic control .
There is no area where decision-making is being transferred closer to the citizens of the Member States .
Major changes are taking place in the Union of today compared with the Union which Sweden joined almost three years ago .
The border controls which it was then said would remain are now going to be banned , the right of veto which we were to have in the area of foreign policy is now to be severely limited , new steps are being taken towards a common defence which it was said would not become a reality , supranationality is increasing and the influence of small states is being reduced , while the European Parliament is being given increased power .
This negative development is not outweighed by the limited advances also being made in the treaty in areas such as employment and openness .
I would like in particular to point out two paragraphs in the report which I cannot accept .
There is a demand that the European Parliament should have a right of assent in future treaty changes .
That would be a crucial change which would change the nature of the Union in the direction of a state .
If the Member States are no longer able to decide the development of the treaty themselves , they will also have lost control over the direction in which the Union is going .
The second area is that the report demands new large institutional changes as an absolute condition for a future enlargement of the EU .
In this way enlargement is being taken ' hostage ' , but there is nothing to say that an enlargement would be more successful if the dominance of the large states in the EU were increased further by giving them more votes on the Council of Ministers .
Nor is there any connection between supranationality and efficiency within the EU .
Perhaps the clearest example of this is the fact that the EU 's agricultural policy , which has been supranational for almost the longest time of all policy areas , is one of the most inefficient by far .
Mr President , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos have done a lot of work on this report , which we are grateful for .
I am , however , surprised by the turn which the reading of the Amsterdam Treaty has taken .
From seeing the treaty as a great disappointment and directing massive criticism against it , it now appears that a majority are prepared to vote for the treaty , even though it has not been changed .
We were agreed and the criticism was massive precisely because of the lack of openness and public insight as well as the ' concerns ' about supranationality , intergovernmentalism and protocols etc. in the third pillar which make it completely incomprehensible , and mean that it could in fact lead to legal uncertainty .
At the beginning of the debate Mr Méndez de Vigo addressed the ' good Europeans ' and not those who were thinking of voting no , i.e. not to those of us who do not want any federalism .
I would recommend him to go round the various Member States among the people of Europe .
Of course they want to have cooperation , but they do not want to be subjected to the centralized and bureaucratic acquis communautaire .
The citizens have very little sympathy for these superpower dreams and there is very little desire for EU federalism .
The really good Europeans represent a popularly-based and democratically legitimate Europe .
We want cooperation to apply to the whole of Europe , without reservations , so that we can create a stable peace and democracy .
We are going to vote no and want referendums in the Member States .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work , although I normally refrain from doing so in principle because of the time .
Although we will not be approving the report , the work involved really does need to be highlighted .
In presenting its arguments , the report objectively shows up the merits and deficiencies in the text of the treaty in a way that could have just as easily borne the famous ' no , although ' as the ' yes , but ' opted for by the rapporteur for political reasons after controversial debate .
For us independents , alongside the For and Against , the lack of progress in the institutional sphere heard today , reflecting in our view the situation in the Union , there is also the casting vote of ' no , although ' .
That is largely because we see this as signalling that the intergovernmental conference has reached its limits , because the citizens of Europe are not prepared under the given circumstances to surrender sovereignty further and because we believe that this phenomenon should be taken seriously .
Mr President , this assessment is more general .
The Amsterdam Treaty could be regarded as the agreement of the many little steps , most of which must be described as positive .
However , the radical reforms that our times demand were absent .
The European Union has not been institutionally strengthened even on the eve of a new cycle of enlargements , which must not be put off till doomsday .
A joint foreign policy remained one of the demands and defence policy remained in the hands of a NATO which is not exclusively European and in which Europe does not play the leading role .
Great aspirations met with rejection and with the scepticism of those who still aim at seeing Europe gradually being transformed into a broader free trade area .
The shadow cast by the transition into the third phase of economic and monetary union and the euro did not permit new leaps forward .
Most European governments did not feel strong enough to move forward , even in the institutional sector , in a Europe that continues to be plagued by unemployment and that has not yet stabilized its economic recovery .
On this view , the Amsterdam Treaty may be regarded as an interim agreement .
The weaknesses that have been pointed out must not lead us , however , to feel disappointed and to condemn the treaty , nor to underestimate its advantages .
The steps that have been taken may well have been limited , but they were many and in the right direction . They also contributed to transparency , to a more social and a more community-oriented Europe , which is making a greater effort to move closer to its citizens and to simplify its decision-making procedures , to a more democratic Europe with a stronger role for the European Parliament and with the balance between large and small States essentially unchanged .
The analysis of the details of the treaty , which Mr Méndez de Vigo and Professor Tsatsos achieved with such great success and after a great deal of intense effort , leaves the final conclusion in no doubt .
In spite of its weaknesses , Mr President , the treaty is worthy of ratification , and the representatives of the governments of the fifteen Member States , during their meeting with our committee , although driven by different motivations , came to the same findings .
The crucial question now is what the next step is going to be .
The intergovernmental system for the revision of Treaties has reached its limits and the rapporteurs suggest a different approach , with a Commission proposal and political dialogue with national parliaments .
Mr President , it has already become urgent for us to move forward to political dialogue without delay , because it would be dangerous to complete further enlargements without in-depth examination of the issues . And it would be a mistake to risk this in-depth examination without respect for equality between large and small countries .
Balances need to be maintained , because they are established by the general interest and by the very philosophy of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every time we have discussed Europe here in the European Parliament or elsewhere , we have been concerned to know where we are going and , above all , where we want to go .
We will make no exception to that rule today .
At a time when the future of the European Union is being redefined , we sincerely believe that it is by reverting to major political causes that its leadership will be affirmed .
The fundamental principles of humanism , with its inherent prosperity and quality of life , the unyielding defence of democracy and transparency in our institutions and participation by all the citizens of the various Member States in the building of Europe are the great values which will enable us to strengthen and , furthermore , to keep fresh in our memory the original foundations of the European Union .
We should be reminding ourselves that strengthening political cooperation is , therefore , an imperative which we cannot allow to be overlooked , and affirming that its grounds of justification are based on unyielding respect for the diversity of the different nations of which the Union is composed . This , then , is an aim with which we must identify ourselves .
Political cooperation between Member States must be strengthened through the effective participation of all citizens .
Everyone says so , and they are right .
What is not said by so many people is that Europe must not be imposed , but rather consented to , loved and desired .
This fits in with the Méndez de Vigo-Tsatsos report on the Treaty of Amsterdam - and I take this opportunity of warmly congratulating its authors on its technical quality and its creativity - a report which , while more reasonable than so many others , does not give answers to the fundamental questions with which we are concerned .
It contains positive aspects , such as for example the acknowledgment that the European Union is a union of states which , therefore , are equal with one another , although the necessary institutional consequences are not drawn here .
The fact is that while institutional reform is recommended before the time-limit for the formal adhesion of the 16th country to join the European Union , it omits , or perhaps it does not omit , to make a statement on a matter which really is essential for us .
What institutional reform , at the end of the day ?
Furthermore , the report defends the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
While it is debatable whether the report can recommend this to Member States from the institutional point of view , it is politically entitled to do so .
In my opinion this report fails to raise the question of representative power in Europe .
And that is a question worth raising , and I shall always be willing to raise it .
Mr President , like my Liberal colleagues I am in favour of the outcome of negotiations in Amsterdam because it contains a number of small improvements with regard to the principle of subsidiarity , the environment and simplified , democratic decision-making procedures .
But the most important thing that history will remember us for is not the treaty , but what it paves the way for .
The enlargement with the new democracies in the East is our generation 's historic opportunity to secure peace , democracy and prosperity for future generations in Europe .
That is what the whole purpose of the European cooperation was .
It is far more important than the question of to what extent the treaty could have been better on certain points .
I agree that with 20 or 25 Member States we should change to majority decision-making in several areas so that the Union can carry out its core tasks effectively .
But I do not agree with the rapporteurs and the Committee on Institutional Affairs when they threaten to say no to any enlargement if we do not have more majority decision-making .
Imagine that we have 5 countries ready for membership in the year 2002 .
Would this Parliament say no to them and take them hostage because we are unhappy with the Council ?
Do we really want to take the new , young democracies hostage over this dispute with the Council ?
I would like to ask the representative of the Council what you think of paragraphs 15 and 16 of the report by Mr Tsatsos and Mr Méndez de Vigo . And I would like to ask the representative of the Council to repeat what your Prime Minister , Mr Juncker , said .
He has clearly distanced himself from the statement by France , Belgium and Italy .
These three countries of course have the right to have their opinion and to promote it , but , and this is the crux of the matter , if Parliament goes in and stops the enlargement , and if the twelve countries do not fall in line with the three countries , history will condemn this Parliament .
It is a simple lack of historical perspective , a lack of a sense of proportion .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , vote against the last part of paragraph 15 and against a some words in the introduction to paragraph 16 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteur for this excellent report .
I would ask support for the motion for the amendment which was approved in the report .
In it a parallel is drawn between the vitally important issue of alliance for new Member States and non-alliance , actually for the first time , in this type of document .
The committee voted against the amendment but , through my initiative , we got it in the part-session as revision 18 of the whole Socialist Group .
Parliament 's position as a legislator has strengthened the base for the joint decision process .
The Union is becoming more democratic , I am glad to say .
So-called globalization has , however , meant a change in direction .
The state withdraws , and keeps an eye out .
Supranational market forces means we must keep a sense of balance .
Why are decisions on these issues not forthcoming ?
National opportunities for influence and information-gathering must be extended , since the broader foothold the Union has , the more open it must be too .
The working party reforms gained at Amsterdam will not , however , provide nourishment for expansion .
That is why we need a new study , or else we will choke to death .
A ship that gets wider , but not deeper , can hardly keep up straight .
What is important is the expansion of a region of peace and stability .
The change of emphasis in the Council 's votes , as planned in the Amsterdam Treaty must be made very cautiously and always respecting the say of smaller Member States .
In changing the number of members in Parliament we must also remember that the small states , too , need parliamentary representation , as the most important principle of the Union is solidarity .
Uniform status for Parliament members was not achieved at Amsterdam .
I have recommended to the part-session of Parliament that all representatives receive the same pay and that only bona fide travel expenses be paid .
Mr President , I too appreciate the work of Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos .
You cannot fail to approve their report and the treaty : every small step forward , however small , is always progress and deserves appreciation .
Moreover , as the European Parliament , we have to direct the examination of the national parliaments , because it would be very serious if the national parliaments failed to approve the treaty at the confirmation stage .
We still have to favour the process of accepting the prospect of greater integration of those countries that are already members of the European Union that have not yet joined the monetary union , and we also have to offer those countries applying to join the European Union the image of a truly effective unity of intentions of the entire Union .
I approve the treaty for those reasons , but we cannot hide our disappointment at the inadequate changes at institutional level .
It is not a romantic disappointment , caused by an abstract and idealist European culture ; it is a political and therefore a concrete and realistic disappointment , not so much because the European Parliament had hoped that the intergovernmental Conference would approve the institutional changes relating to operation , prerogatives , composition of the Council and the Commission , and the Parliament itself , which were largely unanswered , but also because we know that , without these institutional reforms , the European Union risks a real process of regression and even collapse .
What was not done in Amsterdam should be done as soon as possible .
What was not done in Amsterdam for political reasons , which we can readily guess , should be done first , before any concrete expansion ; what was not done can be justified by being impossible technically , time-wise and politically in Amsterdam , but can never become a mental reservation for not achieving expansion or , on the contrary , for using expansion to make the powers of the political union less effective and empty .
But it is not only a question of expansion : monetary union itself invokes a rapid institutional reform , the institutionalization of a political government for the Union that is just that .
Monetary union implies the absorption into the Community of decidedly consistent shares of national sovereignty that cannot be handled with efficiency , fairness , transparency and participation : and this we cannot pretend to ignore .
As the European Parliament , we should state clearly that expansion and the birth of monetary union and the objective of a greater integration of the European Union seek the completion of the institutional reform that only began in Amsterdam .
Mr President , enlargement is now the EU 's most important task and no obstacles must be put in its way by making absolute demands for reforms before an enlargement .
Doing that would create uncertainty about Europe 's development with a high risk of civil war .
Therefore there are parts of paragraphs 15 and 16 for which I cannot vote .
On the other hand , I am pleased about paragraph 20 about a continued and strengthened cooperation with the national parliaments , and I would like to urge the Committee on Institutional Affairs to go further with this with regard to creating a vision of the future cooperation in Europe .
The Amsterdam Treaty is not perfect , because we human beings are not perfect .
Nor do we agree on all the answers to the questions of life and of everyday living .
We have different traditions , cultures , living conditions and problems , so the Amsterdam Treaty is a compromise .
It is incomplete , but it is a good basis for peace in Europe .
I am therefore voting yes to the Committee 's report , which is a signal that a yes to ratification is the most important thing .
Mr President , the Amsterdam Treaty clearly falls short of the aspirations of this Parliament , as has been pointed out by many speakers in this debate .
But the choice facing us today is not between the Amsterdam Treaty and an ideal treaty that we would have wanted .
It is the choice between the Amsterdam Treaty and the existing treaties as they are now .
If you make that comparison , the Amsterdam Treaty includes a dozen or more significant steps forward , even if it falls short on one major point which is preparing for a wider Union .
I will not go through all the improvements .
They have been alluded to already .
I will just mention some key ones : the social protocol , the new possibilities opened by the employment chapter ; the improved provisions on public health , consumer protection and environmental policy ; the integration of part of the third pillar into the first pillar ; the better protection of human rights and the procedure that is introduced , for the first time , to deal with any Member State that ceases to be democratic , should that ever happen ; the better provisions on transparency ; and above all , the extension of the powers of this Parliament , both in scope of the codecision procedure and in the procedural changes , which are precisely the ones we wanted .
It is interesting to note that none of these changes would have taken place - not a single one of them - without the change of government in the United Kingdom on 1 May .
It is also interesting to note that many of them , especially those concerning Parliament , were certainly facilitated by the work of Mrs Guigou and Mr Brok , representing us in the Intergovernmental Conference .
That being said , the new treaty fails to provide for the functioning of an enlarged Union .
The European Council itself acknowledged that in the protocol that it attached to the treaty .
This provides and needs further institutional reform .
I believe that this reform must include , above all , the question of extending qualified majority decision-taking instead of unanimity .
Unlike Mr Haarder , I do not think this need for reform means that enlargement will be held up - far from it .
There is time to agree those reforms and to ratify them together with the enlargement as a single package , perhaps even in the same treaty in due course , which would make ratification easier in certain countries and would of course also require the assent of the European Parliament , because we give assent to accessions .
There is time to do it .
It must be done .
We must put the two processes together and make sure that enlargement takes place with the necessary institutional changes .
Mr President , in light of the speeches that have been made in this debate , I think that it is legitimate to ask whether we are talking about the same treaty .
Indeed , for some Members , the Amsterdam Treaty is a resounding failure , but for others it represents the triumph of pragmatism over idealism .
And , in my view , that is the most significant thing about this draft treaty : its ambivalence .
Those who have accorded maximum priority to the institutional pillar have condemned its inadequacies - and I agree with them .
Those who have emphasized the economic aspects have welcomed the fact that the draft treaty gives a boost to economic and monetary union and introduces a large number of innovative elements - and I agree with them too .
I believe that the rapporteurs have managed to overcome this difficulty , with intellectual rigour , and without extolling the draft treaty 's virtues or concealing its defects .
Whilst this considered approach is important , the most significant thing is that this report is set within three complementary perspectives :
Firstly , the perspective of the past , since the Amsterdam Treaty already belongs in the past .
However , the report does not restrict itself simply to stating the facts , since what the draft treaty represents can only be understood as a function of the historical process whose roots lie in the origins of the European project .
Secondly , the perspective of the present , since history is not made only by counting past successes . On the contrary , we must also recognize our new point of departure .
And thirdly , and most importantly , the perspective of the future , since if we do not know where we are going , we will recognize neither our new point of departure nor the road itself - to which Mr Méndez de Vigo referred this morning .
The rapporteurs firmly understood - and , in my view , have clearly expressed in the explanatory statement - what the European Union has been , what it is , what it can be in the light of the possibilities offered by the draft treaty , and , above all , what it should be .
To this end , there is an unavoidable need to change the method .
And , in my view , this is the essential contribution that this report makes : it looks to the future .
This report is therefore set in the perspective that we are still in time . But in time for what ?
In time for ensuring that the wrongs which we condemn do not occur ?
No .
We are in time to ensure that they cease being wrongs .
And , in this regard , there are two possible approaches : continuing to argue about how many angels will fit on the head of a pin - whether the Amsterdam Treaty is good or bad , that is - which will change absolutely nothing ; or ratifying and implementing this treaty , and working to change and improve a situation with which we are not satisfied .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , congratulations to the rapporteurs , Méndez de Vigo and Tsatsos .
The quality of their work strengthens the credibility of the European Parliament in its exercise of its share of Community powers .
It is true that we expected a Maastricht II from Amsterdam and only got a Maastricht I and a half . Yet Amsterdam should be compared with Maastricht , and not with some ideal model , as my colleague , Mr Corbett , was saying here just now .
The construction of Europe consists of a series of efforts , not a gift from heaven .
In any event , it would be an illusion to think that history is made by laws .
In the best scenario law is an accessory to history , in the worst , a reflection of it .
Now , if we are not mistaken , Agenda 2000 is no longer than Amsterdam .
And the extension of the first enlargement to include five countries is measured by the same standard .
Amsterdam , therefore , is moving at the speed of history itself .
Obviously , institutional reform held no great attraction .
But what we have done here is a step in the right direction ; a strengthening of the codecision procedure of the European Parliament and the democratic legitimacy of the President of the Commission .
The path to real Europeanization lies along the Commission / Parliament axis and it can make contact with its citizens again through the democratization of the Union .
The questions of the number of commissioners and the weighting of votes on the Council are simultaneously insufficient to resolve the problems of transition to a new enlarged Europe and too much to alter the whole European construction model , without sufficient debate or the express consent of the electors , as though it were being brought in surreptitiously by the back door .
Until the single currency comes in we have time to think about real institutional reform .
This is also the case because you do not find two revolutions taking place at the same time and the one that is now in process is the change to the single currency .
I suspect , furthermore , that the first issue on the agenda today , the institutional question , has been and still is the apportionment of powers between Union and States , due to the Intergovernmental Conference model .
Institutional reform could only take that principal place in a framework in which the codecision procedure of the European Parliament also played a part in the revision of the treaties .
That is why I agree with the rapporteurs and their suggestion of a new method of revising the treaties , with greater participation by the European Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we already said last June , the results of Amsterdam are not satisfactory .
An observation made here , of course , and elsewhere too .
Have we given this treaty enough of a chance ?
Perhaps not .
Although the worst may never happen , it is never wrong to be lucid and critical .
Our ambitions for the European Union are not limited to the pure summation of national interests , averaged down to the smallest common and acceptable denominator .
It would be better even so to ratify the treaty .
We prefer a little bit of not very much , to rather a lot of nothing at all .
I know many of my colleagues and friends will vote against today , but would in fact vote for if they were member of national parliaments .
Intellectually , the teacher that I am , or that I remain , understands this subtle distinction .
But politically , now that I have become a European Member of Parliament , I disapprove of that approach .
After long and painful labour , Mr Tsatsos and Mr Méndez de Vigo heard new demands rising on all sides .
A consensus has come into being around four basic points .
Whatever our assessment of the Treaty of Amsterdam , institutional reform is still ahead of us .
Institutional reform is a prerequisite to any enlargement , and must be undertaken now , and in another way than at present .
Now let us move on to the future . Let us ask others also to think about the future .
Our parliament has said and proclaims this louder now .
The Commission has heard this voice . It needs to act , and said that it was ready to do so this morning .
Governments have responded .
It is down to the Council to listen , and take this message forward , to give a signal , both to ourselves and to the citizens at the Luxembourg summit , to say that they have understood and that they are going to get on with the job .
We could have adopted a more radical position , especially as our expectations were so high , and our hopes so dashed . We were almost cut to the quick to see that in Amsterdam , the European idea appeared to have been set to one side .
Our expectation from the Luxembourg summit is that Heads of State and of Government should take a grip on themselves , give a meaning to Europe , and say to the citizens that they know where they are going , and above all , that they all want to go there together .
Let us listen to René Char 's words , as if he were speaking to us here in this Parliament , both today and for the future , and as if he were saying to us what he wrote for others : ' Work for your happiness , go out towards where your risk lies .
The more they watch you doing this , the quicker will they get used to it . '
Mr President , my congratulations to the rapporteurs for their report .
The Treaty of Amsterdam is very modest and for that we can be glad .
Nevertheless , it contains many good things .
For this Parliament it contains increased powers that will improve the democracy and efficiency of the EU .
For my country it provides a secure legal base for the retention of our frontier controls while not frustrating the desires of the other members of the EU .
And although I have to admit that it has not been the constant point of discussion on every street corner , it contains much that is of relevance to the citizens of the EU .
The employment chapter , the anti-discrimination clauses , the new protocol on animal welfare , the UK 's opt-in to the social chapter are all of relevance to citizens .
Of course it does not contain everything that people would want .
In fact , it is not as anybody would have written it .
It is clearly a compromise , as any treaty of this sort must be .
Mr Corbett has mentioned its deficiencies in respect of enlargement .
I would like to have seen some reform of articles 38 to 43 on agricultural policy which clearly are extremely outdated .
But , on the whole , the treaty is a good one and this is partly because it recognizes , as some contributors to this debate have not , the fairly modest aspirations of most EU citizens in respect of the growth of European powers .
Members of this House may be frustrated with the slowness and lack of vision of the member governments of the EU but it is those governments who have got to get whatever treaty they agree passed by their national parliaments and passed in referendums if that is required in their countries .
Mr Bourlanges - who is now here - said : ' The diplomats have failed .
The citizens are going to have to take over ' .
Personally I rather doubt that if we had a Europe shaped by the citizens , it would quite meet the aspirations of Mr Bourlanges or a majority of this House .
That is why I have doubts about the end of intergovernmentalism as a means of designing treaties , which several people in this House have mentioned .
Mr President , I thank my colleagues for this report , which seems to me a very good one , as it is , in my view , the political expression of what the Parliament as a whole believes .
It is not necessarily completely consistent with my own approach , however , and my colleagues know this well .
Firstly , much has been said here about citizens .
It is true that whenever we hold one of these meetings , at least in my political framework , the citizens reject the Treaty of Amsterdam , and reject the Treaty of Maastricht .
But that is not the problem that faced our rapporteurs .
That is a collective problem , which involves the question of how are we to rekindle the European flame .
And here , I see only one solution . This is in fact to do more Europe , to make the Europe we are constructing better , and to ensure our actions relate to their problems .
I hope that the Luxembourg summit on employment will contribute to this .
Secondly , should we say yes or no to Amsterdam ?
I think the question was already settled in July .
We said then it was not the best treaty that we could have had , but we have already said yes to it , in a certain manner .
Thirdly , the real problem is of course that of enlargement .
If this Treaty of Amsterdam was intended only for the fifteen , I would say that , in the final analysis , although this does not add up to a major revolution in the Community , the treaty does contain some things which are not too bad , in the field of the environment , in social affairs .
However , when seen from the point of view of enlargement - and here , I am only repeating what our colleagues are also saying - this treaty is absolutely inadequate .
This is the real problem .
The European political project is one of enlargement .
If we do not manage our own reforms first , and achieve democracy and efficiency , we will be faced with enormous difficulties , which will mean that our citizens become even more reticent than they already are with regard to Europe .
And finally , the fourth question . This is how we are to organize the forthcoming intergovernmental conferences .
We have already seen quite clearly that the current procedures for discussion among governments did not give good results .
The governments are prisoners to their own constraints .
Let us allow the citizens to speak out more clearly , and let us give more power to the European Parliament .
This is the message already contained in the report . This is the message we wish to lend even more support to .
Mr President , Commissioner Oreja , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Amsterdam is the European Union 's visiting card to introduce it to its citizens .
And through the treaty , what it says , what it does not say and above all what its citizens can succeed in learning by reading it , they can create the will to be Europeans .
To achieve this the Treaty on European Union must fulfil three objectives : it must be an effective basis to enable the European Community to meet the challenges of the information society , the knowledge society , which is what the society of the Third Millennium will be ; it must give high priority to people ; and it must be clear and legible .
None of these principles is satisfactorily enshrined in the text which came out of Amsterdam .
The Méndez de Vigo / Tsatsos report has been the occasion of great debate between those who advocated the pure and simple rejection of the text and those who recommended that Parliament should support its ratification .
That debate has transcended all party politics , which I think is a healthy sign .
The Parliament will show a responsible attitude by adopting a clearly critical but constructive position as regards the results of Amsterdam - as suggested by the rapporteur , who has shown great flexibility in including countless suggestions , and even criticisms , some from within his own group , in the final text .
It is obvious that there can be no enlargement without genuine institutional reform .
There can be no institutional reform without a radical change in the method of revising the treaty and , above all , of the intergovernmental rationale which has held sway up to now , and thus without the total involvement of the Parliament and parliaments ; that also is obvious .
A further point which is self-evident is that only profound institutional reform will make it possible to create speedy and efficient decision-making mechanisms .
But , Mr President , the fact that statutory equality of members is the very basis of the Community and that its wealth lies in the cultural , geographical diversity and varying sizes of the States of which it is composed is another important truth which I wish to emphasize and which must be taken into account when we consider institutional reform .
The fact that the cultural dimension will be the driving force behind the European project in the future knowledge society is perhaps the least known , but also the most fundamental of truths and must be represented in the text of the treaty .
And , finally , I live in hope of seeing the Council moving closer to the Parliament 's position as regards the urgency of establishing a new method for the next revision , and also of seeing a reference to culture in the preamble to the treaty and the addition of a specific article on language policy , in view of the importance of that question to every citizen .
Mr President , I think the most important achievement of the Treaty of Amsterdam is that as a result , economic and monetary union will start on time , and secondly , that the process of enlargement has not been obstructed .
The treaty itself is thin .
That cannot be denied .
It offers , in particular for the European Parliament , some attractive perspectives on the issue of further democratization .
But , Mr President , the problem remains for this Parliament too , that no parliament exists without a relationship with the people : democracy .
If you look at what is in the treaty , further intergovernmentalization , opt-ins , opt-outs , flexibility , then you will end up with a situation in which the people of Europe will never be able to understand how democracy in Europe functions .
Mr President , the shortcoming of the Treaty of Amsterdam is that enlargement will not be easily achievable , and that we will have to hope that , by reaching agreement on institutional reform , enlargement will become possible ; without it the quality of the existing Community will decline .
To me that this is the crux of the issue .
Mr President , I do not feel all that confident about this , as the existing Community already finds it difficult to function well .
I will illustrate this .
We are always discussing the reforms of the Commission , the number of members in this Parliament , but we never discuss the Council .
But I saw in the paper today that my Minister of Transport did not manage to get the European Council of Ministers to discuss something as topical as the transport strikes in France , because the councils are no longer able discuss topical issues , if these have not been extensively prepared by officials .
That means a lot of time is lost .
Mr President , I think the problem is starting to seem as if there is no remedy ; that , as price for enlargement , further bureaucratization will occur , and this further bureaucratization can be an important obstacle in the democratization of Europe , and I think we made very little progress on that issue in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
You should always measure yourself against your opponent .
Who is fighting this Treaty of Amsterdam with the greatest vehemence ?
On the one hand , there are the Euro-fundamentalists . For them the Treaty of Amsterdam does not go far enough .
They want a quicker and more complete move to a European federal state , and this Treaty of Amsterdam is a long way off that .
On the other hand , the Treaty of Amsterdam is being fought by the main opponents of the European Union , who either do not want a common Europe at all or only want a very loose confederation of states , a superior free trade zone of nation states , who can say no to everything .
For such opponents and their arguments the Treaty of Amsterdam cannot be bad at all .
But it could be better .
It could , and should , embrace much broader and deeper institutional reforms if it is to bring about each bit of consolidation needed for the next enlargement of the Union .
We still have a few years yet until enlargement .
We must use this time for further treaty review , which follows other rules than the previous Intergovernmental Conferences .
The previous method of treaty review is out of date .
It leads to veto positions in areas where we need movement .
It leads to the lowest common denominator in areas where we need great - if not the greatest - commonalities .
Which procedure will help us out of this dilemma ?
Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos bring the correct approach to the discussion .
The next treaty review needs to follow European rules of lawmaking . It must proceed in the way we traditionally make European laws : on the basis of a notice of motion from the Commission and with the legitimate involvement of Parliament and Council .
If we conduct the next review according to these rules , then it will be successful , and then the next treaty will not only fail to prevent enlargement , but actually promote it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission and Council , if the work of the treaty were to be appraised in one idea , then it might be said of it , drawing on the words of the German poet Bertolt Brecht , that it involves ' moderate progress ' .
Bertolt Brecht meant this very cynically and critically .
Certainly , you can convey this element ; you can also be very positive and say that it is progress .
We should not deceive ourselves , however , into thinking that the progress is too slight when measured against the demands that this House makes .
How does the citizen of Europe regard the European Union after the Treaty of Amsterdam ?
The citizen of Europe sees that we will be arguing and debating hotly in the near future because in many cases we have not succeeded in moving from the principle of unanimous voting to majority voting .
That is a crucial task which we need to put right with the next reform , so that Parliament can slowly arrive at the position it really deserves .
Secondly , there is an aspect I am constantly experiencing in the area of foreign policy : the citizen of Europe sees that here there is a large continent that produces a lot , pays a lot , but has very little say in the matter , because it does not speak with one voice , but with many voices compared with the single voice that comes from America .
We surely need to correct this .
My final point : Mr President , how are things to proceed from here ?
Mr Rack and many others have already stated - and you will find this too in the report from Mr Tsatsos and Mr Méndez de Vigo - that things need to be different .
There is a need for this House , that is for the voice of the people , to express a greater willingness to reform !
For this was the way things were after Amsterdam : each head of government went home and said , ' Amsterdam was a great success .
I gave away nothing .
We did nothing for Europe , and I saved my home country . '
That is why Parliament , which represents the higher interests , must play a greater role in future .
In this respect I would like to thank the rapporteurs Mr Tsatsos and Mr Méndez de Vigo for their excellent report as a starting point for new reform , which must express more strength and more desire for a common ground .
Mr President , I am very conscious today that we are taking part in a continuing historic evolution of our European continent .
I wish to say that this latest stage of European integration sees the third significant treaty change in over a decade .
The ordinary citizen wants to know what this treaty is all about .
We have to spell out very clearly what it is and , to put it at its simplest , it is there to strengthen the Union 's policies and the effectiveness of its institutions .
In this regard , I very much welcome the fact that the Union is being given enhanced powers in the fight against crime .
In future the aim will be to ensure that citizens can benefit from free movement while criminals do not .
I also welcome the new treaty provisions which reinforce the powers and the competence of the European Parliament in areas such as employment , the environment and all the other areas , such as social exclusion and poverty , that have been mentioned here this afternoon .
These are areas , naturally , where the public expect us to be active .
A further major advance in this treaty is in the area of a more effective and coherent foreign policy .
This involves streamlining decision-making procedures with a limited provision for qualified majority voting while preserving a national veto whenever vital interests are at stake .
For Irish nationals this is very important , and it is important to realize under this heading that there is no threat here to Irish neutrality .
In fact the treaty will have to be ratified by way of a referendum in Ireland and in a number of countries .
In this regard , I would ask the Irish Government to ensure that it provides simple information , not complicated texts in legal jargon .
One regrettable point about the treaty is that the seat of the European Parliament has now been reinforced here .
The ordinary Members of Parliament , the elected Members , do not have a say on this and this is very regrettable .
I welcome the debate today and I look forward to the debate in the national parliaments in the months ahead .

Mr President , I should firstly like to congratulate Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos on a clear and comprehensive report which makes a critical but realistic analysis of the Amsterdam Treaty .
This week , three important events with a European dimension are taking place : this debate in the European Parliament ; the special Employment Summit in Luxembourg ; and - a situation which affects Europe , although Europe is not playing a major role in it - the conflict between Iraq and the United States , or Iraq and the United Nations .
I am going to depart somewhat from the question of the Amsterdam Treaty , depart from the confines of Parliament and depart from Strasbourg .
I am going to put myself in the position of the European public .
Whatever form is given to the treaties - by means of a system of revision which clearly cannot be the present system of an Intergovernmental Conference alone - as long as Europe does not have a socioeconomic model or an international political vision , the Community , the Union , will continue to function , for better or for worse , with highly competent institutions , but it will not be integrated into the world .
And , in this regard , it should be recalled that the Community was founded on the basis of a typically European socio-economic doctrine .
Within the capitalist system , Europe was endowed with an economic model based on an indicative plan for private enterprise , a binding plan for the public sector , and provision for social security .
This model lasted from 1957 to 1986 , or perhaps 1989 , when Europe was subjected to a different socioeconomic interpretation and lost its distinctive identity .
Europe was built by means of a Christian Democrat-Socialist consensus .
I am now calling for a consensus to establish a European model .
When this model exists , and when Europe defines its position in a world which is no longer bipolar , or under the hegemony of single power , but multipolar , the entire European project will be easier , and the revision of the treaties will be easier .
As far as the technical revision of the treaties is concerned , it is logical for us to focus on our tasks , but we must also call on Europe to maintain its international and socio-economic models , since , otherwise , we shall be engaging in mere formalities .
European reform , European action , the European position must be viewed in relation to the need to enhance Europe 's image on the world stage as a socioeconomic and international political model .
The rest will then be easier , and we shall not find ourselves with a suit made for an adolescent which is growing , or which we do not wish to grow .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , as the institutional debate on the Europe of the euro gradually deepens , we find that Amsterdam could not have been anything other than what it was .
Only when the institutional consequences of monetary unification have been specified will it be possible to outline the overall institutional framework of the European Union , not on account of virtuous automatism of monetary unification , creating political institutions , but the need to finally take into account , with all the information available , what has been the real and disturbing Maastricht revolution , that is the design of a Union that is always a union , but no longer a union of equals but rather a union of different people .
The government of differences is therefore the great challenge faced by the Union for it to remain a Union .
The extraordinary effort of convergence that has already been made in the field of public finance shows how this vision of a Union with differentiated status is both realistic and worrying owing to its intrinsic novelty for the Member States .
This should therefore be the focal point of the political and institutional attention of this Parliament in the near future , because the question of expansion will also jeopardize not only the guarantees of our unity but above all the ability to manage our differences ; with this tension between unity and diversity , which already exists in our system , a decisive factor of cohesion will be the transverse institution consisting of the European people and their rights and duties , that is , the institution we call citizenship .
The deepening of the substantial dimension of Union citizenship is basically the most important institutional contribution this treaty could give and has given , as all other aspects have been brought to a compulsory standstill .
It is in this climate of transition that , concluding this long debate , I believe it is good advice to follow the opinion of Mr Tsatsos and Mr Méndez de Vigo .

The debate is closed .
The President congratulates the rapporteurs , Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos on their excellent work .
The vote will take place this evening at 5.30 p.m.
EU / USA summit and trade relations
The next item is the debate on the statements by the Council and Commission on trade relations , including sanctions , and the implementation of the new transatlantic agenda ( 2nd and 3rd Pillars of the Treaty on European Union ) with a view to the European Union / United States of America Summit to be held on 5 December 1997
Mr President , ladies and Gentlemen , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to be able , in the name of the Council , to take part in this debate on the forthcoming United States of America - European Union Summit .
As you know , the new transatlantic agenda signed after the summit between the European Union and the United States of America , which was held in Madrid on 3 December 1995 , along with the joint European Union - United States action plan , which was associated with it , have given a new focal point and orientation to all aspects of partnership between the European Union and the United States .
The new transatlantic agenda , as our American friends call it , has encouraged both parties to enlarge and intensify their cooperation in many fields of common interest .
I believe I can say that the six-monthly summits are an essential element of the NTA .
Not only do they emphasize the global reinforcement of relations between the European Union and the United States , but they contribute to advancing the implementation of the NTA , and are an opportunity for overall re-examination of the European Union - United States relationship , and for debating specific matters of common interest .
The president of the European Council and myself are awaiting with interest this forthcoming summit , which will take place , as you know , in Washington on 5 December , following the summit between the European Union and Canada , held the day before .
Preparations for this summit are well advanced , and the President of the Commission and the American representatives will meet tomorrow in the top level group established between the European Union and the United States to make an assessment of the current state of implementation of the new transatlantic agenda , and to examine some of the main questions that we face today .
We are now establishing a detailed agenda for the summit with our American partners , but I can already tell you that we are expecting to raise points as important as our commercial relations with the United States , in particular in the framework of the relationship between the European Union and the United States in the WTO , and with regard to the Helms-Burton legislation .
Also , there are other topical subjects , such as the peace process in the Middle East , the question of Cypress , the question of climate change , fighting against crime and organized crime , the fight against terrorism , narcotics , drugs , immigration and asylum .
These are the essential matters , I believe , for debate at the summit .
As in previous summits , the United States and ourselves will focus on concrete successes which have been achieved in the last six months .
We hope we will be in a position first to sign the scientific and technological agreement , and then to put our initials to the agreement on the implementation of the principles of active courtesy in the application of our competition rules .
Thirdly , we can also , at least I hope so , officially announce initiatives such as the Transatlantic Information Exchange System , the digital library and transatlantic dialogue on civil society .
As regards the European Union and United States programme in favour of democracy and civil society , announced at the Hague summit , we hope that we can confirm the names of those who will have seats on the judges ' college .
This summit , Mr President , ladies and Gentlemen , will be the fourth since the NTA has been set up .
In the last two years , we have reached a number of substantial , concrete results .
Hence , in the field of foreign policy , the two parties have reinforced their cooperation on key questions , including the promotion of peace , stability , and reconciliation in the Balkans , in the Middle East and in Central Africa .
The membership of Euratom , on 17 September , in the organization for energy development of the Korean peninsula , alongside the United States , Japan , and South Korea , illustrates our joint willingness to reinforce efforts undertaken in the field of nonproliferation .
As regards the field of humanitarian aid to development , we have improved our coordination in response to the needs of societies torn by war .
We are also collaborating in the promotion of democracy and the reinforcement of civil society .
The European Union and the United States are working together to meet the challenges raised at the global level .
As part of our cooperation in the field of the fight against narcotics , at the Hague summit we signed an agreement on chemical precursors , in order to combat the misappropriation of chemicals for production of illicit drugs .
We are working together in the Caribbean region , and hope to extend our cooperation to the Andes region .
We are currently making great efforts to exchange information as part of our effort fighting international organized crime , and we have launched a coordinated information campaign initially directed at Poland and the Ukraine , in order to combat international trafficking in women .
In spite of divergences between the European Union and the United States on the timetable for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions , we are reflecting on the ways and means to cooperate at the Kyoto conference on climate change , which is due to be held in December .
Some important results have been achieved , as regards the multilateral agenda on trade and on efforts to create a new transatlantic market .
As part of the WTO , the European Union and the United States have made a common effort to finalize the agreement on information technologies and the agreement on basic telecommunications services , which together will make it possible to liberalize some thousand billion dollars ' worth of international trade in goods and services .
Within the framework of the OECD , joint efforts have contributed to the adoption of major decisions in the field of fighting corruption in international commercial transactions .
Mr President , within the framework of the new transatlantic market , the European Union and the United States have worked together to reduce barriers to trade and investment , in many cases responding to the recommendations for transatlantic dialogue between companies .
Following the conference which was held in Chicago in November last , and the European Union - United States Summit , which was held at the Hague on 28 May of this year , the two parties signed a cooperation and mutual assistance agreement in the customs field , which will contribute to facilitating trade , reinforced implementation of decisions , and fighting fraud .
Negotiations on an agreement for the mutual recognition and the evaluation of conformance have been completed .
A fundamental aspect of the NTA is the development of links between peoples .
Transatlantic dialogue between companies is contributing to closer ties between the European and American business environments , promoting good practice , and further liberalizing transatlantic trade .
Following the success of the Chicago conference , the TABD met again on 6 and 7 November in Rome .
On the other hand , a transatlantic conference entitled ' Building a bridge across the Atlantic ' was held in May in Washington , and brought together experts in civil society , education , youth and culture , in electronic trade and parliamentary links , from both sides of the Atlantic .
We are particularly pleased that relationships between the European Parliament and the American Congress are becoming every closer , a development to which Mr Alan Donnelly , member of the European Parliament , is making a substantial contribution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the NTA is a dynamic process which the two parties are constantly stimulating into new movement , by continually updating priorities and reviewing new targets .
However , it must be admitted that it is not the solution to all our problems .
Very major differences , such as those relating to the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato legislations , to hormones , and even , the to the banana protocol clearly testify to this .
But the NTA on the other hand has generated mutual confidence and has allowed the two parties to develop their overall relations within a spirit of cooperation which has taken its inspiration from fundamental , jointly shared principles and objectives .
Mr President , on the eve of the EU-US Summit on 5 December in Washington , I wish to start by explaining why I believe that the relationship between the United States and the European Union is so critically important , why it is essentially healthy and why it is in both our interests to work together to overcome the problems which arise between us .
The relationship is the most important bilateral economic relationship in the world .
The annual value of trade in goods and services in 1996 exceeded ECU 360 billion .
We are the largest investors in each other 's markets .
European companies are the largest investors in 41 United States ' states and the second largest in the rest .
One in twelve American factory workers is employed by European firms , and American companies employ three million workers in Europe .
We are deeply interlocked , and that benefits both sides .

But the heart of our relationship lies much deeper : we share many basic values , attitudes and interests ; we cooperate to promote those common interests and values around the world in working for political stability , democracy , open trade and human rights , and that is why we are working together in Bosnia and Eastern Europe , and in promoting peace in the Middle East .
These common interests have not been removed or reduced by the end of the Cold War but they may have to be refocused .
Many of the issues we are now facing , such as globalization , climate change , the emergence of China , and drugs , are not the old issues of East-West confrontation but they are issues on which we stand together and on which we often take joint initiatives in multilateral fora .
Against this background , the first theme in what I want to say today is that we have our differences - sometimes very serious - on a range of issues but we have to see them in context and keep them in proportion .
Across the board the EU-US relationship is strong and deep .
Perhaps it is because our ties are so fundamentally sound that we allow ourselves to voice our differences so openly and so frankly .
When we agreed two years ago to launch the new transatlantic agenda , both sides saw the importance of having a comprehensive framework in which we could promote our cooperation in the very wide range of fields it covers .
That has paved the way for a leap forward in the EU-US relationship .
In the new transatlantic agenda we set four main priority areas for cooperation : promoting peace , stability , democracy and development ; responding to global challenges ; expanding world trade and closer economic relations ; and building people-to-people bridges .
We have made progress on all these fronts over the past two years , less than we might have dreamt of but creditable nonetheless .
We are developing our foreign policy cooperation .
We are making progress in working on global problems such as drugs , organized crime and trafficking in women .
We have been able to deliver tangible benefits to our business and peoples through our collaboration in international organizations , such as the WTO , and also in our bilateral agreements , most recently the mutual recognition agreement covering six sectors and approximately $ 50 billion of trade .

I was most glad to see that both Mrs Erika Mann 's report on the new transatlantic agenda for the Committee on External Economic Relations and Mr Souchet 's report on EU-US relations for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy acknowledge both the early fruits and the future potential of the new transatlantic agenda process .
Let us not forget that the NTA is still young .
We can and will do more .
I am particularly concerned that we move forward to build what is described as the new transatlantic marketplace , drawing from the recommendations of the very successful transatlantic business dialogue by focusing on those barriers which really matter , while taking into account consumer and other interests on both sides of the Atlantic .
Secondly , it is important to recognize that this is increasingly a relationship of equals .
That is not always going to be very palatable in the United States but it is in both our long-term interests .
The European Union can at times seem a frustrating partner for the US because of our institutional complexities and the mixture of national and Community competence .
However , for all that , we are becoming more coherent in our external relations and increasingly acting as a single player on the international stage .
As such , we will become an ever more capable partner of the US while having to cope with the US Congress , which often seems to us to be becoming inwardoriented and unilateral-minded .
The European Union is already a fully equal partner of the US in international trade and we put that partnership to excellent use in leading the international agenda in trade and liberalization , whether you talk about the information technology agreement , telecoms or financial services which is due to be concluded on 12 December this year .
If you look at the benefits of that very close cooperation with the US - what we do with each other in such areas as mutual recognition and what we do with each other vis-à-vis the rest of the world in providing joint leadership to bring about the very important international agreements which we have already achieved even this year - then that puts into perspective the negative effects of rulings by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body , such as in the bananas case .
I am fully aware that many people see such rulings as the Americans using the WTO against the European Union .
But let us also reflect that they represent a welcome move by the United States away from purely unilateral trade legislation and action and towards binding multilateral dispute settlement .
We should not put into question the value of that just because we may not be comfortable with some of the decisions .
I , for my part , shall not hesitate to propose to Member States that we should make full use of those rights , which we negotiated in the Uruguay Round and which we have used in many cases and will be using in the future - the Japan spirits case is a very good example - against the United States when it , in our view , has acted in breach of its WTO obligations .
We , indeed , started the process of doing so in a case only this week where we thought that export subsidies in the United States were contrary to the rules .
We shall use that quite as vigorously as anyone else .
The trend to see the European Union as an equal partner to the United States is obviously going to be reinforced by the launching of economic and monetary union in January 1999 .
It is no coincidence that there is a welter of articles from the other side of the Atlantic - some alarmed , others alarming - but all focusing on the apparently new reality to the United States of economic and monetary union .
The European Union , when that happens , will have a single currency which is appropriate , matching its status as the world 's leading trading economy . And the euro will become a competitor with the dollar as a global currency .
For a country which is so keen on competition , that should be something that is acceptable , if not always welcome .
I am convinced that in monetary matters as in others , competition is healthy both for us and for the world as a whole .
But it is extremely important , now that the reality is becoming more clear to the United States itself , that Europe and the United States begin more intensive discussion on the international implications of the introduction of the euro in order to avoid surprises and reap benefits .
In this context I very much welcome the growing appreciation of EMU by the US administration .
In a recent hearing in Congress the Under-Secretary of the Treasury , Mr Summers , testified that the US Government is now convinced that EMU will happen .
US policy-makers are now starting to consider its effects on their economy and the international monetary system .
The Treasury has advised American companies to speed up preparations for the euro .
Let me now turn to the problem of extra-territorial legislation reflected in the Helms-Burton Act and the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act , ILSA .
These issues are of great concern to me , to the European Union 's Member States and , of course , to Parliament .
I am very much aware of the two resolutions adopted by the plenary concerning the Understanding reached with the United States on how to attempt to bridge our differences .
I want to explain our policy on this important matter of principle - and this is my third point - taking into account the questions put forward by the honourable Members , Mrs González Alvarez , Mr Cabezón Alonso and Ms Oddy .
I would like to thank the Members of the European Parliament US Interparliamentary Delegation and in particular , its chairman , Mr Alan Donnelly , for the great efforts that they have made to convey the depth and the width of European concern about these issues to members of the United States Congress .
They have in fact gone beyond expressing concern .
I welcome , in particular , Mr Donnelly 's proposal to convene a transatlantic conference on Cuba next year .
The root problem lies with the legislators .
Given the prevailing mood on international issues in the American Congress , European parliamentarians have a central , and not a peripheral , role to play in presenting our views to them .
In respect of Cuba , as also in the case of Libya and Iran , the tragedy is that we and the Americans share similar , if not identical , policy objectives : in Cuba , promotion of democracy , economic growth and human rights ; in Iran and Libya , human rights , opposition to the promotion of international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
The fundamental truth is that we are each other 's strongest allies in seeking these objectives .
We have taken many concrete steps in that direction in both cases , through our common position in Cuba and the measures we have taken against Iran and Libya .
The presidency and President Santer informed President Clinton in detail about our counter-terrorism and non-proliferation measures against Iran and Libya at the May summit in The Hague .
The European Union and the United States , jointly with Canada , have also subsequently greatly intensified their foreign policy dialogue on Iran .
But the threat of secondary embargoes on European companies introduced under the Helms-Burton Act and ILSA has been a set-back to EU / US cooperation in tackling these problems .
It has not helped the common objective . It has hindered it .
We are of the opinion that such secondary embargoes are illegal in international law .
But beyond that , they are counterproductive in policy terms .
This has led to a huge diversion of energy and attention away from the real priorities of dealing with Cuba , Iran and Libya .
I welcome the fact that there has emerged from this House a suggestion which will enable us to explain to the American public and Congress what we really are doing and the interests that we are advancing in those areas .
But we had as our primary duty the obligation to protect European interests .
To do so we turned to the WTO .
It was the action taken in the WTO , and only that action , which led to the Understanding which I negotiated in April of this year , under which , in exchange for our suspending but not abandoning our WTO action , the American side agreed to work towards the granting of waivers , both of Title IV of Helms-Burton and under ILSA .
The Helms-Burton waiver is linked to bilateral negotiations on disciplines for investments in illegally expropriated property on the one hand , but on principles relating to extra-territorial legislation , on the other hand .
We had not reached agreement by the target date of 15 October but we are continuing to work and to consider how best we can reach an agreement .
In order to reach such an agreement there has to be a readiness on the part of Congress to authorize waivers of both pieces of legislation in respect of the EU when the terms of the understanding have been fulfilled .
It will require longer term agreement between us on the wider aspects of sanctions policy which may involve enhanced consultations regarding countries of concern .
But it is clear that since the understanding was reached no action has been taken against any European company under either act .
It is clear also that if action is taken against any European company that would render it , in my view , impossible to continue the suspension of the WTO panel and we would be right back there .
I would also emphasize again that to be acceptable , any overall settlement must cover not only the negotiations on Helms-Burton but also protection for European companies against the effects of the ILSA Act .
We consider that the European Union fully qualifies for a waiver under ILSA and that obviously includes Total , which signed an agreement fully compatible with Community and international law .
Let me conclude my remarks now by briefly looking at some of the other subjects which are likely to be covered at the summit .
Complementing the Presidency 's remarks , I imagine our foreign policy discussions will be focused on how to increase EU-US complementary efforts in support of the stalled Middle East peace process .
We will ask the US to press all parties to implement the full terms of the Oslo agreements .
The other major topic will be the possibility of strengthening the economic reform process in Ukraine .
Climate change , as has been mentioned , will obviously play a major role at this summit , which takes place just prior to the ministerial part of the Kyoto climate conference and , difficult as it seems , it must be our common aim to bring Kyoto to a successful conclusion .
On bilateral trade we reserve the right to point to the discriminatory draft American implementation rules of the GATS Basic Telecoms Agreement as well as to the raising tide of unilateral sanctions legislation at state level in the United States .
And no doubt the Americans will raise their concerns about the risks to trade of any ban on specified risk materials used in pharmaceuticals and cosmetics .
I also have no doubt that the question of genetically modified crops will also be raised .
There may also , I hope , be two forward-looking presidential statements .
I say ' I hope ' because the preparations for the summit have not yet been completed and we are still working on these issues .
First , a statement on increased regulatory cooperation between the European Union and the United States ' authorities with a view to improving effective market access for our exports to each other while maintaining the necessary high standard of protection for health , safety , consumers and the environment .
When negotiating the mutual recognition agreement , which was the top priority of the business communities , it became very clear that there was ample need for much greater cooperation between the regulatory authorities .
A second declaration will , I hope , give electronic commerce a major boost by establishing common principles which will help guide its development across the Atlantic and around the world .
The growing importance of new people-topeople links across the Atlantic will be reflected by the envisaged signature of the Science and Technology Agreement with the United States , providing new opportunities for our scientists and scientific institutions to collaborate on cutting-edge issues .
I have no doubt that this House , and the Presidency and the Commission , will look at the relationship in the round , its beneficial features , the problems - warts and all - as well as the opportunities .
I am quite confident that a robust defence of European interests is not inconsistent with the advance of common interests , quite the reverse : it facilitates the resolution of problems , which enables us to go on to work closely together .
It is in that spirit and with these aspirations that we approach the forthcoming summit .
Thank you Sir Leon .
I think that was one of the longest Commission speeches ever made in this place .
I assume you were carried along by the interest you have on this subject and by how important you think it is .
And I agree with you which is why I did not ask you to wind up before the 20 minutes - double the time of the Council .
However , it has been a most interesting speech and I hope this is also the opinion of colleagues .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mr Commissioner , I think it is proper that the speech from Commissioner Leon Brittan was somewhat longer than usual because it was a very full and important speech .
The Commissioner has shown that the USA and Europe are both partners and competitors at the same time .
He was very optimistic that we are increasingly becoming equal partners .
I do not know if everyone sees it like that , especially in the United States of America , or else Helms-Burton or D 'Amato might perhaps be viewed differently , and then things might perhaps be viewed differently at McDonnell-Douglas and Boeing , and British Airways and American Airlines , too .
It still seems to me that the view is that Europe has to adhere to bilateral and multilateral agreements , but that America is fully entitled , every so often , when it suits its own interests , to make unilateral arrangements or even unilateral resolutions .
This is no doubt to do with the fact , Mr Commissioner , that in many areas we hold very varying opinions in Europe itself .
You mentioned Bosnia and the Middle East .
We are still not so far down the road that we support the same code , and it is precisely where the Middle East is concerned that I agree with you .
It is not acceptable that Europe should be putting a lot of money in this area , to no avail , because America is exerting too little pressure here to really bring about a peace process through the appropriate attitude of Israel .
I would like to give you my whole-hearted support where Helms-Burton , D 'Amato and other acts are concerned .
Europe can be ready for compromise on the detail , but not on the substance ; it should be clear that - if , for instance , action is taken against a company - the waiver must cease , for then we must be prepared for argument and debate at the WTO .
I also agree with you : it is good that we now have breathing space , but it is only breathing space and not an overall settlement , and I would like to support you in your efforts to bring about an overall settlement .
One last point in view of the time : fast-track negotiations , talks in the USA , failure and the consequences .
I believe the USA is in a similar situation to us , without overestimating the question we need to ask together - and I stress together - namely : How can we carry out and implement free trade in the world if at the same time there are many economic and , particularly , social problems connected with this form of trade ?
We are supporters of free trade because we gain from it .
Yet we need to make it clear to our own people , just as it is necessary for President Clinton to do so in the USA , that free and fair trade are compatible , that , with all free trade , the trade must be fair in the eyes of our citizens .
In this sense it is an important assignment to conduct these talks with the United States of America , at this summit and beyond .
In this respect , may I wish you , Mr Commissioner , a pleasant and successful trip to America , which you will be embarking on tomorrow , I believe ?
Mr President , I warmly welcome the two statements which we have had this afternoon .
There is no criticism of anyone for speaking too long .
It was extremely clear and very beneficial that we should be able to have such a statement before what will be an important summit meeting early in December .
Therefore I welcome the statements made .
We can recognize the significant progress made when we look at all the issues which are now under discussion concerning something which is barely two years old , the new transatlantic agenda .
However , it is important to stress why this summit in particular has its importance .
The danger is that we have at present a number of differences , as the Commissioner has pointed out , but we also have an overwhelming bundle of common interests .
Will we be falling into a trap , not through lack of interest but a lack of priority , when we come to deal with the introduction of the single currency , as the Commissioner mentioned , and as we come to the question of enlargement eastwards ?
It will not be simply through lack of interest but through lack of priority in dealing with the transatlantic relationship that all these issues that we have heard enumerated today could go further down our list of priorities and not get the attention they need in six or twelve months ' time .
Attached to this , it is rather evident to us in the political field that all the issues under discussion between the administrations also have their political context .
Increasingly economic issues , whether sanctions or the building up of a new transatlantic market-place , will require this House and the US Congress to be involved in some way , whether in the shaping of regulations or the stimulus of finance or whatever else is necessary to ensure that this new transatlantic agenda is successful .
I would like to ask three questions of the Council and the Commission in terms of this summit meeting .
Firstly , will the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission , when they both go to the summit , ensure there is a long-term perspective built into the summit conclusions so that we know we are working together on both sides of the Atlantic to shape a longer term transatlantic partnership ?
Secondly , could we ensure that such a perspective looks forward to the 21st century , where we could think of having a comprehensive institutional framework , perhaps a treaty .
Then you could bring in the political communities alongside the business communities , to work with the administrations to create this new transatlantic relationship .
Lastly , would the Commissioner like to say a little bit more on the new transatlantic market-place which I know he stressed is an important concept ?
We will have to define that concept .
Perhaps it is at this summit in Washington that the green light can be given to that examination .
Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , the new transatlantic agenda , agreed in December 1995 in Madrid , underlines and confirms the joint efforts of the European Union and the United States to extend and deepen their relationship .
The liberal group is therefore pleased with the success of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue .
In this framework , many trade barriers have been demolished since November 1995 .
The most important examples of this are the Multilateral Recognition Agreements .
The MRAs will stimulate international trade and lower the cost for business and the consumer .
I therefore very much regret the protectionist attitude of the American Congress at present , which seriously hinders the implementation of existing agreements and the reaching of new ones .
Trade encourages business growth and is thus crucial to employment .
I therefore hope and expect that Congress will abandon this wrong track , and return to its traditional liberal attitude regarding free trade .
On behalf of my group I also call on the Commissioner to implement this Parliament 's resolutions on the trade disagreements with the United States .
The EU-USA summit in the Hague was very successful and for the first time emphasized the importance of the relationship between citizens on both sides of the ocean .
This is invaluable to our long term relationship .
During the summit in Washington this will be furthered by means of a Thai project which encourages electronic exchange between citizens .
In addition , the signing of the agreement on scientific and technological cooperation signifies a milestone within the new transatlantic agenda .
I would finally like to ask Commissioner Brittan whether he can advise Parliament on the summit with Canada which will take place on the fourth of December .
Canada is another transatlantic partner , and moreover , the Union has a joint action plan with it .
I would like to have your answer on this , Mr Brittan .
Mr President , we have heard today quite a lot about achievements , intense discussions and indeed some problems with our partners on the other side of the Atlantic .
There is no doubt that negotiations at the Washington summit or wherever else have to proceed whenever dissent emerges as a substantial obstacle to the transatlantic agenda and dialogue .
It is also true that in some cases negotiations per se , in particular with protracted deadlines , serve only the purpose of the other side .
The troublesome case of Helms-Burton should have taught us a bitter lesson by now .
Since 11 April there have been seven or eight rounds of negotiation between the European Union and the United States ; on the European side naturally some satisfaction has been expressed in that Title IV and the suspension of the United States sanctions have spared some but not all European companies , while , by the way , hitting hard firms outside Europe .
At the same time an atmosphere of intimidation and fear has been created and continuously fuelled as a result of threatening statements by some congressmen .
The results are in front of us .
Trade between the countries of the Union and Cuba has been drastically reduced .
Investments are being cut or halted to the levels of 1996 .
In other words , Helms-Burton is operative .
It works wonders for the USA while endless negotiations go on with only some barking and very little bite in this House and in Brussels .
May we suggest that the time has come to fix a deadline - let us say 31 December - and then go for the only option available , recourse to the WTO panel .
We would like very much to have a clear-cut opinion from the Commission on the matter of a deadline concerning negotiation , on Helms-Burton or , for that matter , the D 'Amato Act .
Mr President , patting each other on the back is the last thing we want in these days before the EU / USA summit .
Because there are a whole lot of issues missing from the new transatlantic agenda that belong in any dialogue committed to the environment and the welfare of the people .
This dialogue , which we undoubtedly need , must be both a critical one and one capable of withstanding criticism among friends .
False friends are no use to anybody .
And right at the top of the list of priorities of the two largest economic blocs in the world should not be the kowtowing to company interests , but rather political guidance in the direction of world peace , socially and ecologically sustainable regulation of the global economy , and equal participation of all countries , especially the weaker ones .
It is also absurd to push for a multilateral trading system under the aegis of the WTO , on the one hand , while pursuing special bilateral paths , on the other , that exclude and disadvantage the rest of the world for the protection of your own economy .
The opposite course would be more appropriate : common concern for greater consumer protection , raising the standard of the existing social environment , and providing better public information .
Preparations for the next WTO Conference of Ministers should also be on the agenda .
Because substantial proposals in the areas of social and environmental standards need to be made early .
Genetically modified soya , hormone-treated beef also need to be banned from our menus according to the WTO text .
The EU should also remind its friends of its homework in Kyoto and Ottawa , where in December the international agreement banning land mines is to be adopted .
Because we have a global responsibility .
We do not need a fortress Europe nor a hegemonic US superpower .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , please persuade your group to allow more than a minute and a half . It is only natural that you cannot express your thoughts in such a short time .
Mr President , transatlantic dialogue will only be truly fruitful and the meeting of 5 December will only be a truly useful stage in this dialogue , if both make moves towards the settlement of a series of major legal and commercial disputes , which today oppose the European Union and the United States of America .
I am therefore delighted with the announcement that we have just had , stating that the Helms-Burton law was on the agenda .
More broadly , we believe that the very serious question of the extra-territorial application of national American legislation should be raised to its full extent .
We have the strongest regrets that the bilateral concertation in October did not end up with substantial progress in this area .
However , it is essential for the European Union to stifle perverse practises such as these at birth , for if not , we risk proliferation in the future .
The path chosen by the Commission at the time of the Uruguay-Round was to make European countries pay a high price , in counterpart to the United States renunciation of unilateral practices .
If the United States continues with unilateralism , we shall have been sold a pup .
We therefore have to show the greatest firmness on this question of principle , and if necessary , brandish the threat of credible sanctions , and for this purpose , ensure we have the indispensable instruments for a foreign trade policy .
Has the strategy of the Commission been the right one ?
Was renouncing the WTO panel , albeit on a non-definitive basis in consideration of a very fragile assurance of short-term non-application of the Helms-Burton legislation to European companies , the best possible choice ?
There is reason to believe not , as instead of seeking a definitive elimination of legislation whose illegality is beyond all doubt , we have contributed to maintaining a climate of legal unsafeness , which is detrimental to our companies , and which may have dissuasive and paralyzing effects .
The laws remain on the books , and may be used at any time a chance event may cause the American administration to put an end to the moderate way in which the matter is now handled .
Furthermore , leaving such legislation on the books unchanged may only encourage other lobbies to mobilize and - at the federal , state , and local authority levels - impose new legislations with extra-territorial effect , as we have seen with Massachusetts .
Our interest therefore , Mr President , is to put a complete end to this very pernicious trend .
Hence , it is essential at the meeting of 5 December that we raise the awareness of our interlocutors as to the serious and very harmful effects that these provisions may have on the climate of transatlantic relationships .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I was not surprised when I heard the Council and the Commission .
But even so , I was astonished not to hear a single word about the asymmetry in the relationships between Europe and the United States at present .
When I use the word ' asymmetry ' to avoid using the word , ' colonization . '
Political and military colonization - and just see what happened in the discussion between France and the United States over the NATO southern command .
Commercial and economic dissymmetry - did the Commissioner speak about the three million workers in Europe whose livelihood depend on American decisions ? That is unilateral , and what about the other side ?
Cultural colonization - just look at the tidal wave from the American sub-culture which is swamping our television screens and the cultural universe of the European youth .
Building a bridge over the Atlantic under such conditions would be to set up a one-way traffic lane , reduce barriers , and allow the strongest to become even stronger at our expense .
Not a word either about Iraq , this virtual genocide under which nearly a million Iraqi children have suffered to date . All that in the name of human rights , which is really an extraordinary position .
Not a word about the scandalous cartel between Boeing and McDonell-Douglas . Not a word about the scandalous policy of American domination in the Balkans .
Not a word about the discussion which might affect the steel market , the electrical construction markets , the agricultural markets , where America is wholly dominant .
Of course , the Helms-Burton law has been mentioned .
The truth is that the American empire has won three world wars .
With the First World War , it got rid of the German and the Austrian-Hungarian empires .
With the Second World War , it got rid of the British and French Empires , and with the Third World War - the Cold War , in fact - it got rid of the Soviet Empire .
Fine .
But the result of all that , is that we now have an American superpower , which is colonizing the whole world .
We expected just a little resistance from Europe , in the face of this unilateral process .
Mr President , may I say I welcome Sir Leon 's remarks on the WTO .
I would wish , on behalf of my group , to underline his point that we cannot think the WTO is a good body when it finds in our favour and a bad body when it finds against us .
However , I do think that if the European Commission actually withdraws its case on HelmsBurton , having satisfied European interests , then it would be undermining the WTO itself .
This debate does raise a very important question of what we feel is a very dangerous emerging democratic deficit in the new global world order which , to some extent , this transatlantic dialogue can offset .
I was moved to make these remarks by Sir Leon 's use of the expression ' diversion of attention ' when talking of Congress 's attitude to Helms-Burton .
Politicians can play an important role as intermediaries , but it is important that non-elected politicians , as you choose to be nowadays Sir Leon , are aware that it is a two-way process .
All too often politicians - and they sometimes volunteer themselves - have to be intermediaries in explaining to the electorate decisions taken by other people about which they sometimes feel uneasy .
Politicians also have another role and that is representing the views of the electorate to decision-makers .
Although politically I have no sympathy whatsoever with Jesse Helms , as an elected politician I do have some sympathy with the rights of people who are elected to put forward legislation which they feel reflects the views of their own voters .
Unless we are careful we will see a very dangerous discrepancy develop between what is decided amongst the great and the good and what needs to be encouraged and explained to the electorate .
In that respect I would hope that the transatlantic dialogue will develop a democratic arm and include more and more elected politicians as a small step to getting beyond what is , I repeat , a rather dangerous emerging democratic deficit in this new world trading order .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council and Sir Leon Brittan for their report and the insight they have given us .
I believe that over the last few years a lot has been achieved by the work of the Commission in particular .
Good relations between Europe and the United States have provided for freedom , peace , more human rights , stability and prosperity over the last decades .
We need to see to it that this is kept alive in the future , while appreciating too that , because of the new world order , the end to power bloc confrontation , the diminished significance of alliances forged through military threat , the strengthening of the European Union to the point of monetary union , things have changed to such an extent that we need to find new responses to the mechanisms and that NATO alone cannot be relied upon to maintain transatlantic relations .
I think we should see beyond the transatlantic declaration , beyond the transatlantic agenda , to how we might use the momentum from the successful work of recent years to strengthen these relations .
It is precisely the decision in regard to Helms-Burton , the inability of the American President to push fast-track through in Congress , which shows that things will only work if we can bring this together at a political level that also includes the American Congress .
Anything else , I believe , is impossible if we wish to improve relations long term .
I think that is why a transatlantic market-place with clear objectives and a timetable is very important , to maintain the momentum while providing a framework for a treaty which takes in the democratic institutions of the European Union and the United States .
In this way it can be made clear that the common interest is greater than the individual interests which are asserted at times .
Mr Commissioner , I should first like to thank you for answering a number of questions which could not be answered yesterday for lack of time .
Secondly , as I have only one minute , I shall refer solely to the question of the extra-territorial application of legislation , which , as you can see , is of concern to everyone taking part in this debate .
And this is for two reasons , I believe : firstly , because the United States seems to be trying to impose a model of political and trade relations whereby it decides how and when everyone else should trade ; and secondly , because a number of us have the feeling that by withdrawing its complaint before the WTO and continuing to negotiate on illegal laws , the European Union is contributing to the illegal embargo on Cuba that has existed for years . Indeed , the Helms-Burton Act is no more nor less than a reinforcement of the embargo , or blockade , as you wish to call it .
The European Union must not contribute to this , because , as you are well aware , in the last vote in the United Nations , the General Assembly condemned the embargo as illegal by an overwhelming majority , and therefore condemned the Helms-Burton Act .
I believe that the European Union must adopt a vigorous stance vis-à-vis the United States , and must not enter into negotiations on the Helms-Burton Act , but affirm that act is illegal .
I believe that a superpower like the United States will be far more impressed by sincerity and the vigorous defence of principles - principles , which , as you can see , all the Members of this Parliament are calling on you to uphold .
In any event , I am aware that the agenda is very broad , and I wish you luck .
Mrs González Alvarez , I will make the same comment to you : that your group should take more than a minute .
I feel very bad when I have to interrupt a colleague after just one minute but , goodness me , the groups should allow two or three minutes .
Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office and Sir Leon Brittan not only for their excellent presentations this afternoon but for the real commitment that has been shown by the Commission and the Council to deepening the relationship with the United States of America .
There are the Cassandras in this House and in the American Congress who will use any issue to say that the transatlantic relationship is not working , that it is disastrous and should not be continued .
The fact is that the relationship between Europe and the United States is the most important relationship that exists on this planet .
This is particularly so now that the Congress has refused fast-track for trade negotiations for the US President .
We have to step up our activity in trying to deepen the relationship .
You cannot simply allow this dynamic to fail .
We have to look at new ways : people-to-people links , education establishments , diplomats , politicians and trade negotiators working more closely to try to make the Congress understand that this relationship between Europe and the United States is so important for our mutual future .
That is why I hope when the transatlantic summit meeting takes place in a few weeks ' time , that rather than being just a thin audit of what has gone on in the past it pushes the agenda further forward , in particular on electronic commerce , fighting crime and fighting organized crime and drug trafficking in the third pillar areas .
We should look for new ways of cooperation .
This House has a responsibility - and I say this to all the political groups represented here this afternoon .
You cannot expect the civil servants - this is the point Michael Hindley was making - to deal with the US Congress .
It is up to us as politicians to deal with the US Congress .
We have to speak to them , we have to meet them regularly , we have to solve this problem .
That is why I hope that in the context of the work of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , the Committee on External Economic Relations , the delegation for relations with the United States , we will look very carefully over the next month or two months at ways of talking to the Congress , of deepening that relationship , in particular with the new Congressmen and Congresswomen who simply do not have a grasp of the international relations that exist between Europe and the United States .
It is our responsibility , not the responsibility of the Commission or the Council .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming summit between the European Union and the United States is perhaps a decisive and definitive opportunity to test whether or not the European Union has its own voice , and whether or not it has institutions whose actions are governed by the will to defend Community political and economic interests .
It is therefore important that in December the Council and the Commission should be capable of preventing the United States from continuing to maintain and impose arrangements which run contrary to the guidelines that have been agreed multilaterally .
It is obvious that the existing rules on competition in the agricultural sector , or in the aeronautical , naval or audio-visual industries , should be just as valid on the east or the west coast of the Atlantic .
It is fundamental to ensure that the WTO genuinely operates independently of American interests , as regards the protection of public health , the predicted death of Community banana producers , or the pure and simple rejection of those legislative attacks on human rights , the so-called Helms-Burton or d 'Amato-Kennedy Acts .
Mr President , Sir Leon Brittan , Minister , I have heard of the success you have had in recent times , and it is impressive .
Indeed , we cannot claim that there was too little on the new transatlantic agenda , rather we can assume there was too much .
Perhaps that is one of the problems .
The sweep of political and economic issues really does extend from trade disputes , via the question of how we are to deal with extra-territorial legislation , to a whole range of political questions : What are we doing in the Ukraine ?
What are we doing in the Baltic ?
What are we doing in the Middle East ?
How can we bring our citizens together in future , and how can they reasonably participate in this new transatlantic agenda which politicians and economists have got off the ground ?
All this is very sensible .
However , I believe we have to shoulder a special political responsibility , and by this I am referring now to the three institutions that are active on the side of the European Union .
I believe we need to add two things to the overall range of issues just mentioned on the political and economic agenda , and we should do this in the next half year . Firstly , we should bring people more into the dialogue we are conducting .
We have conceived four dialogues : one for the citizens , one for the small and medium-size companies , one for the flagship generally , namely the Transatlantic Business Dialogue , and one dialogue for the workers and trade unions .
We know we have considerable problems apart from in the area of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue .
We need to do something here ; this is part of the responsibility we need to assume , and we need to do it together .
The second thing we must do , and this will not be any less dramatic : we need to include ourselves as parliamentarians in this form of the work .
It will not do that we have a political and economic agenda , but not a parliamentary one .
We need to ensure that we are included in future in all the arrangements you come to and in all forms of agreement you make , including the issue of the transatlantic market-place - and that we are included by means of the codecision procedure .
I think we can come to a sensible form of cooperation in this area too !
Mr President , I just wish to support most of what has been said in this debate this afternoon .
This is not a particularly controversial issue between the various sides of this House .
There is a general assumption that we want to maintain and improve relationships at all levels in the United States - the administration and the Congress .
I welcome the very full introduction to the debate from Sir Leon Brittan .
Without being - and certainly not wishing to be - churlish , I would , however , like to suggest that he adds one thing to his list , which appeared to be omitted , and that is the suggestion that there should be much closer cooperation between the competition authorities on this side of the Atlantic and those on the other side , notably the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission .
There have been some highly controversial competition issues in recent months in our relationship with the United States - Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas being one , Guinness and Grand Met being another , and KPMG and Ernst & Young being potentially another .
Those of us who belong to the delegation were reassured by the promise we had from Commissioner Van Miert to try to work towards closer relationships between competition authorities on both sides .
Sir Leon mentioned the need for closer cooperation between regulatory authorities but I would respectfully suggest that competition is a rather different matter .
One other thing I should like to add to the shopping list is the suggestion that every time there is a transatlantic summit we have a debate like this , with the representative of the Commission and the representative of the Council coming to talk to Parliament , just as they did this afternoon .
Mr President , relations between the European Union and the United States must be set in the political sphere , but in today 's world of globalization , politics are inseparable from economics , and I should therefore like to refer to a number of trade issues .
I believe that the European Union must vigorously defend its interests , and must affirm its identity as a unified and coherent whole , both in the field of the aeronautical industry - to which other speakers have just referred - and in the field of the World Trade Organization , where the European Union has lost its cases before the panels on hormone-treated beef and the EU banana regime .
And I hope that the negotiations that Sir Leon Brittan is carrying out on behalf of the Commission will enable us to ensure that the European Union 's interests are adequately defended and that the chosen method of consensus will not prejudice Community action .
I should quickly like to ask the Commissioner a few questions specifically concerning the difficulties that President Clinton has encountered in securing the celebrated fast-track powers from the US Congress .
What implications does this have for the new transatlantic agenda ?
Does the Commissioner consider that the fact that President Clinton has not , for the moment , secured those powers from the US Congress will somehow mean that he will not secure the necessary powers to modify Title III of the Helms Burton Act ?
And , lastly , in view of the fact that he has not , for the moment , secured those powers , will the European Union take advantage of this window of opportunity to increase its commercial presence in , and develop commercial ties with , the countries of Latin America ?
Mr President , straight away I would like to express my gratitude to all those who actively participated in this debate .
I think we all agree in recognizing that transatlantic dialogue is extremely important , not only out of technical and commercial considerations , but also because the foreign trade and direct foreign investment figures testify to very major economic ties between the European Union and the United States of America .
As regards the results obtained to date , I think it can be said , although there are some areas requiring improvement , that the overall assessment is broadly positive , particularly as transatlantic dialogue got underway some two years ago only .
There exist , as you emphasized in a number of your speeches , clear differences , and I would say that these are on occasion striking differences , between the approaches adopted by the United States and the European Union .
Witness the notorious Helms-Burton and d 'Amato laws , and the European position with regard to them .
I therefore wholeheartedly agree with what Sir Leon Brittan said to you .
I think it is perfectly unacceptable , and Europe should say as much loud and clear at the summit .
And since we are talking about critical dialogue , I think that the placing on the agenda of a debate on these two laws provides clear proof that the European Union intends to defend its commercial interests vigorously .
Partnership has been mentioned .
Some have said that we were under American dominance or hegemony .
Others have already mentioned partnership between equals .
For my part , I would say that we are perhaps midway between a partnership between equals , and that European monetary union will be a key element in achieving that equality of partnership .
Let me explain myself , Mr President . In July 1995 , I was privileged to attend an official visit of our Prime Minister , Mr Juncker , to the United States .
At the time , we spoke a great deal about the project of economic and monetary union in the European Union with President Clinton 's administration and the relevant officers of state .
At the time , nobody in the United States believed in it , and all were ready to lay money on the fact that we would be unable to rise to the challenge and achieve economic and monetary union .
I think that the fears that are now being expressed in certain quarters of the United States - the American Congress and the corporate sector - show that the completion of economic and monetary union is essential for the commercial and economic policies of the European Union at world level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to say a word about our policy as part of the WTO .
I would quote something Mrs Lalumière said , if I am not mistaken : united we can do a great deal .
I hope that we will be united and remain united , as in these last few weeks , and particularly during the Florence euro-workshop , where we saw that there was a broad consensus on the future agenda for the WTO .
I think I can say that we will have great solidarity between ourselves on this dossier , which is a particularly important one for the European Union and the Member States , and here I mean financial services .
If we are able to show the same cohesiveness as for other dossiers , for example , telecommunications services , the meeting at the ministerial level of the WTO on 11 December in Geneva will be a great success for the European Union . That is my hope .
On the other hand , much is being said on the settlement of disputes relating to the WTO , where we have , I would say , lost a battle or two .
This should prompt us to reflect on how to reinforce or even change procedures in the settlement of disputes .
We are open to discussions on this subject .
But I would say that the system currently in force , even if it is not always satisfactory at the multilateral level , is far better suited to the defence of commercial interests than the unilateralism practised earlier by the Americans .
That already is an important point .
On the other hand , the question has been raised as to President Clinton 's chances of getting the fast track adopted .
Firstly , there is the major summit meeting , where I do not doubt for an instant that the presidency of the Council and the Commission will once again place their arguments on the table .
Having said that , this extremely important political dialogue , at the Presidency and Commission level , which takes place every two years , deserves to be pushed on to completion .
On this point , I believe that all those in this House who have pleaded in favour of a more active role in this Parliament in the political dialogue with members of the American Congress are right .
Indeed , I believe that there is a role not only for the Commission , and for the Council , but also for the Parliament .
The agenda was also raised , and it was said that subjects such as Iraq were not on it .
Mr President , in my speech I specified that the agenda for this summit with the United States made room for discussions on negotiations on peace in the Middle East .
It is quite clear , after the events of the last few weeks , that the question of Iraq will be raised . I have no doubt whatsoever about this .
Mr President , we have also been asked whether we took into account the long term , whether we had made plans to discuss themes relating to the future .
The agenda that we are now finalizing expresses the desire on the European side to deal with subjects which will play a useful role in the real development of our relations with the United States in years to come .
Mr President , I have no time to say more .
I will add just one thing .
I find the Presidency 's appearance in this House prior to every summit an interesting idea .
But there is another idea which I find interesting , which is to come and keep you informed , at your December session , of the results of this summit .
I very much agree with Mr Swoboda in his statement that it is necessary for us to enlist the public in an understanding of why trade liberalization with the United States and working with the United States and the rest of the world is desirable .
I certainly can assure Mr Elles that there will be a long-term perspective for what we are trying to do with the United States and the question of the appropriate framework for the new transatlantic marketplace to be developed further is one which is very much to the fore of my own thoughts , even if I am not able to give a conclusion to it today .
As far as the Canada summit is concerned , I would say to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel that we will be focusing mainly upon the devolution with Canada of progress following our agreement with Canada , which has been considerable .
To Mr Manisco on the Helms-Burton issue , I would say that we are actively negotiating .
I do not think it is useful to announce a deadline at the moment .
If you are negotiating , it is only worth negotiating if there is any sign of progress .
We are not interested in negotiating to eternity without any prospect of a result .
That I very much agree with .
I do not think it is right to say , as Mr Souchet has said , that we are operating on the basis of no definitive solution to the problem .
We are seeking a definitive solution .
It is not right to say that we have withdrawn from the WTO .
We have suspended it and reserve the right to return at any time , I would point out to Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez .
As far as Mr Hindley and others who have advocated Parliamentary participation in the new transatlantic agenda are concerned , I welcome that .
I would add that the new transatlantic agenda specifically refers to that possibility and it is up to Parliamentarians to make the most of it .
Similarly , those such as Mrs Erika Mann , who spoke of bringing people in to a greater extent . Again , I would welcome that .
That is part of the new transatlantic agenda .
As to the fast-track , I agree with Mr Donnelly that the problems over the fast-track mean that we should step up the dialogue .
I believe that the European / US dialogue is a way both of increasing the chances that fast-track may nonetheless be passed and also of making progress in the absence of fast-track .
It is certainly true , as Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra has said , that there is a window of opportunity for us in South America .
I would like us to take up that opportunity , not just because the United States has injured itself by not passing the fast-track , but also for its own sake .
To Mr Cassidy I would say , yes , a cooperation of competition authorities is very much part of the game .
We are actively negotiating a second and supplementary agreement with the United States which would build on the one that we already have , which would enable the principles of positive comity to be applied more systematically .
That is an important part of the agenda .
Sir Leon , your contribution to this debate has been extremely interesting .
We have accepted 8 motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 , paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
The debate is closed .
Votes
Mr President , there were four problems to be solved if the reform of the European Union envisaged by the Maastricht Treaty was to become a reality : the elimination of the constitutional democratic deficit of a Union from above and of a Europe of the intergovernmental conference ; the elimination of the institutional deficit of a Union without legal personality , of dualism , the pillar-and-space structure lacking any single competence to act in the matter of peace and legal policy ; the elimination of the legal framework deficit in the confusion of Union , Community and international law ; and finally the elimination of the paralyzing lack of clarity as to how future integration and enlargement measures should be carried out to finally overcome the East-West divide in Europe .
It is not a case of denying the partial improvements made to the Maastricht Treaty by Amsterdam when pointing out the lack of a solution still to these fundamental problems .
No-one is going to devalue the efforts of the two rapporteurs on Amsterdam . But their report remains ambiguous in regard to these fundamental problems and is therefore unacceptable to my group .
In view of the failure of the Intergovernmental Conference it is not so vital whether this House recommends accepting the Amsterdam Treaty or not .
Rather , what is central is whether the European Parliament limits itself to being a proud co-mover of partial institutional reforms or whether it finally rouses itself to become the leading voice in a constitutional process , the heart and nerves of the next crucial steps towards integration !
( Applause from the Green Group )
Mr President , I voted against the report because I did not wish to be party to a utilization of the European Parliament by national parties and national governments , which not only serves to undermine the sovereignty of the European Parliament , but equally the sovereignty of the national parliaments themselves , because these are the bodies that have the decisive word at the moment in the ratification process .
This dilemma that we have with this decision suggests that now is the time to get serious with a central claim , which states : old-type Intergovernmental Conferences like this are no longer in the position to drive European integration forward !
Precisely because this is the case it only works if we say that , in the ratification process for Amsterdam , we need to ensure that the next intergovernmental conference takes place with the European Parliament enjoying codecision .
Otherwise we can leave everything the way it is !
Mr president , I too voted against this resolution .
The reason was that I do not believe that the intergovernmental conference is any longer the right way to further the development of the European union .
It is in many respects a failure .
I believe it will , for example , lead to the European parliament 's inability to effectively influence amendments to the treaty .
Europol is a good example of how the protection by law of citizens is in danger when governments are disinclined to give either the European Parliament or national assemblies sufficient powers of democratic supervision .
The other example of an inter-governmental conference 's ineptitude in solving these fundamental problems is EMU .
The issue is whether in formulating economic and monetary union we will have created an essentially federalist part of the EU , while there will be a move to administer it as if it were an inter-governmental project .
With that , the democracy deficit and the future lack of central bank control is clear .
I think we ought to switch to the kind of constitutional legal process whereby the rights of citizens would be an important ingredient in the debate .
Mr President , the European Parliamentary Labour Party , on whose behalf I speak , broadly welcomes the Amsterdam Treaty , not as something that is perfect but as something that contains many good things .
In particular , we know that our constituents would welcome the UK opt-in to the Social Chapter , the provision for Europe-wide legislation against discrimination and the new protocol on animal welfare .
There are also many other things we welcome .
However , we have some reservations about the final report and while we have kept our separate votes to a minimum , nevertheless we have voted against five parts : the first indent of paragraph 8 on border controls ; the first indent to paragraph 9 on a common defence policy ; the second indent of paragraph 12 extending codecision to fiscal policy ; the fourth indent to paragraph 12 giving the Union and the Community a single legal personality ; and , the third indent of paragraph 16 , restricting unanimity to constitutional areas .
With those provisos we can broadly welcome both the report - and we congratulate the rapporteurs on their work - and the Amsterdam Treaty .
We support the Amsterdam Treaty and agree with Parliament 's appeal to the national parliaments to ratify the treaty .
It is a success for political cooperation in the area of the environment , equal opportunity and , above all , employment .
We also welcome the principle of increased openness and the citizens ' access to documents .
We do not support the demand for a common defence , and in a special supplementary proposal we have pointed out that the position of the non-aligned states must be respected .
We share the view that a number of institutional questions must be solved in connection with enlargement .
Regarding the decision on increased use of majority voting , we are not prepared to support the report 's far-reaching demands for common majority voting .
We do not therefore support the second and third points of paragraph 16 .
Nor do we support majority decision-making in the area of cultural policy ( paragraph 12 , eleventh point ) . We consider that to be mainly a question for the individual Member States .
After having indicated the paragraphs on which we have a dissenting view , partly through voting and partly through this explanation of vote , we voted for the report in the final vote .
We think that it is an important signal to the citizens of Europe that the Intergovernmental Conference was successful on several issues which are important to citizens .
We are saying no to the Treaty of Amsterdam , which is a further step towards pushing down nations .
This is not what the peoples want .
A survey recently undertaken by the Commission itself across Europe , showed that 8 % of those questioned only were favourable to a European superstate , 40 % were in favour of cooperation without loss of national sovereignty , and 38 % were in favour of cooperation accompanied by jointly pooled competencies in limited fields , and finally 14 % were for strict national independence without cooperation .
These surveys , and the Commission did not see fit to continue - and we all know the reason why - shows that Europe is today being built by Eurocrats , with the agreement of governments , and that it is not the Europe of the people .
Now we understand far better why the Treaty of Amsterdam , following on from the Treaty of Maastricht , has been drafted in such an obscure way , and why we find such esoteric provisions , hiding behind the protocol on subsidiarity , and which - but without clearly saying so - adopt the position of the European Court of Justice , on the claimed superiority of Community law over national constitutions .
There is a reason for this obscurity .
It throws simple citizens off track , and prevents any understanding of the real long term purpose of what the citizens are asked to ratify , and it allows those who are responsible - and the French Ministry of European Affairs was a recent example of this - to hide behind technical questions , to support the view that it would not be the right time to consult the people by holding a referendum .
It is easy to understand the short term tactics behinds these manoeuvrings , but the longer term aims are not so easy to divine .
People say that the federal construction , once completed , will be more effective than the Europe of the nations .
But does anyone perchance believe that it will be possible to achieve efficiency by adopting purely technocratic procedures without the commitment and support of the people ?
This is a pure illusion .
In reality , there can be no efficient European construction unless it has the support of the people , and this is the reason why , whatever people say , the Europe of the nations is not only the most democratic of Europe 's , but also the most efficient .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted yes to the report on the Amsterdam Treaty today .
We have done so in the opinion that the report emphasizes many important Danish issues .
Examples include better environmental protection , cooperation in the fight against unemployment , transparency and greater influence for the European Parliament .
However , the report on the Amsterdam Treaty is problematical in some areas .
It was therefore necessary to vote against some paragraphs in the report .
In our view it is very regrettable that the European Parliament wants to try to put obstacles in the path of enlargement by demanding that all institutional reforms should be in place before enlargement begins .
It has therefore been necessary for us to vote against these paragraphs .
Another criticism of the report is the linking together of Denmark with Ireland and the UK with regard to the Schengen cooperation .
Denmark participates in Schengen at an intergovernmental level , while both Ireland and the UK are totally outside the cooperation .
We are therefore voting against it because it sends the wrong signals to the Member States about Denmark 's involvement in the Schengen cooperation .
The report also sets the scene for a further cooperation in the area of security and defence policy .
It is the opinion of the Danish Social Democrats that the security and defence of Europe should be secured through membership of NATO and not through the WEU .
We are therefore voting against paragraph 9 , because we believe that it conflicts with the Danish reservations .
The European Parliament is helping to make decision-making in the EU more democratic and transparent .
We therefore support the fact that agricultural policy , among other things , is to come under joint decision-making in the European Parliament .
However , we cannot support the inclusion of defence and foreign policy or legal and internal affairs , which are in the third pillar , under this procedure .
The European Parliament is generally regarded as the big winner in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
An appropriate conclusion , in view of amongst other things the enlargement of the area in which the joint decision-making procedure is to be applied , and the required approval of Parliament for the appointment of the President of the European Commission .
A large number of the European Parliament 's wishes have not been granted , but the majority of this Parliament is sufficiently pragmatic to recommend to Member States that they ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam .
That , however , is not our advice to the Member States .
The rapporteurs point out that the European Treaties , including the Treaty of Amsterdam , will not lead to a federal European state .
This ideal is evidently out of fashion .
Yet I cannot but interpret the new treaty which extends the powers of the Union in areas such as employment , social affairs , internal security , and defence , and which strengthens communal procedures , as a step in the direction of a European political union .
This ambition has been superseded , in view of the future enlargement of the Union to an even more heterogeneous bond of 20 of maybe even more Member States .
It is also problematic that no account was taken of the dissatisfaction of the citizens of the Member States about a governmental structure which has been imposed from above .
The public support for ' Europe ' has decreased considerably over the past few years , as shown in opinion polls , election results , and in the turnout for European elections .
A treaty with a less ambitious estimation of what European government can do , would have been a better way to show the surplus value of European cooperation .
A slimming down of the European portfolio would make European decision-making clearer , in the end , and would simplify the enlargement .
The extension of the powers of the European Parliament is in our view not the best solution to the democratic deficit in European decision-making , after all .
The awareness that Parliament functions at a considerable distance from the citizen is not getting through frequently enough .
By definition , it has inadequate representative strength and legitimacy , partly as it has to represent an increasingly larger area via a limited number of members .
Although the European Parliament fulfils a useful role in some areas , the national parliaments need to remain the main focus to their citizens .
National parliaments will be looked at as a priority at the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
We reject the Treaty of Amsterdam and that is why we have voted against the Méndez de Vigo / Tsatsos report .
It is an understatement to say that the conclusions of Amsterdam were not a cause for jubilation and enthusiasm from European public opinion .
As is the case for all compromises , the Treaty of Amsterdam leaves those who , like myself , are passionately interested in Europe and European construction , and have been for a score or more years , somewhat dissatisfied .
Let it be said clearly : this treaty is not up to the challenges and ambitions of European construction , which should , in less than five years from now , have completed single currency , enlargement , the fight against employment , political Europe , and social Europe .
But is that a reason to reject the treaty , and join the camp of those who are such constant adversaries of European construction ?
I think not . If so , the cure would be worse than the illness itself !
Following on from Maastricht , Amsterdam has opened up a number of doors .
We need to have no hesitation in using them and the new resources they make available to advance towards a Europe of citizenship which can combat unemployment and have a political existence on the world stage .
It is up to we sincere Europeans to work for this !
But we also must demand that tomorrow 's Luxembourg summit on employment should be concrete , strong , and active , and that the day after tomorrow , we need new institutional reform , so that the forthcoming enlargement takes place as it should , without disorganization or weakening .
We have entered into a new stage with Amsterdam .
Things might have been better , but the important thing now , is to prepare for the next step .
Despite the fact the Alleanza Nazionale has made strong criticisms of the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Conference and later of the final draft of the Treaty of Amsterdam on several occasions , we have decided , owing to a sense of responsibility , to vote in favour of the report drawn up by the Committee on Institutional Affairs , as we have found that some of our negative positions on the treaty and some of our proposals to strengthen the pillars of the foreign and defence policy have proved essential for the Union to become a real political community of European States and peoples .
Ours is therefore an act of good will , despite preferring the report to have been more decisive and complete on some points , such as the expansion of the Union and the rebalancing of its political and economic actions in respect of the South and the Mediterranean .
We are now waiting for the actions to follow the words , particularly with regard to the importance of the " unconditional approval ' of the joint declaration made by Belgium , France and Italy , identifying the need for further institutional reforms , as a prerequisite to any expansion .
Our vote in favour is therefore further confirmation of the vocation and political choice of the Italian Right , with the primary objective of creating a real political Europe .
I regret that the resolution presented by the Committee on Institutional Affairs by the Parliament has not taken up the conclusions of the legal committee relating to the re-numbering of the treaty .
The decision to re-number all of the articles in the treaty appears to me to be regrettable in two respects .
As regards fundamentals , I fear that this may be an apparent simplification , which will in practice result in confusions and complications for the actual users of the treaty , who are the national administrations , professionals , etc ..
Any reference to the treaty will lead to two-fold searching and checking , both with the old numbering and the new .
As regards procedure , a reform on this scale should have been preceded by in-depth consultations with the people involved , and that was not the case .
Only the European bars reacted spontaneously , by expressing their opposition to reform .
But their protests were rejected summarily , in the name of an overhasty technocratic argument .
The outcome of the revision of the Maastricht Treaty was far from satisfactory , since the political objectives that had been set were not met .
As a convinced European , I deeply regret that having failed to rectify the Union 's political defects prior to the essential enlargement , we now have to postpone to a new Intergovernmental Conference the resolution of such important institutional problems as the reduction of the number of Commissioners , the generalization of qualifiedmajority voting , etc .
What greater indication of the Amsterdam summit 's failure can there be than the fact that before the draft treaty is even ratified by the Member States we already talking about the essential need to amend it ?
On the threshold of economic and monetary union , the Union has still not adapted its institutions to the forthcoming enlargement - which , by any reckoning , is seriously irresponsible .
It still does not have a common defence policy , and it has still not clarified the treaties so that the citizens can understand them .
Lastly - although some people wrongly believe that this a minor issue - the Amsterdam Treaty deliberately fails to include any reference to tourism , ignoring the fact that , amongst other things , tourism is the biggest source of job creation in the European Union .
These necessarily brief remarks will explain why I abstained in the vote , although I wish to qualify that abstention by congratulating Mr Méndez de Vigo on his excellent work , for as the poet Machado said , the road is built as we go along .
The motion for a resolution on the amendment of the Union Treaties submitted to the Plenary of the European Parliament by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , is , in my view , inadequate , ambiguous , irresolute and insensitive to public opinion and the role of the national parliaments .
Admittedly , the amendments tabled have improved the motion , but the European Parliament , whose right to vote to approve or reject the revision of the treaties has not been recognized , has an obligation to point out the draft treaty 's inadequacies in the fields of democratization , social rights and human rights . It also has an obligation to make clear that the Amsterdam Treaty does not make it possible to meet effectively the challenge of future enlargements , and leaves it up to the parliaments - or , as the case may be , the people - of the individual Member States to decide , in accordance with the conditions laid down , whether or not to ratify the new treaty .
Instead of that , the report submitted to Parliament mixes criticism and calls for further changes and new methods with the specific recommendation that the fifteen Member States should rapidly ratify the treaty .
Undoubtedly , the final assessment in the individual Member States will have to be made in accordance with the commitments undertaken by their respective governments . But the European Parliament , in my view , now has a duty to make its critical assessment in accordance with the positions that it maintained throughout the Intergovernmental Conference .
Consequently , in view of the rejection of the amendments that I tabled along those lines , and with a sense of responsibility as a committed European , I voted against the Méndez de Vigo-Tsatsos report , although without prejudging the position that the Iniciativa per Catalunya MPs will adopt in the Spanish Parliament in due course .
I am voting against this report , because the Treaty of Amsterdam does not allow for the establishment of a true political pillar providing for the balanced completion of the monetary aspect of European Union .
The Maastricht treaty wagered it would make moves towards a single currency on the basis of rigorous ( actually , far too rigorous ) economic convergence criteria , but that it would also consolidate political integration by providing for institutional reform for the purposes of improving the efficiency , democratic operations and role of the European Parliament .
The IGC should also make it possible to develop European policy in social and labour relationships , fields which are critical to our peoples .
We cannot but observe that the Maastricht bet has not paid off , and that the intended balance has not in fact been respected .
Monetary union is going full steam ahead , whereas political Europe is getting bogged down powerlessly .
This situation is all the more serious as our destiny is increasingly conditioned by the decisions taken by an independent European central bank , without there being any government with decision-making powers in the economic field over the major areas of choice affecting economic growth , European competitiveness , and employment .
Hence , Europe is increasingly becoming an extensive financial and economic area which escapes all regulation or democratic control .
Enlargement to the Eastern European countries will only increase the dilution of democracy .
While the report proposes further institutional reform , prior to any enlargement , the European Parliament has not moved to a position where it can make this an effective and absolute condition .
We have not achieved a situation where the Parliament can weigh with its influence on the future summit on employment at Luxembourg , and hence , in practice , move social Europe onwards .
While the introduction of a reference to social affairs and employment in the new treaty is positive , the way this is formulated is ambiguous , as the treaty simply makes reference to the coordination of policies of employment , which remain national .
In brief , once again , Europe has postponed political reinforcement , and has left the social question in abeyance , while monetarism and liberal dogma is enforced upon us in the form of constrictive criteria .
Far from serving the ambitions of those who wish for a federal Europe , a Europe where the people can make their will felt , the treaty is a consecration of weakened nation states , without the construction of a true European political counter-power .
It is unacceptable .
The Amsterdam Treaty does not constitute the final step towards creating a United States of Europe , but its contents move in a direction which strengthens the EU 's ambitions to develop into a federal state structure with superpower characteristics .
Supranationality is being strengthened , border controls are being abolished and the EMU process with a common currency and central bank is being confirmed .
Institutionally , it is the EU 's supranational organs , the Commission , the Court of Justice and the European Parliament , which benefit from the Amsterdam Treaty .
The losers are the Council of Ministers and the national parliaments .
There is not a single sentence in the treaty which confirms that decision-making power is going to be transferred from the EU to the Member States .
Questions of major concern for Nordic countries about employment , openness and the environment have at best been given well-meaning words , but ultimately these could be forced to capitulate to the supremacy of the single market .
The so-called environmental guarantee is even a step backwards compared with the time when it was introduced .
It is unacceptable for a new Intergovernmental Conference , which further strengthens the EU 's federal character , to be made a condition for the eastern enlargement .
We also find it unwarranted to give additional power to the larger countries if the EU is to be enlarged .
Giving the European Parliament a right of assent for treaty amendments must be rejected .
That would entirely remove the basis for the intergovernmental nature of the treaty .
There is an obvious reason why the Amsterdam Treaty does not go as far as the most outspoken federalists in the EU had hoped .
Public sympathy for EU federalism has probably never been as low as now .
The peoples of Europe want to have cooperation , but not at the price of subordinating themselves to the EU 's centralistic , bureaucratic and old-fashioned Acquis Communautaire .
According to opinion poles in the Nordic countries , there is solid opposition to participation in EMU , i.e. the project which is in a way the engine for the creation of a federal state structure at the EU level .
The basis for every society which wants to guarantee people jobs , a good education , a good environment , social justice and solidarity with the people of poor countries , is that its political system is popular and democratically legitimate .
The EU will not have the ability to achieve that for the foreseeable future .
We have voted no to the report .
I wish to state that I have voted in favour of the Vigo report and in favour of the Amsterdam Treaty .
I am disappointed with what has been achieved in Amsterdam .
What is most regrettable , Mr President , is that we must go through the whole process of ratification for what is a very small measure of progress .
It will be difficult in Ireland , where a referendum is required , to generate enthusiasm for the Amsterdam Treaty .
What I most regret is the failure to secure a proper reform of the way decisions are made ; institutional reform as we call it .
This failure has to be described to the people in plain language .
It means that if we enlarge the Community then from that day on not only present Member States can prevent important decisions but even Slovenia or Estonia will be able to apply a veto and block important decisions in a whole range of Community policies .
We are being irresponsible to agree to further enlargement in such circumstances .
There is the danger of creating serious crisis and stagnation .
The bigger the number of states the greater the danger of a crisis occurring .
I welcome the extension of powers for the European Parliament .
It is important that 70 % of all legislation will be by codecision between Parliament and the Council .
The principle of democracy must be applied to the European Union as it is in all Member States .
Finally , I want to make it clear that I am happy that we have made some progress in the area of common security and defence .
All Member States have accepted the creation of a political union in ratifying the existing treaties , and that political union cannot be complete without the development of common defence arrangements .
The Amsterdam Treaty makes common defence possible but provides for reluctant States to opt out .
I am sure that in the short term my own State will decide to opt out .
This is largely because the political establishment and the Irish media still insist , in all public discussion , on retaining the terminology of World War II and defining this question in terms of neutrality as was traditionally observed by the Irish State .
On the other hand , when opinion polls in Ireland offered the question whether Ireland should help to defend a fellow Member State the majority replied positively .
That is why I believe that I am representing the view of the vast majority of Irish people when I say I support the common defence policies because I believe that it is not the will of the Irish people that they should have all the benefits of membership while refusing to accept responsibility for security and defence .
Treaty of Amsterdam , Amendment No 13 : Text does not conform to the principle of Austrian neutrality .
The main criteria to be used in the assessment of the Treaty of Amsterdam have been summarized in Amendment No 32 made by the I-EDN group .
There are four such criteria . Let me review them .
First criterion : respect for national democracy and constitutional rules of the Member States , within the framework of an association of sovereign states in which the national border is the one of greatest legitimacy for the democratic expression of the will of the people .
Second criterion : reinforcing the role of national parliaments in the European decision-making process .
Third criterion : the search of a more transparent Union .
Fourth criterion : the need for enlargement , which requires at the institutional level the setting up of a variable geometry Europe based on differentiated cooperation .
Now , what does the Amsterdam Treaty propose ?
Bypassing national democracy , basing itself on individuals , against the peoples and Member States .
The absence of any role for national parliaments , which are gradually to be deprived of their competency in decision-making at the European level .
Opaque negotiations , ever more complex procedures , and weakened democratic control .
Systematic communitarization in all fields , which itself raises so many obstacles on the path of the necessary enlargement .
Open communitarization of the two intergovernmental pillars of the Maastricht treaty : justice and internal affairs ; and indirect communitarization , by means of its financing , of common foreign and security policy .
Far from being a harmless treaty , the Treaty of Amsterdam is considerably accentuating the process of federalization and centralization of the European Union .
Instead of making good the democratic deficit , it is increasing the democratic deficit .
Instead of providing Europe with the dynamic flexibility which it needed to come through this historic stage of continental reunification , the Treaty of Amsterdam is pushing us up the cul de sac of federalism .
In so doing , the date of effective enlargement is being postponed .
For this reason , we shall resolutely militate against this very poor treaty , and promote an open concept of a variable geometry Europe .
This will mean that at last we can welcome into a renovated Europe all the Member States which communist ideology had kept artificially separate .
We will not accept that any other ideology , under whatever guise , should take over and erect a new Berlin Wall , and create two Europes .
In spite of the fact that the European Parliament has institutionally guaranteed right of participation , nor any power of ratification , it is called on to give its opinion on what they call the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This is a treaty which has caused and will certainly continue to cause much ink to flow .
This treaty , which President Juncker said it would be difficult to ratify , and which Jacques Delors did not correct the Maastricht errors enough , has in just a short space of time become a good treaty , one acceptable to all .
When you remember that for more than two years , preparations for the intergovernmental conference in all European countries mobilized the best minds in the governments , parliaments , political parties , and other organizations , we are forced now to the conclusion that all these proposals and reactions have been a waste of time .
How can we explain to our citizens that those with the most influence , in other words , our Heads of State and of Government , were able to get together on matters as important as the introduction of the euro and enlargement , but were unable to do so on themes regarded as rather minor , such as the composition of the Commission prior to the first wave of new members , or the weighting of votes in the Council of Ministers , or again , the use of majority voting .
The bets laid on the future of Europe have only partially paid off , and in spite of all that , we 've said yes to a treaty which does ducks the reforms essential to the proper operation of an enlarged European Union .
With the greatest respect to our Heads of State , and to our ministers , I must say that I have difficulties accepting an agreement which leaves open practically all the questions essential to the proper functioning of European institutions , an agreement which does not say how the re-casting of regional aid and the new agricultural policy will actually take place .
I also believe that the Treaty of Amsterdam might have helped public opinion better understand how Europe was to be built , and bring it closer to the construction of a Europe of citizens .
Nothing like this has been done , on the contrary .
The gulf between the words of the specialists and the words intended for the consumption of citizens has increased yet again .
If , after all these criticisms , I am still prepared to vote in favour of this treaty , it is because the treaty confers a little bit more power on the European Parliament , thanks to which it will better play its role as a driving force in European construction .
Despite the well-known improvements achieved by the Treaty of Amsterdam in the promotion of equality between women and men in Community assignments , and with the recognition of the importance of mainstreaming and active equal opportunities policies in all Community actions , through the amendment of article 3 , I find it regrettable that article 118 places the European Parliament in a weaker position - as regards the fields of social security and the social protection of workers - than that of article 119 and that it makes it difficult to take decisions in favour of women because it demands unanimity on the Council .
I consider that the enlarged role given to the Parliament in the process of adopting measures under article 119 , and also the re-wording of article 119 to provide means of positive action , are encouraging .
I would request that the co-financing rules be revised so that women 's NGOs can play their part in the PRINCE programme , as unanimously approved by the Committee on Women 's Rights , enabling the NGOs to include factors such as the value of work performed by volunteers and set-up costs when calculating their contributions .
I therefore find it regrettable that none of the articles in Part III of the treaty explicitly defines measures designed to establish equality of rights between men and women in all aspects of life in principle and reality , and recommend that the Union be given a mandate next time the treaty is revised to carry out an express survey of all the fields in which sexual discrimination exists and follow up the political green light which has already been given in the present draft treaty , with regard to equality of opportunities and mainstreaming .
Finally , I consider that before the next revision of the treaty the following points need to be developed :
article 119 should be extended in such a way as to provide a legal basis for equality between men and women which clearly goes beyond the field of employment ; -article 6-A should be re-worded to give direct effect to the prohibition of sex-based discrimination , or at least to give the Parliament a greater role in determining the measures to be taken pursuant to that article ; -the implications of including equality between women and men in articles 2 and 3 should be clarified from the legal point of view .
I voted against the resolution on the Treaty of Amsterdam , as I agree with it to a large extent .
Unlike the majority in this Parliament I take the criticism of the treaty seriously .
The credibility crisis in which the EU finds itself , the arrival of EMU , the entry of the new Member States - a promise we must not go back on - necessitated a fundamental review of the treaty .
The treaty was supposed to enable us to build on a political , social and ecological union in a democratic and bold way ; the necessary complement to the union of market and money .
It did not work .
The most important part of the treaty review , preparing the Union for enlargement , was likewise not achieved .
That is why we cannot advise Member States to ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam .
That would be inconsistent in the light of our criticism .
The treaty needs to be rewritten up again .
The least the European Parliament could have done , was to defer its judgment on Amsterdam , and to put the government leaders under pressure to force them to adopt a new treaty review before the millennium , at the summit on enlargement in December .
The major political groups of this House seem even to lack the courage to use our advisory role strategically , as argued by S.O.S Europe .
Some , for instance the Dutch government , proclaim Amsterdam as a victory for the European Parliament . Yes , we will obtain more power in the main pillar .
But a gaping democratic hole remains in place around agriculture and foreign trade. in Amsterdam foreign policy is ' Brussels-ized a little more , but it has certainly become no more democratic .
The idea of parliamentary control on foreign policy has perhaps been buried for good .
Even worse is the fact that democratic control on asylum and immigration policy is being eroded further as a result of Amsterdam , while it is in this area that lives literally depend on careful policy including checks and balances .
Neither the European Parliament nor the national parliaments look like they might have a grip on what will be concocted in the Council 's fortress in Brussels .
If this Parliament is truly concerned about the EU 's democratic deficit - and not just its own power - then it should have called on the national parliaments to ensure parliamentary control in those policy areas in which the European Parliament stands powerlessly at the sides .
If necessary , following the Dutch or Danish model , by chaining their ministers to parliamentary right of assent .
This is not a step back in European unification , it is a rescue operation for a constitutional achievement which is being undermined by the present path of integration , because would not it be convenient for ministers and civil servants to be able to make decisions in Europe without having to deal with a parliament ?
With the Amsterdam Treaty the EU is taking a big step in the direction of federalism .
That is not what I wanted to come out of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Today EU federalism has very little support among the citizens .
The Union 's centralism , bureaucracy and long-winded acquis communautaire are important reasons for this .
The report from the Committee on Institutional Affairs contains little that is new and , in my opinion , is of little value .
Above all I object to the growing demands for decision-making by qualified majority .
This entails a serious weakening of democracy to the extent that the governments of the national states could be forced to adopt laws to which they are opposed .
This democratic aspect is the whole reason why I am taking a stand against this report .
Nor do I think that the European Parliament deserves to be given more decision-making within the EU system , partly because this increases supranationality within the EU and so weakens democracy , but also because of the Parliament 's poor discipline and weak democratic roots .
Political debate in Europe today is concentrated around elections to national parliaments . Only a very small political elite knows that the European Parliament does .
The European Union should be a cooperation between independent states .
We should build up a Europe of the democracies , not a United States of Europe .
Unfortunately the European Union being built today is an EU of the market .
It is the free movement of goods and services and open competition which now take priority over the demand for democratic roots and legitimacy .
That is why I am voting against this report .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0901 / 97 ) .
Question No 1 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0757 / 97 )
Subject : The situation in Algeria
What consideration has the Council given to the situation in Algeria over the last few weeks ?
I thank the President-in-Office for his answer , which I believe was correct and which demonstrated great respect for Algeria , although I am unsure that it was sufficient from the point of view of effectiveness .
I believe that despite the difficulties , it is possible to take forward the peace process in Algeria .
We must try to do so .
And when we tackle this immediate objective , we shall realize that the peace process is inseparable from the fight against corruption .
It is essential to take forward the process of halting the violence ; and we must provide the maximum possible political and parliamentary support for this process , the initiative for which must come from Algeria itself .
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart , but allow me to detain you within the scope of this question , as I have received two requests to put supplementaries .
Before giving the floor to Mr von Habsburg , however , I shall use the powers invested in me by the Rules as President in the Chair to place on record my congratulations to him on his eighty-fifth birthday and my recognition of his work in Parliament .
Mr von Habsburg , I have the honour of giving you the floor .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank you and say what a pleasure it is to work under your chairmanship , which is so good for this Parliament .
I would like to ask the following question of the representative of the Council : do you really believe it is possible to reach honest democratization by eliminating those who represent the majority of the people ?
It should not be forgotten that the original error from which all this has arisen , was the fact of an election which very clearly showed what the demands of the Algerian people were , and that election being cancelled . And it must be recognized that those who might have restrained the forces of violence have been singled out for elimination , because there were plenty of moderates in the FIS .
Second question , would it not be good thing to carry out a policy of supporting the two moderate Arab countries which are on either side of Algeria , i.e. Tunisia and Morocco , insofar as increased support would create a situation which was more favourable in the future ?
On behalf of the Council , I would first of all like to join in with the Presidency in congratulating the honourable Member who wears his age so well and , as I remember the hours of questions which we were involved in together , late into the night , some six years ago , I must say that the honourable Member has lost absolutely nothing of his verve .
In response to the first question raised by Mr von Habsburg , I would say that if we were in ' It 's a Knock-out ' , the television game , yours would be the toughest question of them all .
Of course , there was the government decision at the time to stop the electoral process .
There is bound to be doubt as to whether this was the right approach .
Personally , I have doubts about that , and I would like to say that , under the current circumstances , we must establish positive dialogue with all moderate elements , belonging to all the factions , once they have opted for democratization and for the rule of law .
In the second instance , I fully understand your sympathy for the two neighbouring countries of Tunisia and Morocco , especially as we already answered a similar question , among others that you raised some months ago .
You wish to prompt those two countries into giving a good example , as they are already doing .
As part of the Euro-Mediterranean initiative , new partnership styles have rightly been adopted with these two countries , but the problem which arises is how , within the financial spending limits provided for in the next few years by the Commission , to achieve an equitable balance as regards interventions benefiting Tunisia and Morocco .
Knowing Mr von Habsburg as I do , I have no doubt that he will take advantage of the next opportunity to raise this pertinent question with the Commission .
Mr President , the interpreter in the German cabin has translated your congratulations to Mr von Habsburg and spoken of his 58th birthday .
I only wanted to endorse the interpreter 's judgement .
Mr Posselt , as you will have noticed , we have excellent interpreting booths , which not only improve our speeches when they are translated , but are even able to determine our age in accordance with our appearance . And that is what they did for Mr von Habsburg .
Ladies and gentlemen , after that pleasant and agreeable point of order , I would remind Mr Wohlfart that I said that we had two supplementary questions .
The second is by Mr Wibe , who has just one minute , since it is not his birthday and I am unable to give him longer .
Actually , I would like to agree with the doubts about the current policy expressed by Mr von Habsburg .
For a long time people have taken it for granted that the terrible massacres in Algeria were carried out by Islamic groups .
However , recently there have been very credible reports that in fact the Algerian government itself may have been involved in this .
It is also known that the Algerian government has actively opposed attempts by international organizations to enter the country and investigate the facts .
I would like to ask the Council whether this is not a lead which should be followed up , and whether we should not strongly urge the Algerian government to open the country to international organizations which would come in and investigate this .
Let me say that I do not believe that these massacres are going to end if we simply continue to put the blame on people who we do not know are guilty , i.e. the Islamic parties .
I certainly share the fears that have just been expressed by the honourable member , and as I know how concerned M. Poos , our Minister of Foreign Affairs , is with regard to this dossier , I can guarantee that this aspect of things will certainly be raised at the meeting with the Algerian Minister of Foreign Affairs .
Furthermore , this is the purpose of this meeting , which is to send a message at once both clear and positive .
Question No 2 by Hans Lindqvist ( H0781 / 97 )
Subject : Carriage of radioactive waste within the EU
I understand that a new Euratom Directive ( No 96 / 29 ) on radioactive waste has been adopted , and will become law in the Member States by May 2000 .
Under the Euratom Treaty waste may be moved within the EU .
It would in principle be open to Germany , France or the UK to store their nuclear waste in a waste dump in Sweden .
So if Malå commune , which recently held a referendum on the final disposal of radioactive waste in its area , had said yes rather than no , would it also have been permissible to dump foreign waste there ?
The directive also proposes that radioactive waste be diluted with other waste to bring it below the ' danger ' limit values .
Is this correct ? If so , is there not a risk that there will be an increase in the carriage of radioactive waste and that countries with good primitive rock structures may become waste dumps for the whole of Europe ?
Directives 96 / 29 Euratom setting basic standards relating to the health protection of the working population against the hazards of ionizing radiation , to which the honourable Member refers , and they represent , I would say , an overall approach to health protection , setting strict standards and giving better protection to all .
These standards of protection naturally also apply to radioactive waste .
In this context , the elimination , recycling , or re-use of radioactive substances or matter containing radioactive substances require prior authorization .
Furthermore , the directive contains no provisions requiring mixing radioactive waste with other waste to bring down the levels of radioactivity to comply with standards .
As regards the circulation of radioactive waste , the Council would like to remind this House that directive 92 / 3 Euratom relating to the oversight and control of the transfer of radioactive waste between Member States , and on entry to and exit from the Community , lays down a strict monitoring regime .
Transfers between Member States can only take place on the basis of prior approval of the competent authorities in the recipient Member State .
In more general terms , the Council specified in the resolution adopted on 19 December 1994 relating to radioactive waste management , that it believed that it was the responsibility of every Member State to see to it that radioactive waste produced on its territory was managed in an appropriate fashion .
The Council also considers that optimal use should be made of installations at the national level , and that there should be more detailed examination of the various approaches possible which might , among other things , reduce transportation of radioactive waste .
I hope it will be possible to convey that answer to those in my country who are concerned that shipments of radioactive waste are going to increase .
I understand the answer to mean that , on the contrary , the Council 's representatives are saying that there is no risk that radioactive waste could stray into any Member State which has not itself approved the import of shipments from other countries .
That is , of course , good news .
I hope that it will apply for a long time to come and that each country will decide for itself what shipments of radioactive waste from other countries it will accept .
This is a positive response which I look forward to passing on in Sweden .
However , I think the second answer was very unclear .
I understood the directive to mean that it is quite clear that people intend to dilute radioactive waste with other waste to be able to get below the limits which apply for handling , transport and storage etc .
I believe that my interpretation of this is correct , but if it is the case that this is also wrong and that the Council is right , I would also be pleased to convey that message to my country , Sweden .
I think that I have so far as possible , on a very sensitive and very important subject for human health , tried to give answers to the various questions raised by the honourable Member .
For my part , the most important thing is the provision laying down the responsibilities and competencies of the recipient Member State .
This means that if in this particular case Sweden does not accept a transfer , it is thereby protected from possible storage of the radioactive materials which the honourable Member has alluded to .
I would also say that this was the principle which was very vigorously defended by Sweden at the time of its membership negotiations , because it wanted to avoid pollution of its territory with nuclear waste .
In this context it is worthwhile remembering that Sweden on the one hand , and the Community on the other hand , made a request to annex to the final membership agreement the following declaration : as regards the terminal portion in the cycle of nuclear fuel , it is the responsibility of each Member State to define its own policy .
I think this is a clear position .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , you know I come from Austria , a country where all nuclear questions are handled very sensitively .
I must confess , to my shame , that I am not familiar with the 92 / 3 / Euratom directive quoted by you .
The question this raises for me , and which is no doubt interesting for many Austrians , concerns the passage of nuclear waste .
Only the Member States of destination are ever referred to .
Would it be possible under this guideline for a country like Austria to practically defend itself against the relevant substances being transported through it ?
I am not just talking about the final disposal .
I must admit , this is a question to which I would not wish to give a wrong answer .
I would therefore propose to the honourable Member to give him a reply in writing as soon as possible .
I hope the honourable Member understands the position I am in .
I have two supplementary questions .
The first concerns the explanation which the President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers gave , and which is in the Swedish Treaty of Accession .
Is it not the case that this explanation relates to the method to be used for terminal storage and that that is decided by people themselves , not by the waste that is to be terminally stored ?
That is how I have understood this explanation until now .
The second question is as follows : if we have a situation where Sweden , or some other country , refuses to accept a shipment of radioactive waste , will it be possible to challenge that decision in the Court of Justice ?
Could the Court of Justice in that case overturn a Member State 's decision to refuse to accept radioactive waste ?
As regards the first part of the question , I have no further information .
I would say that we would use the same procedure as was promised to Mr Habsburg .
If there is a problem in Community law , the Court of Justice should be able , in my opinion , to deal with the matter .
Question No 3 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0787 / 97 )
Subject : Mass arrests at the Amsterdam Summit
A recent report from the Coalition for a Different Europe estimates that at least 700 peaceful demonstrators were arrested during the Amsterdam Summit in June .
Photographic evidence of police behaving aggressively towards the protestors has also been published .
Between 200 to 300 demonstrators are reported to have been deported to other EU countries and there have been numerous reports of protestors being manhandled by police , including reports of women being subjected to body searches and accompanied to toilets by male police officers .
Civil liberties groups throughout the EU have criticized the Dutch Police authorities for sanctioning the mass arrests of demonstrators .
In October the Danish Foreign Minister , Niels Helvig said that the arrests were questionable .
What action will the Council take on the basis of the reports of police misconduct at a vital EU event ?
I already had an opportunity to reply to questions on this matter , which was raised by Mrs Gonzales and Mr Diaz , at the July session .
The Council has never discussed the problem raised by the honourable Member in her question .
I would like , for the sake of completeness , to draw your attention to the fact that maintaining public order on the territory of the Member States of the Union is the exclusive responsibility of the national police authorities .
The honourable Member will therefore understand that the Council has no authority to take a position on something which is not part of the competencies conferred upon the Council by the treaties .
First of all I would just like to say that a report was published yesterday by the independent Amsterdam Police Complaints Commission .
They confirm that there was an inquiry , the three mass arrests were incorrect , and the criticism of the manner in which the arrested persons were treated was essentially very wellfounded .
Regarding the Minister 's response , it is quite clear that the Council is playing a role here , in that it is agreeing on the Europol Convention .
Member States throughout the European Union are seeking agreement on policing throughout Europe and the Europol Convention .
Europol , without political or judicial control , will have massive powers of collection of data , etc .
It will be immune from the law .
We are setting up a federal European police force that will carry out its police activities in Member States .
The European Union has to address this and the dangers this will involve .
I would like the Council 's reassurance that at the next summit in Luxembourg we will not have mass arrests .
It is a very dangerous precedent to set for members of the European public , that they cannot have the right to demonstrate and to highlight their concerns regarding what is happening in Europe .
It is a fundamental right for people to be able to protest throughout the European Union . You cannot wash your hands of it and say ' Oh well , that is the individual responsibility of the Member State ' .
Question No 4 by Per Gahrton ( H-0794 / 97 )
Subject : Strategy for relations with China
The visit to the USA by President Jiang Zemin of China raises the question of the West 's future strategy for its relations with the world 's most populous country .
The basic question is : how will it be possible to cooperate and conduct trade whilst actively and effectively helping to advance the process of democratization and introduce fundamental universal human rights ?
Some Chinese affairs experts believe it necessary to keep up strong , overt criticism of China for its failings in those areas , whilst others argue that silent diplomacy would be preferable .
Norway 's new government has opted for an overt , hard line , whereas some EU Member States have clearly decided to keep a low profile .
What is the Council 's current China strategy ?
What plans are there for the EU to take action within the UN Commission on Human Rights ?
The situation with regard to respect of human rights in China is a constant concern of the European Union .
All countries in the European Union share the determination and objective of achieving a significant improvement in human rights in China .
Following on from the 53rd session of the Commission of Human Rights of the United Nations in Geneva , the European Union undertook to re-examine its policy on China , from the points of view of human rights , with the aim of adopting a consistent approach .
The question of human rights is on the agenda of the regular meetings between the European Union and China .
The Luxembourg and Chinese Ministers of Foreign Affairs have had meetings on this subject in July , on the fringes of the post-ministerial meetings of the ASEAN , which took place in Kuala Lumpur , and on the fringes of the General Assembly of the United Nations in September 1997 , in New York .
In New York , there was agreement that the European Union and the People 's Republic of China would renew dialogue on human rights at expert level , on the understanding that this dialogue would be without preconditions .
Dialogue on the human rights between the European Union and China was first launched , I remind you , in 1994 .
Before the Luxembourg presidency , two meetings took place at the beginning of 1995 and at the beginning of 1996 .
Under our presidency , the first meeting took place at the end of October in Luxembourg , and the second meeting was scheduled for the beginning of December in Peking .
This dialogue will enable us to examine all questions of interest to the two parties .
Mr President , in this context , I must point out that China announced that it had signed the international pact on economic , social and cultural rights , and that work leading up to the signature of the international pact relating to civil rights and politics is continuing .
You doubtless learned last Sunday , that China released Mr Wei Jingsheng earlier than expected , a gesture that was welcomed by the presidency .
The case of Mr Wei Jingsheng had been regularly raised by the European Union , and recently in Luxembourg itself .
Thank you for the answer which contained a lot of facts , but no news .
The question is whether the release of Wei Jingsheng is the spark that could light a prairie fire in the form of further strong stands on human rights in China , whether it is the butterfly which will set off the hurricane which will really create change in China .
There are many different opinions .
A great deal has happened recently , partly at the latest party congress and partly during President Jiang 's visit to the USA with the famous statement about a ' mistake ' at Tiananmen Square .
Now we also have the release of Wei Jingsheng .
I wonder whether , against the background of these facts , the Council has any new strategy .
Have you any interpretation of what is happening ?
Is a hopeful change taking place in China or not ?
What is the Council 's interpretation ?
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart , for your answers , and especially for your recommendation of patience , which is an absolutely essential virtue in this highly complex institution .
And I must also request your patience as I ask you to maintain your attention on this question , since , pursuant to the Rules , I have received a request to put a supplementary from Mr Posselt , who has the floor for one minute .
Mr President , I congratulate you on your brilliant response to China .
I would just like to inquire by way of addition : we do not take an uncritical view of American foreign policy , of course , but actually a very critical one .
Yet American foreign policy has done something very positive recently with the appointment of its own Tibetan envoy .
I wanted to ask you whether the European Union is also planning to appoint a similar envoy , or how the question of Tibet is currently being handled in the Council .
This is a very good question .
Until now , this possibility , raised as it happens by the honourable Member , has still not been examined by the Council .
But as the European Union already has a number of special envoys in place to defend the position of the European Union as a negotiator or mediator in various parts of the world and , given the political , economic , and cultural importance of a country such as China , but also the interest that we all have in the promotion of human rights and democratization , I believe that the suggestion merits our support , and at all events , I intend to present it at the time of a forthcoming General Affairs Council .
I would first like to correct a choice of words in my previous contribution .
The reports on massacres in Algeria which I spoke about do not implicate the Algerian government , but they do implicate the Algerian authorities .
As far as the Council 's reply is concerned , I would still like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether it is not reasonable for us to be able to introduce routine inspections in Sweden .
This is an issue which rouses the entire Swedish people .
We have never had salmonella in our country , thanks to the fact that we have had proper veterinary inspections .
However , the treaty we have entered into is based on the idea that the certificates we receive from the exporting countries should be correct .
Evidently they are not correct .
In this case , surely , concern for human health must be the spirit of the treaty , so to speak , and must therefore allow Sweden to set up routine inspections when we import meat , as long as it continues to be the case that meat is infected in spite of the fact that people have certificates saying the opposite .
Mr President , I will not conceal the fact that the question of salmonella contamination is of the greatest interest to myself as a trained doctor .
It is also a matter of consumer protection , given that there are in Europe , as mentioned in the question , around one thousand people who die every year as a consequence of sammonelosis .
The problem is therefore a relatively important one .
As concerns the supplementary question , I have just said that the Commission 's mission was to take the necessary measures and as necessary to present appropriate proposals to ensure compliance with rules for the protection of consumer health .
This in my opinion should be of the utmost priority , alongside other rules whose purpose is to avoid the introduction into intracommunity trade of items adversely affecting the rules governing the internal market .
If there is no wish to consider the possibility of changing the rules governing intra-Community trade in meat to overcome the disadvantages which have been raised in the questions , the best thing to do would certainly be to invite the Commission itself tomake a proposal to the Council in the proper way .
Keeping salmonella out demands a lot of a country .
Wherever it occurs , the whole flock or herd must be destroyed .
That is also what happens .
It is necessary , but it is expensive .
How can we justify these costs when , in spite of veterinary certificates , of a lot of the meat being imported proves to contain large amounts of salmonella ?
I am in favour of the European market for agricultural produce . It is good for consumers .
But a precondition is that we are all able to rely on the fact that the food we buy is not a danger to health .
We cannot do that today .
Thousands of Europeans die each year from salmonella poisoning .
As consumers we must be able to have confidence that the food we buy and eat is good for us .
It is therefore in the interests of the whole of Europe for the Council to accept its responsibility to stop salmonella .
After Mr Wohlfart 's formal and uninvolved response , I am unable to trust the Council in this respect .
If my ears do not betray me , and if I understand the honourable Member aright , he was not asking a question .
He said that I had made a declaration which was fairly clear and straightforward , but he doubted that I was really convinced about the action to be undertaken , if I have understood things right .
Is that it ?
I thought the answer the Minister gave did not suggest there was any great will to tackle the problem of salmonella in Europe in its entirety .
An awful lot needs to be done if we are to make Europe salmonellafree .
We have succeeded in Sweden , but it cost us a great deal .
What are you doing on the Council to ensure that other countries act in a similar , if expensive way and so eradicate salmonella ?
Mr Wohlfart , Mr Cars , you are establishing a dialogue outside the framework of the Rules .
I am extremely flexible in the Chair , but I would ask you to allow me to conduct the sitting so that I can at least justify the emolument that I receive for being here .
I will not now take up all the time available for speaking by entering into a dialogue , and at all events , yours is the sole responsibility for directing the debate .
If I understood the reasons for this question , the countries are known , and I would say that if you had a suspicion , I think that controls at point of destination , by sampling , are always possible .
Furthermore I would add that if the Commission believes that the situation is becoming truly a matter of concern , it is the Commission 's responsibility to make a proposal to the Council of Ministers , along the lines suggested by the honourable Member .
Salmonella in itself is one problem .
Even worse are the salmonella bacteria which have become resistant to antibiotics .
I would like to know whether the Council is aware of the situation with regard to antibiotic-resistant salmonella bacteria in the EU , how they are being fought , how people are thinking of coping with this problem at all , and where they exist .
I have not ducked an answer , but the Commission must give you a formal answer .
However , as a doctor , I must point out that as regards resistance to antibiotics , the problem , unfortunately , is not limited only to the bacteria known as salmonella .
It is due in fact to an unwarranted use of antibiotics .
We could have a 24-hourlong debate on resistance to antibiotics , and I would be very pleased to have one day in private with Mrs Hulthén .
Mr Wohlfart , you can , of course , arrange a meeting with Mrs Hulthén afterwards .
As President , and also speaking as a doctor , however , I wish to say that the appearance of antibiotic-resistant bacteria is an indisputable fact . There are countless cases of this , including staphylococcus , the bacterium which causes infections that are treated with penicillin .
However , that is a scientific matter , and we are examining the issue from the healthpolicy point of view . Mrs Thors therefore has the floor for one minute to speak on this issue .
The problem with salmonella is due partly to the fact that we cannot rely on the inspections which have been carried out .
My question is when does the Council really expect to have effectiveness so that the inspections which are carried out can be checked and we can rely on the certificates which exist .
The questioners have emphasized this .
On the other hand , we also know that we would not have the problem with infected turkey meat , for example , if the same rules which are now being introduced for beef - country of origin labelling - were to apply to all food products .
Today it is impossible for us to label meat which comes from a country whose inspections we cannot rely on .
I would also like us to be able to rely on the certificates which are issued in all parts of Europe .
When does the Council expect to realize the intentions which are contained in the Commission 's proposal on food legislation and which are being so hotly debated in the Member States ?
The question of controls and subsequent protection of the consumer , and in this case protection of human life , is part of the Commission 's remit .
I would not wish to speculate further .
I believe that if the Commission , with proof to hand , can demonstrate other more efficient means to react to the problem , it will be the Council 's responsibility to take these decisions , and take its appropriate share of responsibility .
As you see , this is a very important question for us in the North , especially in Sweden which has often been hit by infected meat .
I have a follow-up question which I would like to have answered .
If it is the case that Sweden 's health authorities decide the risks of salmonella infection spreading in Sweden are too great , and , in spite of the fact that you say it is not allowed , they introduce random inspections or regular routine inspections , as mentioned in Mr Wibe 's question , what will happen then ?
What would be the result if Sweden still introduced routine border inspections ?
Would we then receive a visit from the President-in-Office of the Council , or another representative of the Council , who would stop the inspections ?
What would be the result of such a decision on the part of Sweden ?
I did not fully understand the end of the sentence .
I invite the honourable Member to repeat his question .
If Sweden concludes that routine border inspections are necessary and introduces such inspections , in spite of the fact that you said that it was not allowed , what would happen then ?
What would be the result of that for the Member State of Sweden ?
I think we have possibly not understood one another .
I said that if the authorities of a member country , in this case Sweden , had a suspicion , in this instance , they could set up controls .
There is no prohibition on inspection if there are suspicions .
I think in the way you express the reasons behind Mr Wibe 's question made allusion to certain countries .
It may be possible to establish a link , which would become the basis of a suspicion .
Then the Swedish government is free to carry out inspections .
I am not sure that the Council properly understands why we are so angry in Sweden and Finland , but it is of course due to the fact that this is a problem which has arisen through our becoming members of the European Union .
We were promised that the problem would not arise .
That is why we expect a little more commitment .
I would like to ask what objectives actually exist .
Is there an objective that the whole of the European Union should be as free of salmonella as Sweden and Finland were before their membership of the European Union ?
We are a little suspicious , because the French ambassador in Sweden went public and said , more or less , that people can tolerate a little salmonella .
These Swedes seem a bit wimpish , a bit hypochondriac and oversensitive .
Salmonella is part of everyday life .
I am not quoting word-for-word , but that was the impression he gave .
In the light of this we desire a bit more commitment and an objective that salmonella shall also be eradicated in the rest of the Union .
We are well and truly into salmonella !
Joking apart , I can assure the honourable Member that the presidency has understood perfectly well what is at issue .
It would be a pity if a doctor did not understand what is at stake with the risk of salmonella .
Trust me , I fully understand the scale of the problem raised here , because by the number of supplementary questions , I can see that it is a matter of grave concern in your countries .
On the other hand , I do not know which ambassador you had in mind when you were speaking , but to me it does not appear that this ambassador had a very sophisticated understanding of medicine .
This is a personal opinion .
I can only repeat this .
If the Commission , which gave an undertaking to carry out its homework on this , during the health council which was held in September this year , draws conclusions which are quite possibly those which you are coming to now , I believe it is the Commission 's duty to accept its responsibilities , and out of concern for consumer health , to propose to the Council adequate and effective protection measures . The Council will then take its responsibilities .
I have no doubt , in this particular case , that the Council will do just that .
Question No 7 by Robin Teverson ( H-0803 / 97 )
Subject : Road hauliers
Will the Council confirm that it will take all possible measures to protect road haulage companies from industrial action in other Member States ?
If action such as road blockades , set up in France last year and threatened again recently , does result in financial loss or physical hardship will they make sure that hauliers are compensated quickly and given all possible help ?
First , the Council is fully conscious of the untoward consequences that road barricades had in France in 1996 on the free circulation of goods and persons in Europe .
It is delighted at the outcome of the recent conflict between truckers and their employers .
The Council remains convinced that , now as then , negotiation is the best way to cope with these and similar situations .
I would also like to point out to the honourable Member that the Council took note of the actions undertaken by the Commission , which had responsibility for overseeing respect for free circulation within the single market , in regard to the French authorities and the authorities of the other Member States , for the purposes of facilitating a resolution of the conflict , of mitigating the effects of the barriers , and finally accelerating procedures for compensation for damage , if any , suffered .
I am glad that the President-in-Office understands the great hardship this has caused a number of companies .
My concern here is not just that compensation should be paid quickly - which has not happened at all in the past - but that a code of practice should be accepted by all Members of the Council .
First of all this should ensure that roads are kept open during national disputes so that trade between European countries can continue to take place and foreign drivers are not affected , and then , if that fails , there is a code of practice which makes sure that financial compensation is always paid by the Member State concerned , and that compensation is paid quickly .
Would the President-in-Office see whether such a code of practice could be agreed between Member States for any such future incidents ?
Firstly , I would like to say that with a view to a solution to this strike , the COREPER at its meeting of 5 November last , looked at the possibility of calling an extraordinary Transport Council .
Fortunately the tripartite negotiations in France made it possible to solve the problem , out in the field .
But the questions which have been raised by earlier road blocks , involving the need to guarantee transit corridors and accelerate compensation procedures , have already been raised at the Council of Ministers of Transport , and in the General Affairs Council .
For my part , I shall try to submit your proposal , relating to a code of good conduct , to my colleague Mme Delvaux , who has responsibility for the Council of Ministers of Transport , with a view to examining the possibility of adoption of a code of good conduct , as proposed by the honourable Member .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as you will see when we reach the subject of the European City of Culture - I am the Member for Valencia - the problem of the losses caused by road hauliers ' strikes is a regular occurrence .
Of the five hundred actions brought in the French courts , only one has been successful .
This is because , like all courts , the French courts require two things : that it be clearly determined who is responsible ; and that the losses be quantified .
I believe that Community law can be extremely useful with regard to both those requirements .
Firstly , the President-in-Office will surely agree with me that the free movement of goods is the very essence of the treaties .
He will also agree that the Member States have a duty to ensure compliance with the treaties .
And he will probably agree that all Member States are objectively responsible for dealing with the inadequate functioning of public services .
The conclusion is that we must establish that the Member State in question is responsible by means of Community law .
And , as regards quantification of the losses , I would propose that a Commission service be set up to assess the losses objectively in order to facilitate the work of the courts .
At the very least , the witnesses would be considered expert witnesses under any of our legal systems , which are derived from the Justinian Code .
I shall be extremely brief .
The honourable Member has himself outlined the solution to the problem that he has just raised .
It is now down to the Commission services to do their duty .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you were very polite in replying to my question , but your answer reminds me of the words of the owner of a house whose roof leaks every year : when it leaks , he says " I had better do something about it ' ; then , when the rain stops , he does nothing .
And , the following year , the roof leaks again , and he has to put buckets under the drips , and so on .
Do you not think , Mr President-in-Office , that , with regard to the interruption of road traffic as a result of industrial action , the Community , the free market , is like that house with a leaking roof , and that it is time for the Council to address the issue of the organization of road transport , the industrial problems and the broader question of compensation once and for all , and not wait to hold a special meeting of the Council , but adopt wide-ranging Community legislation ?
You are caught between a rock and a hard place , as they say .
You know that you must address your questions to the Commission , Mr Medina Ortega , and I expect to see you at Question Time to the Commission next month .
Question No 8 by Maj Theorin ( H-0805 / 97 )
Subject : Legal rights of asylum-seekers
When an asylum seeker is refused entry and returned to his home country or another country outside the Schengen area that person must have a guaranteed right of appeal against the decision refusing him entry .
This right should initially be guaranteed by the country the individual is returned to .
If that State cannot guarantee that right it should be the country refusing entry .
Are there any guarantees that a state refusing entry will offer asylum-seekers the right of appeal ?
I shall now try to perform my duties .
The Council resolution of 20 June 1995 on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures lists in detail the guaranteed rights which apply to the processing of asylum requests .
As regards the rights of asylum seekers in matters of appeals and reassessments , reference should be made to paragraph 4 of the resolution , which deals with reassessments .
The following paragraphs in my opinion give replies which adequately answer the question raised by the honourable Member .
First , it is specified in paragraph 8 , in the event of a negative decision against the asylum seeker , there should be a possible appeal to a tribunal or an appraisal organization which will make an independent decision on individual cases .
I would also like to refer to paragraphs 15 and 16 of this same resolution which deals with the information given to the applicant regarding the decision , the reasons for the rejection , the possibility of reassessment of the decision and the deadlines applicable , and finally the availability of time to make an appeal .


As regards paragraph 17 , this paragraph lays down general principles allowing the applicant to stay in the territory so long as no decision has been taken regarding appeal and allowing the asylum seeker to make an appeal to the independent organizations mentioned in paragraph 8 , and then be granted authorization , due to the special circumstances of his or her case , for temporary residence on the territory of a Member State , when the legislation of that state authorizes an exception to the general principle .

With regard to manifestly groundless requests for asylum , I refer to paragraph 19 of the resolution which specifies that the Member States may , by derogation to the principle stated in paragraph 8 , deny the right of appeal against the rejection of an application if , on a prior basis , instead of and in lieu of such procedure , an independent organization distinct from the authority examining the case , has confirmed the decision for rejection of the application ..
According to paragraph 21 , the Member States may lay down exceptions to the principles of paragraph 17 in limited cases .
However , there must at least be a guarantee that the decision regarding the application shall be taken at a high level and that sufficient additional measures , such as an identical assessment confirming the validity of the original decision are made by another authority which is both central and has the necessary experience and knowledge in the field of asylum rights and refugees , prior to the enforcement of the decision .

Finally , with regard to requests for asylum made at borders , I would refer you to paragraphs 23 and 24 of the resolution which guarantees that , first , any asylum seeker arriving at a border has the possibility of lodging an application for asylum , and that if a special procedure is applied for the purposes of undertaking an examination before the decision relating to entry , if the application is manifestly without foundation , no measure for deportation should be taken while the special procedure is underway , and finally that , if entry is refused and there is a derogation to the general principle of the suspensory effect of the appeals procedure , there must be a guarantee that the decision for refusal of entry is taken by a minister or by a comparable central authority , and that sufficient additional safeguard measures , such as the prior examination by another central authority , should provide an assurance that the decision taken is a just one .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply .
The Schengen cooperation involves a more restrictive asylum policy for Sweden , which means more applicants are going to get a negative answer and be refused .
When the chances of an asylum seeker being granted asylum are reduced , there really must not be any lack of legal certainty for him or her .
Therefore it is important for us to have certain fundamental rights truly guaranteed .
There must therefore be guarantees for the right to appeal .
I am very grateful for the legal answer which I got from the minister .
When I get the answer on paper I am going to go through it again and I will come back if I feel that the answer needs to be elaborated .
In fact , I see no objection to providing supplementary information to the honourable Member in writing .
I would simply add some words , as Schengen has been mentioned .
I was myself a signatory to the convention of application .
I can assure you that it was , as it happened , a difficult and painful exercise . But I can also say this .
The principle of the first host country having responsibility of checking whether or not rights of asylum can be granted , is indeed applied , in theory ; and it is also true that , for humanitarian reasons , the second country to which the political asylum seeker may make a request for asylum may still grant the asylum seeker that right .
The rules are not as restrictive as they might appear at first sight .
Question No 9 by Richard Howitt ( H-0806 / 97 )
Subject : Child labour in West Africa
Trafficking of children in West Africa is widespread and on the increase , involving the following countries : Benin , Togo , Nigeria , Niger , Burkina Faso and Gabon .
Child trafficking particularly affects young girls from the south east of Togo who are in high demand to work as domestics in relatively wealthy areas around Lagos in Nigeria and Libreville in Gabon , both oil exporting countries .
Also last year an illegal ' labour camp ' for children was discovered in Lagos .
The haggard , malnourished children found there were mostly from Togo .
It is believed that an average of approximately 30 children are brought into Lagos every two months by brokers who scout for children in Benin and Togo .
Is the Council aware of organized child trafficking practices in West Africa ?
What action will the Council take to do something about this tragic situation ?
Will the Council raise the issue of child trafficking with the Nigerian and Togolese government authorities ?
The Council is not unaware of the fact that trafficking in children is a most unfortunate reality in a number of countries , and unfortunately not only in the countries that have been mentioned by the honourable Member .
On 4 November , the political committee recommended that the question of kidnapping of children should be put on the agenda for political dialogue with the 27 countries concerned .
On 31 October , seven Mauritanian nationals were arrested at the Bamako airport in Mauritania , when they were attempting to embark on a flight to the United Arab Emirates with nine children aged less than five years .
The international combat against trafficking in children is conducted by the United Nations , who have designated a special rapporteur on the question of the sale of children .
The European Union will continue to work towards an end to this odious practice , cooperating with the governments concerned and with non-governmental organizations also concerned by this question .
I would also like , in this context , to point out that every year the European Union actively participates in drafting a United Nations resolution condemning trafficking in children and child labour , and calls on Member States to put an end to such practices .
Finally , the European Union has made a commitment in favour of democracy and the protection of human rights .
Indeed , article 5 of the first Lomé Convention explicitly states that the policies of the European Union in the field of cooperation and development are closely bound up with the respect for and the exercise of fundamental human rights and liberties .
As signatories of Lomé IV , all countries cited by the honourable Member have declared their profound attachment to human dignity and human rights .
The European Union expects all signatories of the Lomé Convention to fulfil their obligations .
Thank you for your response .
The labour camp in Lagos that I mention in the question was actually known by local residents as a slave dump or children market .
People looking for cheap labour came to the camp and chose the children they wanted .
Most went on to work as domestic workers , at market stalls or as shop assistants . Some washed vehicles or collected fares on minibuses .
In addition , they faced physical abuses in the form of beatings from their employers or were at risk of sexual exploitation by the families employing them .
A report by Anti-Slavery International found that 95 % of the child domestics were girls .
Because of these stark facts , President-in-Office , I wonder whether your answer , while I agree with it in total , is enough .
What do you expect to be the outcome of the political dialogue on 4 November , which you have described ?
Although we have article 5 in the Lomé Convention , what will you do specifically to enact it in response to the countries that I have referred to in the question ?
What more can Europe do ?
First , the European Union would have an interest in giving Mrs Mary Robinson , the new High Commissioner for Human Rights , the responsibility of dealing with these very painful matters .
I believe that she has the necessary authority to ensure that the voice of the United Nations is heard , and to remind the signatory countries of the various international conventions on human rights of their responsibilities , which I would say are elementary .
Furthermore , as regards signatory countries of the Lomé Convention , it is on the one hand absolutely necessary for the European Union as such to denounce these occurrences most vigorously , and that it should say so to the relevant Member States who are signatories to the Lomé Convention .
On the other hand , I am of the personal opinion that this is likely to be not enough .
I shall nevertheless be free , during the Development Council which will be held a week on Friday in Brussels , under questions relating to the humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes region , to add an extra point to our discussions on child labour , which you have described in terms which cannot but make us profoundly sad .
It shall then be the responsibility of the Commission to undertake further investigations and research , in close collaboration with the services of Mrs Robinson and the NGOs who are qualified in this field , so as to propose the appropriate measures which in my view are necessary , to the Council without unnecessary delay .
Mr Howitt is requesting the floor for a point of order .
I do not want to take up any more time except to genuinely thank the President-in-Office for what I regard as a very positive answer .
I felt that so strongly , Mr Howitt , that I thanked the President-in-Office several times . I believe that his answer has raised everyone 's awareness of this problem enormously .
Thank you , once again , therefore , Mr Wohlfart .
Question No 10 by Anna Karamanou ( H-0809 / 97 )
Subject : Council Recommendation of 2 December 1996 on the balanced participation of women and men in the decision-taking process
On 2 December 1996 the Council , recognizing the democratic deficit that exists as regards the representation of women , adopted a Recommendation for the Member States with a view to ensuring the balanced participation of women and men in the decision-taking process .
The Recommendation calls on each Member State to adopt an integrated strategy and to take all the necessary legislative , regulatory , administrative and other measures with a view to increasing the participation of women at all levels .
Approximately one year after this Recommendation was issued , will the Council say :
What specific measures and programmes are being promoted by the Member States of the EU with a view to achieving the balanced participation of women and men at the decision-taking centres ?
What steps have been taken and what efforts made to alert public opinion and the various public and private bodies concerned to the need to facilitate the access of women to Community and national political and decision-taking bodies ?
In response to this question I would like to say that the recommendation of the Council , which dates back to 2 December last year , and which applies to the balanced participation of men and women in decision-making processes , lays down that the Commission will submit a report , both to the Parliament and to the Economic and Social Committee , for the first time three years after the adoption of said recommendation , and then on an annual basis , using the information supplied by the Member States .
Consequently , given that the recommendation was adopted last year , the first report will be drafted only three years later , that is , at the end of 1999 . In these circumstances , the Council is not in a position at this stage to make an inventory of measures and programmes in force in the Member States , as requested by the honourable Member .
Mr President , I am in a position to know very well what is written in the final paragraph of the recommendation with regard to the obligations of the European Commission .
However , my question is addressed to the Council , which I consider should be in a position to inform the European Parliament on the reception suffered by this recommendation at the hands of the Member States and on the progress of this recommendation .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office if he is satisfied with the representation of just half the population of Europe in the democratic institutions and in the centres of political decision-taking .
Does he think that our democratic system works well when it indirectly excludes the equal and balanced participation of women in all decision-taking processes ?
I must limit my assessment to the specific case of Luxembourg , because I know the interest that was raised by this initiative and by the recommendation of the Council , on 10 December last .
Our government is conscious of the importance of the subject , given that , at the time of ministerial reshuffling , two years ago , we included as one of our political priorities the promotion of the role of women in Luxembourg society , by setting up a ministry for the advancement of women .
As regards other countries , political consciousness is increasingly being awakened , and advances are being made .
No later than last week , a very encouraging and positive judgement was handed down by the European Court of Justice in a manner consistent , I believe , with the wishes of the honourable Member .
As regards the role of women , I am personally convinced that here , in this House , there are many women Members who are highly dynamic and who will not restrict themselves to advocating promotion of the role of women in this House only , but in their member countries also .
As the time allotted to Question Time to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 11 to 23 will receive written answers .
Ladies and gentlemen , I cannot close the sitting without thanking Mr Wohlfart , once again , for being good enough to put with the inconvenience of Parliament 's timetable changes for two months running .
Today , I wish to thank him especially , because I know that personal circumstances made it particularly difficult for him to be here .
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart .
Mr Posselt is requesting the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , it is not the usual problem with Question Time , instead I have something quite concrete today .
For some time we have been receiving the Council 's written replies relatively late .
This is the fault of this House , however , because they are issued by the Council in good time as I understand it .
I would therefore request that we get to receive the written replies this week in Strasbourg .
Mr Posselt , I take note of your remarks and I shall look into this matter with the services responsible to see if what you propose is possible .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Action plan for the single market
The next item is the report ( A4-356 / 97 ) , by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission on the Action Plan for the Single Market ( CSE ( 97 ) 0001 - C4-0286 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has examined this report and has given a highly favourable opinion on the work carried out , both by the Committee and by the rapporteur , whom I congratulate .
I would like to make a few partly critical , but constructively critical , comments which I will hasten to make .
The Committee , for example , noted with satisfaction how the Executive Commission intends to speed up investigations into the infringement of Community regulations and it is hoped that what has unfortunately happened several times in the past will not happen again , that is that reports have been dealt with after a long delay , or have not even received a reply .
This also confirms the request made to the Commission on 11 December last year within the scope of the resolution on the Commission 's programme of work for 1997 , to take a decision whereby the Executive undertakes to apply to the Court of Justice for pecuniary sanctions to be imposed if a Member State has not taken the measures connected with the application of a Court judgment within a year , particularly in the sectors relating to the domestic market and the environment .
The Committee on Legal Affairs is also asking the Commission and the Council and Member States to eliminate once and for all , in accordance with the provisions of the treaty , the frontier controls that are still obstructing the freedom of movement of persons and also reinforce all the measures permitting a larger number of European citizens to make use of the freedom of movement .
It also pointed out the general nature of the actions relating to objective 4 , particularly the protection of consumer rights , health and the environment and establishing a dialogue with citizens , and asks the Commission to develop more specific proposals in this connection .
Finally , it confirmed how the objects of a better environmental protection and a braver consumer protection require a more marked action at Community level , as established in the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs on the Commission 's communication relating to the impact and efficacy of the single market .
With these comments , the Committee on Legal Affairs expresses a favourable opinion on this action plan for the domestic market .
And so I congratulate both Commissioner Monti and the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , I would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau .
The internal market , ladies and gentlemen , does not exist in all areas yet , and that costs European business , large and small , year after year , a great deal of money .
In particular the absence of an internal market for energy in which the right of free choice for business and the consumer is respected in the power and gas sector , is a significant obstacle .
The gas market must be privatized as soon as possible and to a substantial extent .
A tax on energy must be implemented throughout Europe , otherwise it will lead once more to market disruption .
A second topic I would like raise on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy is the full exploitation of the opportunities for innovation and new technological developments .
Often it is the small companies who are innovative , and who consequently are able to grow and therefore create more employment in Europe .
That is what we have this summit for .
An important requirement in all this is not only the completion of the market , but also the harmonization of legislation .
The absence of European patent legislation , for instance , is a hindrance for small businesses in particular to make the most of the opportunities of the internal market .
Small businesses do not have the necessary resources to register their new developments .
The last point I would like to draw to your attention is the importance of a European market for information services .
The European Union will only be able to derive full benefit from the development in the worldwide electronics trade if this is based on multilateral instead of bilateral agreements .
But to achieve this the Union will have to do a great deal of work ; also in the internal market as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a supporter of a free market economy it is a rare pleasure for me to present the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for my colleague and committed supporter of social policy Thomas Mann .
In the opinion of the committee , the Commission has a key role to play in creating the social policy to develop a forward-looking economic and social community as a model for improving the European single market .
The more clearly social aspects are built into it , the less room there is for doubt as to whether the model of success for the social market economy can actually be implemented at European level .
In the committee 's opinion , there is a need for action .
First , action on the different tax systems which are an obstacle to trade and above all action to resolve the issue of frontier workers engaged in cross-border transport and double taxation .
Second , in the committee 's opinion the production factor in employment should be subject to tax relief while the environmental factor must be taxed in order to promote employment .
Third , the committee supports the liberalization of public services . However , it also believes that a minimum of universal services must be maintained and that each round of job cuts should be cushioned with job-creating measures to make it socially acceptable .
Fourth , European economic policy , which is based on the principles of a socially and environmentally-oriented market economy , needs to maintain qualified standards of protection which have grown up over the decades and which can be further developed at European level .
Fifth , the Committee is convinced that pan-European employment agency networks and agreements on the recognition of educational qualifications and degrees and increased incentives to gain job experience within Europe are major building blocks for the single market .
Only then - according to the Committee - will workers be able to support the European single market , Europe 's national market as Mr von Wogau calls it , and I think that is important , as well as the promotion of self-reliance , to ensure the success of this single market .
Mr President , I would like to thank Karl von Wogau for his balanced report , which very extensively deals with the issues of the single market in an analytical manner .
The Commission also deserves thanks as the targets it has set to simplify single market regulations , bearing in mind the interests of the people , are worthy of our support .
For the individual , the two big drawbacks in the ongoing activity of the single market are the spread of crime and the lack of information on the countless opportunities there are for freedom of movement .
The single markets can operate only when our citizens stop feeling unsafe and when the fragile borders of opportunity are at last opened up to them .
The bars to the single market , especially those which spring from criminal activity , are not going to be remedied in any one single way .
We need cooperation between customs officers and police , for which Europol would be a marvellous tool , and we need more effective hi-technology for the dissemination of real-time data among the authorities .
Because the Union 's internal borders are disappearing , more standardized guarding procedures for our external borders need to be paid attention to .
In preparing my statement on the report on single markets for the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs I particularly stressed the importance of exploiting technology in border control and the relay of information in order to increase the effectiveness of the single market being , as it were , invisibly monitored .
I would like to approach the question of the exploitation of technology from the viewpoint of the individual also .
For example , by listing vacant jobs on the Internet we might be able to ease the movement of a trained and qualified workforce within the Union .
Research and innovation for Europe could also benefit greatly from the more fluid movement of a trained workforce .
Besides , decisions made in the Union 's institutions should be opened up to the people to a still greater extent via the information networks .
Mr President , I would like to concentrate on the issues related to tax in Mr von Wogau 's report .
On the eve of the employment summit I would like to point out what the biggest contribution in terms of tax might be in terms as a result of the shift of tax from labour to other sources , especially capital and energy .
The intention to so is not new , of course .
We find it in the Delors White Paper .
There is only one element in this White Paper which actually deserves a great deal more attention at present .
But despite the intention in the Delors White Paper it is obvious that in reality no shift from tax on labour to other sources is taking place ; quite the reverse .
This trend was set in motion in 1985 , and , as we can see , is still continuing .
But how can we adjust this trend ?
I think the only option is to achieve a degree of harmonization in the area which is the most mobile , namely capital .
Capital is the most difficult thing to tax as it is mobile .
Since that is the case , most governments can tax the least mobile factor , namely labour .
Limiting the mobility of capital can effectively only be done jointly , and only really be done by means of a certain degree of harmonization .
The Commission has instigated this in the code of conduct which it recommends .
It would be a good first step , I think .
The Commission is being pragmatic by starting with taxation on interest , which will also apply to non-residents .
In addition it is particularly urgent to discuss two elements from the Ruding Committee report , namely , firstly the harmonization of the corporation tax base , and a common minimum tariff for this corporation tax .
Furthermore it is also urgent to arrive at an increased duty on energy , or the introduction of duty on energy sources which up until now have not been taxed at all .
The Commission 's recommendation in this direction must indeed be supported , as the von Wogau report states .
I find it incomprehensible that this Parliament has not even devoted a first reading to this proposal , even though it dates back to May this year .
The revenue resulting from the increased on duty on energy and from making tax on capital more effective , could be used to lower labour costs for the low paid and for low and unskilled labour could be lowered .
Real profit can be made here .
Mr President , Mr von Wogau , the rapporteur , has prepared a special resolution in which he points out what , in the opinion of Parliament , should be done to complete the internal market .
After all , the fact that it does not operate very well yet , does not yet function as a true domestic market , is one of the major reasons why the European business community is lagging behind in its competitive position , and why economic growth in Europe is too slow .
Of course , a great deal needs to happen at European level .
My colleagues highlight all these issues .
But I would also like to ask the Member States to pay attention to this problem .
Often the Member States are the guilty party when it concerns late , wrong or divergent implementation of directives .
Sometimes there is even a case of over regulation because Member States attach a host of extra national legislation onto EU directives .
In addition to necessary new regulation , the Commission should concentrate on the improvement of the implementation , enforcement and simplification of European regulation .
The Commission and Member States will have to agree a new time schedule .
We know that it works in the European Union .
We need a new 1992 . I know that the Commissioner aims to have this ready in 1999 , but I think that is a bit of a fantasy when considering the fiscal dossier .
Nonetheless I think we need to set a realistic date .
A new challenge , a new zest , that is what we need .
If we do not succeed in completing the internal market , further integration will automatically fail to materialize .
The new entrants do not want to be members of merely a free market , they want to be members of closely knit club which offers quality in a host of areas .
This can only be achieved if the Member States keep to their agreements , and if the Commission take its role as guardian of the treaty seriously , even with respect to large Member States .
Mr Commissioner , may I mention two sectors .
I am thinking of the market for government contracts and of the insurance market for example , which are not by any means European markets yet , but are still very much national markets .
A last remark .
Large mergers in the field of accountancy seem to be occurring , very large accountancy firms which are sitting on top of the entire financial market .
The concentration of power and the problems which arise out of this is one of the Commission 's special responsibilities .
What is the Commissioner 's opinion on this ?
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Karl von Wogau on his report .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports him in his conclusions and , indeed , feels that he has carried out a very comprehensive assessment of the problems with the single market and the challenges which face us .
My Group will not support Amendment No 8 , which we believe to be protectionism in disguise .
Clearly we are disappointed with the development of the single market .
It seems that the Member States lack the political will to make it work properly .
Indeed , they have even passed measures which detract from the acquis of the single market .
It seems sometimes that the Commission lacks the courage of its convictions and its powers as guardian of the treaties to pursue cases of non-compliance with sufficient determination .
The single market is essential for prosperity .
We know from surveys that before 1993 compliance with customs controls was costing traders some ECU 7.5 billion every year - that is based on 1992 trade levels but expressed in today 's money .
That is equivalent to 1 % of the total value of trade between Member States at the time .
We know that since 1 January 1993 the abolition of routine customs controls has cut costs by two-thirds , saving traders some ECU 5 billion per annum .
However , compliance with transitional VAT and Intrastat systems is costly . That costs traders some ECU 2.3 billion per annum .
There are similar cost savings to road hauliers since 1992 but residual waiting times at borders are still costing some ECU 50 million every year .
Much money could be saved if the Commission could push the Member States into completing the single market effectively .
The Member States bear the greatest brunt of the blame .
Let me just give you one example from the United Kingdom , the state I represent : I have in my constituency a pensioner , called Mr Bill Smith .
Bill Smith has just lost his fight to prevent 100 fine German cigars going up in smoke - not in his living room but in a UK Customs and Excise incinerator .
UK officials have said they will destroy these cigars because Mr Smith has refused to pay £ 90 in duty .
I took up the case when these cigars were impounded .
Customs were claiming that since they were not imported personally the duty had to be paid .
In fact they had been ordered from a tobacconist in Germany and duty had been paid at the point of sale .
The UK Government claims that this is a distance-selling transaction , like the man-in-black case .
It is clearly not .
There are some parallels but the Commissioner who helped me early on in this case , and my efforts , have been unable to persuade UK customs to act justly .
Until we can get that kind of problem sorted out Europe 's citizens will never believe in the single market .
Mr President , it is an indisputable fact that from 1993 to the Amsterdam summit last June , the construction of the single market has indeed made great strides .
This is perhaps the reason why both the European Council and the European Commission , encouraged by the results of their policy , have moved towards setting up a very ambitious plan of action , with which they aspire to accelerate the pace and to deepen the content and operation of the European single market .
This same philosophy is expressed in the report under debate , which pinpoints the immediate and specific objectives on which , according to the rapporteur , the action programme should concentrate its attention .
However , the issue which does not preoccupy the European Council , the European Commission nor the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy at all is the account of the consequences of the single market on the working people and citizens in the peripheral and weaker countries of the Union and on the economies of these countries .
If such a basic report existed , before moving to adopt a policy to speed up the further development of the internal market , we would discover that the single market and the economic policy that accompanies it are responsible to a very large extent for the tragic position to which the more than 20 million unemployed , the 21 million people with part-time work , the 14 million citizens of Europe who work with short-term contracts , the 10 million and more who do some form of atypical work , are reduced to .
The single market and the concomitant Union policies are responsible for the disintegration of the public sector of the economy and for the formation , by means of mergers , of gigantic private monopolies , which are replacing state monopolies . They are responsible for the takeover in the air-transport sector by American airline companies and the total downgrading of the European ship-repair industry , which , in just a few years , has seen its productive capacity reduced by 87 % and limited to a much smaller share of the world market than South Korea .
The single market and Union policies are responsible for the dramatic deterioration of the position of SMEs , who find support from the Union and from the Member States in words alone , and not in deeds .
The single market , in concert with economic and monetary policy , and the intensely monetarist policies , are responsible for the imminent and palpable danger of the wholesale disintegration of the European social model .
The answer to the question of who is to blame and who is to pay for the single market is , once again , in no doubt , Mr President .
Big business is to blame , the workers will pay .
Mr President , I very much fear that the insistence on speeding up this policy , the promotion of certain recommendations such as the acceleration of economic and monetary union , the strict adherence to the stability pact , the transfer of funding sources for social protection from work to taxes on the environment and energy , the application of VAT in the country of origin , will worsen the already well-known consequences of the single market and will add tens of millions of people to the ranks of the unemployed .
Mr President , our group have given their support for Commissioner Monti 's attempts to achieve some degree of organization in the single market and we also support his endeavours in this plan of action for a unified market .
I would like to mention as an aside that this current struggle to end the duty free system is crucial .
This is a situation where a certain practice is being subsidized to the tune of ECU two milliard a year .
We cannot talk of a single market if we have to contend with this kind of thing .
I hope we will be able to offer the Commissioner our support for this to be ended according to schedule .
We are also fairly satisfied with Karl von Wogau 's report .
This actually brings the realization that the European economic policy is based on the principle of an ecologically and socially sound market policy .
I believe that the European Union must work from this basis in the global arena also .
Graham Watson , who represents the Liberal Democrat Party , said our Amendment No 8 is protectionism in disguise .
I can assure you it is no such thing .
We only wish to stress that a balance between the free movement of goods and considerations of health and safety is required .
I hope the groups will support this motion .
With the Summit Conference on Employment coming up next week , it is vital to discuss taxation .
I think the report is very balanced in this respect .
It really shows how essential it is to reduce the tax burden to improve the employment situation . I am in agreement with the ideas expressed by Alman Metten of the Social Democratic Party .
Finally , I would like to turn your attention to the fact that the Court of Auditors yesterday said it was not at all satisfied with the way small and middle-sized companies are aided .
The aid has not been gone to the right place .
We must pay attention to this , because , quite rightly , these types of business must be aided by the internal markets .
Mr President , the extensive action programme for the internal market is bound to have virtually everyone 's agreement .
It offers a choice of action points .
Something for everyone .
The programme is placed in the context of globalization of the economy , the eastward enlargement of the European Union and the fight against unemployment .
There is a desire to address all of these developments with a series of measures .
The strength of this proposal is at the same time its weakness .
The Commission has bitten off more than it can chew .
A number of debatable parts , such as the unification of rates of tax and duty , and the abolition of all types of border control within the European Union , definitely cannot be implemented in the short term .
I advocate that the programme focuses above all on the first action point : an improvement in regulation , fewer laws , transparent procedures and more effective enforcement .
People , business and government institutions will benefit directly .
In view of the enlargement of the Union and the globalization of the economy , a large number of European laws have to be scrutinized anyway .
This way you can kill two birds with one stone .
I would like also to say something about to mention the slowness with which standards for products and processes are established .
What ideas are being considered inside the European Commission to solve organizational problems in private standardization institutes ?
Again on the subject of the action programme , it is better to tackle one thing well , than to deliver half measures on many issues .
The original draft resolution by Mr von Wogau was very good and concise , but unfortunately it has been expanded by the Committee on Economic Affairs into a long wish-list which would leave even Santa Claus at a loss .
I regret this .
Mr President , it is absolutely essential to dismantle swiftly the many and varied barriers to a properly functioning single market which still remain .
In this regard I should like to give Mr von Wogau 's report my wholehearted support in terms of most of its details , in its basic philosophy and also in its justified reasoning .
As stated in Section 11 of the report particular emphasis should be placed on ensuring that small and medium-sized enterprises play a full part in the single market as there are fears that for various reasons this single market will for a time be an achievement from which big business gains most of the benefits .
However , I cannot subscribe to the opinion expressed in Section 12 - although it is outside the scope of the report , it is mentioned in it - that the single currency is an essential part of the European national market .
In this case I think the wish is father to the thought .
When monetary union takes place on 1 January 1999 , there will still be many areas , clearly illustrated in this report , where the single market will not have matured into a national market .
I am rather of the opinion that to ensure a stable and healthy monetary union essential elements of the national market should be implemented before it begins and that the monetary union represents the culmination of the single market .
With regard to the whole matter of transparency and comparability the combination of a uniform currency and an incomplete single market gives rise to fears of distortion of competition .
I am thinking in particular of taxation , standards and the underlying social and environmental situation .
In certain cases I also have serious reservations about the desire to coordinate economic policy .
These tensions could take on such gigantic proportions that instead of fostering integration the euro could contribute to serious political destabilization .
Mr President , the Delors 1992 programme for the single market was an inspiration for all Europe to embark upon Europe 's big idea to get its people back to work .
Commissioner Monti 's recent analysis of the market provides evidence that the single market is working .
Up to 900 , 000 new jobs in the European Union are attributable to the functioning of the single European market .
That is a real good news story .
And now the Commission 's action plan suggests how we can finish the job and move into the ' super league ' of job creation .
It is not quite true to say , as recital ( c ) of the von Wogau report suggests , that Europe 's single market remains a jigsaw of 15 separate national markets .
As each day passes the market becomes a reality .
I believe there is much that we can do to hasten its progress and thus provide jobs .
Thus , under taxation , the report calls for lower rates of VAT for labour-intensive SMEs .
Codes of conduct to mitigate harmful cross-border competitive taxation should also be applied .
Eliminating the frustrating incidences of the double taxation of frontier workers represents a tangible boost to the much misunderstood concept of labour mobility .
In respect of providing a proper infrastructure for the single market to run on , it is indispensable for us to promote the laggardly implementation of the trans-European networks of transport , telecommunications and energy .
Moving swiftly to secure a European air safety agency and concluding a new Eurocontrol convention are ready examples of what might be done to clear the clouds that obscure Europe 's aerospace sector .
Reinforcing such revolutionary transborder investment in the TENs is to secure the principle of a comprehensive and universal service concept in respect of Europe 's public services .
Such public service provision is , of course , the groundwork upon which pride in industry can build , create , develop and flourish .
Company law still needs to be made a pan-European fact of life .
The swift adoption of the European Company Statute , naturally involving the workforce , would achieve that desideratum .
Simplifying and clarifying the legislative framework should also be our holy grail , provided that such pruning exposes even better the underlying principles of strengthening the productive social and environmental framework in which Europe 's businesses can thrive and prosper .
Future legislation should always pass the test of being easily understood and transparent in purpose and effect .
Proper legislation frees and liberates ; bad law cabins , cribs and confines .
No-one is more guilty of passing bad laws or failing to monitor good ones than Member State governments .
Still unable to grasp the concept of the single market , such national authorities should be put to the test of Commissioner Monti 's single market scoreboard .
Let us name and blame those countries that divert the flood of the market away from its natural channels by their use of the logjams of inconvenience .
Moreover , this market must be made for the people , and not the other way round .
Delivering a single market for the benefit of all citizens is an excellent chapter in the action plan .
Europe 's 120 million children must be particularly protected when the four freedoms of movement - people , goods , capital and services - range across Europe , for they are the inheritors of this market which , fashioned to the needs of all our citizens , will carry Europe dynamic , prosperous and ' job-full ' into the realms of the next century .
I congratulate Mr von Wogau on his report .
Mr President , the final stage for the completion of a European single market relates to the introduction of economic and monetary union within the European Union .
Notwithstanding the fact that Britain will not be joining a single European currency at the first stage the benefits of economic and monetary union for Ireland far outweigh any negatives .
The principal benefit of a single European currency for Ireland is the prospect of a lower trend in interest rates .
It also enhances the attractiveness of Ireland as a destination for foreign direct investment .
Indeed , in Ireland recently we have created 130 , 000 jobs by our participation in the European activity .
A study carried out in Ireland recently came out with the fact that the impact of EMU on tourism , retailing , agriculture , manufacturing industry and financial services was excellent .
It concluded that EMU participation by Ireland would yield a net benefit for the Irish economy in these sectors .
I might conclude by saying that I would have preferred it if the British entered EMU at the first opportunity .
However at present Ireland meets all the convergence criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty , full qualification for EMU in terms of inflation and general government deficit etc .
The Irish people have nothing to fear from joining up to the euro on 1 January 1999 .
Mr President , colleagues , I also support the action programme for the internal market and the von Wogau report .
I would like to use my one minute , Mr Commissioner , to raise one point , which I know is close to both our hearts , and that is the issue of pensions and supplementary pensions in Europe .
First of all there is the matter of pension funds which are not able to invest freely throughout in Europe , and in my opinion this means that an enormous job creation capacity is lost , because the restrictions for the pension funds and the insurers are too great .
On the other hand there is the issue of portability of pensions , which is still a big problem for cross-border workers , but also a problem in connection with flexibilization of the labour market .
Mr President , Commissioner , because of the Green Paper I am not convinces that this matter arising will be sorted out satisfactorily in this House , as we are still seeing some resistance to any liberalization on this point , particularly on the part the socialists .
I think that there is a job for this Parliament , to implement the internal market in this area , too .
Mr President , I would like to say that Mr von Wogau 's report is interesting . It moves through the multiple layers that is the internal market and it is well-balanced .
However , I would like to make the following four comments :
The first comment is that the single market , like the single currency , must be seen within the framework of a European Union which seeks to move at the same speed along the main roads that open up ahead of it .
Success , the rush , the flight forward to a single market or to a single currency , when it is followed by delay and paralysis in other sectors such as , for example , the social sector , could only lead to distortions and to the self-entrapment of the European Union . But mainly , as is the case at least in certain areas of the European Union , it could undermine the morale and the support of the citizens of the European Union for the single internal market , which is the precondition par excellence of its success .
The second comment I would like to make is that the single market may be generally advantageous for the European Union , but is not of equal advantage for all countries or for all regions of the European Union . As a result , from the moment we apply a programme until 2002 , we must at the same time adhere to the programme of cohesion and support for the less developed regions of the European Union until 2002 and not have hesitations and back-tracking in that area .
The third point I would like to stress is that the single market means the abolition of internal borders , but it also means the strengthening of the external borders of the European Union and I very much fear that such a charting of these borders does not exist bearing in mind the various problems that arise , at least in the eastern sector .
As a result , a single market must move forward in parallel with the resolution of the political problems of the European Union .
The fourth and final point is the subject of taxation .
I think that the questions of lightening the tax burden of working people and of instituting an environmental tax are also very important .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr von Wogau , our rapporteur , has produced an excellent report on the Union internal market .
I would like to congratulate him , and say personally that I agree wholeheartedly with his work and with the spirit of the main objectives he has set himself .
Like him , I also believe that we need to do everything we can to ensure that , by 2002 , we have a real , large-scale internal market .
I also believe that , when the decision has been taken to bring this great market into being , anything which goes against the grain , and for which there is no good reason , will result in an accumulation of disadvantages in the field of border elimination , without any of the advantages .
Hence I feel it is a must to harmonize both direct and indirect taxation , taxation on capital , and taxation on labour .
I also feel it is absolutely necessary to ensure free movement of persons , while making sure that the Community has the means to combat delinquency , trafficking , terrorism and organized crime .
And I feel we must develop major communications and energy infrastructures throughout the Union , without levelling down and without sacrifice of public service , wherever it exists .
Hence , there must be a definitive settlement of trans-border problems , of which there are too many . In my region , they disgruntle everyone who has to cross the border to get to work .
In conclusion , like the rapporteur , I agree with the completion of the great market and the single currency , and I want to emphasize that they are , in my view , an absolutely necessarily complement to a political Europe , a Europe endowed with solid institutions , a social Europe , a Europe resolutely combating unemployment , laisser-aller , speculative relocation of companies offshore , a Europe in favour of sustainable growth and of public services for the common good .
Without these urgent complements , the great market , no matter how necessary , will not extract our Europe from unemployment or deep anxiety of our citizens . It will be quite the opposite , as everyone knows .
And as you know , dear colleague and rapporteur .
Mr President , I likewise congratulate the Commissioner on the initiative that has been taken and Mr von Wogau for his report .
Now that everything has been said , may I put five questions in summary form .
The first and second are these . In this case , unlike that of the Single Act ( or 1992 Single Market ) , there is no quantification and no quantified objectives .
Might I ask the Commissioner whether there will not be a Cecchini Report , because having some quantified targets always provides a measure of motivation ?
The second question is whether there will not be a promotion of the sort that took place last time , because I think the success of the Single Act and the 1992 Single Market was the motivation that was produced for that market .
Can we have a promotional incentive of the same type now ?
Thirdly , I should like to ask whether the primary concern will not be the means of achieving the single currency ?
And here , reverting very specifically to matters on which we have previously focused , whether there will not be a special effort to harmonize the taxation of capital , and deposits in particular ?
Because , with the single currency , I am afraid that any difference in taxation will cause distortions in the market which might penalize the objective to be attained .
Fourthly , also from the point of view of tax , Mr von Wogau talks about the need to do away with tax havens .
I entirely agree : it is impossible to prevent distortions in competition with tax havens inside the European Union itself .
And I would therefore ask the Commission whether there will be initiatives to abolish tax havens , and what they might be ?
And , finally , with regard to the taxation of energy , although I recognize that this could have benefits , I would draw attention to the fact that it is a regressive form of taxation , it affects the poor more than the rich and it penalizes transport .
I would ask whether these burdens will not be prejudicial to the internal market , since transport is essential to link the various areas of Europe together .
To be specific , therefore , how can we reconcile a tax on energy , which is such a burden on transport , with the need to bring infrastructures and other resources closer together ?
Mr President , it has been said this evening that the single market needs new impetus .
Ladies and gentlemen , I can assure you , as many of you have understood , that this new impetus is here .
The action plan proves it : it is a specific instrument which , unlike the Cecchini plan , does not propose quantitative objectives on final results but , more pragmatically , more incisively , objectives of timing on the implementation of means of actually establishing the single market - this is the very specific inspiration of the action plan - a single market which , as everyone has stressed , is an important condition for growth , employment and the proper functioning of economic and monetary union .
I am happy to say that the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau , to whom I offer my congratulations , considers the action plan to be a significant step towards the objective formed by the Heimatmarkt which is dear to him , dear to me , and which we are all working towards .
Mr President , I would like to take the opportunity of this discussion on the von Wogau report to outline briefly this evening the steps taken forward so far , which the Commission will report to the European Council next month .
You are aware that the action plan involves four strategic objectives , the first being the effective application of the Community regulations .
I am pleased to say that the action plan is proving that it works : in fact , it established several deadlines , such as 1 October for the Member States to draw up a schedule for the transposition of Directives not yet transposed and a specific indication of the designated coordination centres , contact points , things that are apparently obscure but essential for the single market to work .
Most of the Member States have given us their schedule for the transpositions and almost all of them have given us a list of coordination and contact centres .

Mr Watson and Mr Harrison referred to the need , with an ever greater transparency , to urge the Member States to comply fully with the commitments assumed .
This is the meaning of the internal market scoreboard , which has been published for the first time today : it is provided for in the action plan and is supported by your report ; it is a live instrument that exists today and that will be presented twice a year .
I am sure that not all of you will like it , because it sets out , state by state , not only the percentage of transposition , but also , for example , the average delay , expressed in months , in the transposition of the directives , the average delay in responding to the notices issued by the Commission , and so on .
So it is really a very specific report which , I am sure , will make its entire pressure felt .
Alongside this , there are the statistics , country by country , of the infringement proceedings brought .
Somebody nicknamed this device a " scareboard ' , overdoing it in my opinion , but I think it has a certain effectiveness .
As we want to be ambitious in specific measures , not ambitious in the large number of objectives , we took another step towards the single market yesterday , when the Commission adopted a draft regulation , based on article 235 of the treaty which , if approved by the Council , and I hope that Parliament will not fail to support it , will provide the Commission with a clear means of facing the serious obstacles to the freedom of movement of goods .
A similar mechanism will be applied to that used with regard to state aid , that is , a decision that will enable the Commission to direct an executive decision at the Member States in the space of a few days , in the event of actions or inactions resulting in obstacles to freedom of movement , a decision that will constitute a document of execution , on whose basis injured parties will be able to see the national courts recognize the right to compensation for losses sustained by the Member State responsible .
I will be very brief , Mr President , on the second and other strategic objectives .
The second is that of eliminating the main distortions , and in this connection several MEPs ( Mr Langen , Mr Metten and others ) emphasized the subject of taxation .
Someone mentioned the Delors White Paper , which remains a great inspiration for us as well .
What is the difference ?
Here too , we are trying to construct the specific means of establishing that policy , just as we did in March this year , with the draft directive for the Community framework on the taxation of energy ; just as we have been doing in recent weeks with the package against harmful tax competition , and with this logical package we hope , for the first time in the history of European integration , but I do not know whether we will succeed , to interest different States in making developments , thus overcoming the main difficulty deriving from the rule of unanimity .
Believe me , it is very easy to list objectives , but it is very difficult , in a political context you are familiar with , to achieve them : we are working precisely on the means of achieving these objectives .
One important objective is that of the common VAT system , which some of you pointed out .
In this connection , with regard to Amendment No 4 on the VAT system , I would like to point out the importance of the report drawn up by Mr Randzio-Plath on this matter , a report adopted in May 1997 which I hope the Commission will consider to be Parliament 's official position on the matter .
Among other things , I want to point out the position expressed with force by the Audit Office yesterday , on the fact that while the VAT system based on the principle of the country of destination and not of origin remains in force , there will be a considerable risk of fraud .
In a survey conducted on companies , also published today ( a lot is happening today with regard to the single market ! ) , we see that , in classifying obstacles to a good life in the single market , small and medium-sized companies in particular put the complexity of the current VAT system first .

I will conclude on taxation by saying , Mr Theonas and Mr Castagnède , that I too am convinced that , if we manage to make a clear possibility for taxation in Europe , we will establish an absolutely essential condition for having a European social model and a European economic and not just a monetary policy .
With regard to the sectoral obstacles preventing integration into the market , I will state briefly that , with the efforts made by the Luxembourgian Presidency , three of the four legislative priorities ( transparency for the services of the information society , legal protection of biotechnological inventions and liberalization of the gas market ) have progressed rather well ; with regard to the state of the European society , recalled by some , the Davignon Group has possibly offered a useful path for reintroducing the subject .
Finally , establishing a single market at the service of all citizens : this , as you know , is something I feel very strongly about , despite not being an MEP , and questions such as the transferability of supplementary pensions , pointed out by Mr Boogerd-Quaak , are important .
Several weeks ago , the Commission drew up a draft directive to permit the transferability of supplementary pensions .
It should be said , however , that there would not be a great deal of sense in not having high employment mobility precisely when the single currency is appearing on the scene .
Discussion with the citizens , Mr Florio , is certainly , by definition , always insufficient ; however , the " Citizens of Europe ' Citizens First operation , conducted with the support of this Parliament , is perhaps the first major specific experiment : as you know , over a million citizens have made contact with this operation , by telephone and via the Internet .
I will conclude by referring to the fact that the single market is expanding , and we need to prepare for expansion .
Mr Peijs , we are working because the single market provides the initial basis for bringing the CEEC countries closer to the European Union and it has to be said that these countries are making considerable progress .
Mr Alavanos , it is not true that we are overlooking the subject of present and future external frontiers of the Union : most of the assistance we are giving the CEECs is precisely for the development of their customs .
Mr President , this subject is very important and felt by all a great deal .
It is very encouraging , for the Commission and for me personally , to hear how the European Parliament is maintaining and encouraging our action in a field in which we can never be entirely satisfied .
Mr President , I asked the Commissioner a question on the enormous mergers in the accountancy sector .
One merger took place which provoked a counter merger with , I believe , extremely serious consequences for the internal market and monopolization .
I wonder what the Commissioner 's opinion on this is .
Mr Peijs , this is proof that the single market works : we will not see these great concentrations , these great public purchase offers in the accountancy field , in the insurance field , if companies do not reap the benefits of the single market .
It is right for these phenomena to occur , but it is right for them to be subjected to the stringent regulations on the control of competition , regulations established by the treaty for some time , indeed by the Treaty of Rome , which , as I think we all know , the European Commission seeks to monitor very carefully , as its main task .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow 12 noon .
Construction products
The next item is the report ( A4-0350 / 97 ) by Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission report on the construction-products directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0202 - C4-0636 / 96 ) .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we have just been discussing , since 1987 the single market has been one of the basic elements of European integration .
In other words , competition and liberalization come before harmonization .
However , there are many areas in which technical harmonization remains an important factor .
In the construction sector this matter was dealt with in the constructionproducts directive of 21 December 1988 .
Having a particularly wide scope , this directive covers every product that can be distributed and marketed for permanent incorporation in building works for structural and civil engineering projects .
Unlike other sectors of industry and other product groups , trade in many construction products and construction projects is only sensible and economically viable over short and medium distances owing to the high transport costs involved .
This is the main reason why much less progress has been made with the harmonization of standards and with the procedures and statutory provisions for construction products and construction techniques than is the case with products where technical trade barriers prevent the free circulation of goods .
The construction-products directive is supposed to remove barriers to the free circulation of construction products which are mainly due to differences in standards , test methods and certification procedures .
The directive lays down comprehensive requirements for construction work but not individual construction products , in respect of stability , fire protection , hygiene , safe occupancy , electrical safety , saving energy , all those things that are again documented in the Greens ' motions .
This means that according to this directive Member States may only permit those products the use of which enables the main requirements of the directive concerning the construction work to be adhered to .
Harmonization in the construction industry is therefore necessary because it will ease the mobility of professionals , tradesmen and building contractors , making it possible for them to undertake projects in other Member States .
As experience in Europe since 1988 has shown , the drafting of standards is a long and complex process .
That is why the final result is now unsatisfactory .
Without the harmonization of standards and other technical specifications there will be no free circulation of construction products .
We have just been discussing the single market .
The competitiveness of the European construction industry is being severely prejudiced , especially as the building trade is by far the largest industrial sector in the European economy .
With an annual turnover of almost ECU 700 billion and a 10 % share of the European Union 's gross national product , the construction industry employs a total of 27 million people either directly or indirectly - 13 million directly and 14 million indirectly - in Europe .
All of this takes place in small and medium-sized enterprises , 1.8 million enterprises in all , of which 97 % employ fewer than 20 workers .
The main responsibility for the laggardly implementation of the construction-products directive does not lie with the Commission , and I should like to make this clear , but first and foremost with the Member States who thus far have not shown sufficient willingness to compromise and have wanted to implement their own regulations to an excessive degree .
By mid-1997 , 8 years after the directive was adopted , specifications had been laid down and standardization mandates worked out for only 17 product families .
The blocking tactics of the Member States in the Standing Committee on the Construction Industry and their lack of willingness to put national regulations to the test are the main reasons for this delay and I should like to criticize this explicitly .
Now three levels are required , as mentioned in the report . First the Commission itself , which should undertake to lay down and complete all standardization mandates as speedily as possible , in other words by mid-1988 at the latest .
The progress which has been set in motion by these proceedings of Parliament is already perceptible , Mr Commissioner !
Second , the Member States who in future must stop insisting on a large number of detailed regulations in the implementing orders and recognize the procedure finally agreed upon .
And third , the European Committee on Standardization has been called upon to speed up its work .
The Commission has pledged itself to improve the practical implementation of the construction-products directive and has therefore refrained from proposing any amendment to the directive at the present time .
I wholeheartedly endorse the Commission 's stance in this regard .
However , it will be necessary not only to observe the development but actively to shape it .
And , to this end , Mr Commissioner , I am sure we can count on your active support .
Mr President , it is my pleasure this evening to welcome this report on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr Langen has produced an excellent document , and I was very pleased to work with him on it .
Essentially what we are saying here to everybody concerned with the construction-products Directive is that we need progress .
Here we have one of the key building blocks , if you like , of our single market which simply is not functioning properly .
It is not necessarily the Commission 's fault but what we are clearly saying to the Commission here tonight - and again in the vote tomorrow - is that it has our support to push the Member States to make progress , because it is simply not acceptable that this directive has been in force for the best part of ten years and nothing has really been achieved .
I accept that it is a very difficult problem and - having followed the SLIM procedure , with the construction-products Directive having been one of the pilot projects for SLIM - it is clear that there will be difficulties , because in the SLIM project this was one of the areas in which progress was difficult to achieve .
We must try to make the effort .
An example is a brick manufacturer in my area which makes , surprise , surprise , an awful lot of bricks and wants to sell them freely around the European marketplace , but finds that instead of having one set of red tape to understand and one set of standards to come to terms with it has 13 , 14 , 15 different sets of standards to apply before it can sell its products .
Often it finds it has a product ready to go into a new market and then the market changes and a new national standard is introduced .
I accept that is not necessarily one hundred percent relevant to what we are doing here today but I can tell you that if that company had the opportunities to export freely around the single market , then it might get an awful lot bigger and employ a lot more people in my part of the industrial West Midlands , which would be very good for our local economy and for the people working for that company .
So there is a real impetus for us to do something .

I very much agree with Mr Langen that the Commission must get on and complete the standardization mandates . That would be an important boost for progress in the area .
Really , as I say , this is a report we here in Parliament can all get behind ; we are here to give the Commission support and encouragement to tackle the Member State governments , because , ultimately , if we have that progress then we will move a lot closer to having a completed single market and the sort of action plan we talked about earlier on will get that much closer to being fulfilled .
Mr President , a period of almost ten years has passed before we have genuinely started trying to implement a construction- products directive .
Exactly a year ago the SLIM report was published .
It should be obvious that the Construction Products Directive was dealt with in this report for good reason .
Up until then national Member States had not been prepared to submit their existing regulations .
According to the famous maxim : he who has the standard has the market . Every Member State wanted to elevate its standard to the level of the European standard .
The SLIM report concluded that there is some life left in the directive , but that harmonized European standards should be looked at seriously , as these do not exist .
As is so often the case , the delay is not to be found at an European level , but at national level .
As a result of increased pressure , there has been a certain degree acceleration since then .
It is expected that during the middle of 1998 all commissions given to CEN for harmonization of the 40 product families will have been completed .
Unfortunately this does not mean that the business community knows exactly what its position is .
Some crucial questions remain unanswered .
For example : will EC marking become compulsory in all European Union Member States ?
Countries like the United Kingdom and Portugal think they can allowed themselves an optout .
How does the Commissioner think he will be able to enforce the unity of the market ?
A second crucial and relevant question from the business community : what are actually going to harmonize ?
It is clear that testing methods need to be harmonized .
What exactly is the value of this ?
Will it also be obligatory to accept the test results of a renowned Dutch testing agency for example in Germany as well ?
We all know that at present this presents a big difficulty and a large obstacle to the internal market .
Harmonization of the limit value will only be partly possible because of regional differences .
Please think of the difference in the climate between Lapland and Sicily .
I think the aim for harmonization is that there should also be an internal market for construction products .
That means that in establishing whether a product is satisfactory national test institutes , national requirements and national test methods will no longer be allowed to monopolize .
This will be painful in the Member States , but , Mr Commissioner , please emphasize this clearly to the Member States .
The construction industry has a right to clarity and simplicity after all those years .
Mr President , the Green Group would like to emphasize that construction materials have a major effect on the environment and , for this reason , we have submitted a whole list of amendments .
We think we need a high-level risk assessment process for all new materials .
We have all recently heard of scandals caused by relatively new materials , and their combined effects can be shown to have disastrous consequences .
Let me take just one example from this building here .
A certain construction engineer told me once that above that splendid wooden ceiling there is fibreglass and rock wool .
It is in fact demonstrably very unhealthy material ; we therefore really need European standards and a decent form of risk assessment .
At the same time we must also be able to reject any materials which harm the environment and people 's health .
One of our amendments concerns our opinion that the re-use and recycling of builder 's waste should be promoted .
Builder 's waste accounts for a very large proportion of total waste in society .
I should also like to put my question right away as I believe it is too important to be left to one side .
When we talk about standardization we should generally be thinking about the type of reorganization of the standards system we in Europe are striving for .
Time is getting short and if we consider that EUROCODES gave way to CEN in 1989 , progress in this area has not exactly been setting the heather on fire .
What we should all be asking ourselves is whether it would be possible to set new standards on a voluntary basis and considering what new standardization options are available to us in any case .
It is also urgently necessary for us to get the EC mark because - as Mr Langen has quite rightly said already - many small and medium-sized enterprises are active in this sector .
If we want to do away with borders , if we want to promote public procurement , then we simply need to operate these principles of product approval , labelling , purchasing , liability and insurance .
Mr President , I can be fairly brief on this matter , not because it is not worth dwelling on it , as the subject is very important for the completion of the single market , but because Mr Langen 's report is extremely clear and exhaustive .
In fact , I must congratulate him , on behalf of the Commission , because the content of the report confirms the analysis made by the Commission in this sector .
Previously , the Commission had reached the conclusion that the implementation of this Directive comes up against considerable difficulties at a practical level .
The report reinforces the Commission 's opinion , as it contains an analysis , which we share , of the work still be to undertaken in the field of standardization of construction products .
Within the scope of the SLIM initiative , the Commission examined the possibilities of improvement and simplification thoroughly .
Following the work carried out by all the parties concerned , by the Commission in the SLIM context , by the Member States and by the standardization authorities , the preparation of the harmonized standards is coming along well and tangible results are expected in 1998 .
The Commission is up-to-date on several points raised by Mr Peijs in particular : some points have already been dealt with , while others are present in the Commission 's programme .
The thirteen amendments proposed by the Greens can be summarized as an effort to increase environmental awareness at European level .
The spirit is certainly positive , but some of them have to be considered in a critical light : for example , Amendment No 4 rightly emphasizes the complexity of the standardization procedure and confirms that consequences will necessarily arise .
In emphasizing this fact , only the environment is mentioned in the amendment , however .
Although it is certainly true , it does not take into account the fact that the standardization process will have considerable repercussions on many other sectors as well as on the environment : social policy , economic policy , safety and competition .
Consequently , the Commission will only have to accept the suggestion contained in this amendment if it takes into account the possible repercussions in all fields .

With regard to Amendments Nos 7 and 9 , I wish to draw attention to the fact that the Commission is already following an active policy of financing the consumer and environmental associations , so as to enable them to take part in the standardization work .
These amendments do not seem appropriate to us in this context , however , as they do not relate directly to the directive on construction products , which is the object of Mr Langen 's report .
To conclude , Mr President , I can say that the Commission will be able to accept the suggestions contained in Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 12 and 13 .
Mr Commissioner , I only wanted to repeat the question : is a reorganization of the standards system in Europe being considered ?
Mr Rübig , could you clarify your question a little further ?
With regard to the single market we have seen the problem - and this is what Mr von Wogau was saying - that standardization in Europe is lagging behind .
Deadlines are too long and we quite simply have to ensure that our standardization systems are more market-oriented and operate with shorter deadlines .
The national systems are producing too much resistance .
What we need is a new style of coordination and a new type of organization at European level .
My question is whether the Commission intends to introduce reforms in this area .
This subject has not been discussed in the perspective outlined by you , Mr Rübig .
It seems to be an important subject and a good idea : I will certainly bring this consideration to the attention of the Commissioner responsible , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Indirect taxation systems ( Fiscalis )
The next item is the report ( A4-0344 / 97 ) by Mr Secchi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a programme of Community action to reinforce the functioning of the indirect taxation systems of the internal market ( Fiscalis programme ( COM ( 97 ) 0175 - C4-0222 / 97-97 / 0128 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , in stating the title of this report , you have already partly explained the content , or rather the object , of the Fiscalis programme .
The content relates in particular to training , exchange of experience and development of information materials to provide a better knowledge , a better compatibility and a gradual common path towards harmonization in the field of indirect taxation and therefore , in particular , VAT and excise duties , by means of coordination by the national tax authorities .
The object is naturally to enable the different systems to operate better and to co-exist better by means of this knowledge and , therefore , to allow the market to operate in a more satisfactory manner and the taxation systems to produce a more balanced and more satisfactory revenue for the States , contributing towards the battle against fraud and evasion .
In the previous debate , we heard how , for example , the current VAT system is one of the aspects of greatest concern from this point of view .
The fact that these objects are fixed beforehand also has very significant implications from the point of view of employment .
Tomorrow , as already mentioned , the Extraordinary Summit opens in Luxembourg on the subject of employment : to be able to handle the revenue from other sources better will , ceteris paribus , allow us to reduce taxation on employment and therefore to support employment , from this point of view .
The object of the Fiscalis programme ( the Committee on Economic Affairs has pointed out some similarities , for example with the previous " Customs 2000 ' programme ) is to make better use of existing actions and introduce new ones to achieve the objects dealt with briefly in my introduction .
The Committee on Economic Affairs and the Committee on Budgets , which expressed an opinion , appreciated the Commission 's proposal a great deal and , interacting with it , considered ( the Committee on Economic Affairs in particular ) that several improvements or amendments to the wording submitted for our examination should be proposed . I would briefly like to draw your attention to these amendments .
The possibility of bringing academic experts and also consultants and representatives of taxpayers , particularly small and medium-sized businesses , into the seminar activities to be implemented by Fiscalis has been provided for , for example .
The seminars have been better defined , from a technical point of view as well . The problem of language training the participants will necessarily have to have has been dealt with ; the concept of exchange and training has been better explained ; in particular , several suggestions have been put forward which in some way extend the scope of the programme , favourably in our opinion .
It has been suggested , for example , that the experience drawn by the participants from this training and exchange can also be used by the European Commission to provide teaching aimed at further improving its action in favour of ever closer forms of coordination with a view to the harmonization of the taxation systems .
It has also been suggested that a permanent network be set up between the national training institutions so that the practice of exchanging experience , of taking common measures , leads these institutions to know each other better and therefore to operate better on a market which , as previously stated when commenting on Mr von Wogau 's report , is becoming more and more of a real internal market for the Union .
The programme should enter into force on 1 January 1998 .
In view of the very tight deadlines , the Committee on Economic Affairs and its rapporteur have already made informal contact with the European Commission and with representatives of Council so as to ensure reciprocal approval of the amendments .
We for our part have tried to put everything into it . We hope that not only the Commission present here but also the Council will do as much .
The Committee on Economic Affairs has approved fifteen amendments which are more or less of the same type as I mentioned in my speech .
In addition , tomorrow I will put three verbal amendments which have been agreed with the Committee on Budgets to the vote : the first seeks formal clarification , for example , of the rules that have to be followed in the case of recourse to subcontractors ; the second relates to the fact that , if the CEEC or Cyprus are involved , the allocation will have to be increased accordingly ; finally , the last one points out that , since it is a five-year programme , we are half-way between the current financial budget that expires in 1999 and the subsequent one , which we should remember .
Mr President , I think the extension of the Fiscalis programme , and particularly most of the amendments suggested by Mr Secchi , deserve our support .
Among those amendments , I would like to emphasize those which are intended to increase the number of active and passive participants in the actions to be taken .
Thus Amendment No 5 ( to article 2 ( d ) ) , in which the ' exchange ' is not confined to another administration but can also be effected with ' a training institution of another Member State ' , is commendable ; and so is Amendment No 10 ( to article 5 ( 2 ) ) , accepting that the seminars to be held should be attended not only by officials but also by ' other experts in the field , such as academics , taxable persons or their representatives and advisers ' , as has now been emphasized .
Furthermore , the effectiveness of the actions is also improved , with better use of existing resources , such as that proposed for article 6 ( Amendment No 12 ) , not confined to ' a common core of training for officials ' with the establishment of ' a cooperation network of the national organizations , academies or schools , and the officials responsible for training ' .
If there were no specific proposal to amend the existing wording , I would have some reservations about the suggestion in Recital 10 ( Amendment No 3 ) , concerning the need for ' a Community academy for indirect taxation officials ' , because I fear that a single structure of that kind might lower the profile of that cooperation which is possible and desirable at national level .
In the fourth proposal , the exchange of ideas referred to in new Recital 9 ( and also in Amendment No 2 ) should in fact be provided for and commended , since it may lead to the improvement of existing legal instruments and the extension of exchanges of information in general , which is restricted to VAT in Recital 7 ( Amendment No 1 ) .
It is especially necessary to involve ourselves in the training of a wide range of economic agents when moving from VAT to taxation in the country of origin , with a reduction in interventions by government officials at the cost of a higher degree of participation by citizens and greater responsibility being placed on them .
This , furthermore , is a commendable trend in modern tax law , which also has implications for other forms of tax .
Mr President , I trespassed on your goodwill for speaking time in an earlier debate . I will be brief .
This is an excellent report .
The Liberal Group supports it and we support the broad sweep of the Budget Committee 's amendments .
I would like to speak in particular to Mr Secchi 's Amendment Nos 2 , 3 and 10 .
We know that although the Sixth Directive has a single set of rules , there are in fact numerous differences in practice across the European Union .
We know that to be workable the proposed origin system requires much closer cooperation and coordination between authorities of Member States .
We welcome the Commission 's proposals .
We suspect that its timetable is very optimistic and that the full implementation of the work programme may need longer .
But we are convinced that the imminence of substantial change to the definitive system must not obscure the need for reforms to the existing transitional system , which can then be carried forward into the new definitive system .
The interpretation of the Sixth Directive by Member States , often to the benefit of their national treasuries , is no less than scandalous . This is certainly the case in the UK .
I have published a pamphlet called ' Billion pound bungling : how the taxman stings British business and consumers ' .
This shows how in cases of hire purchase agreements , consumer credit arrangements , the VAT treatment of housing and health provision and the problems of differential VAT registration thresholds for some small businesses , Britannia is waiving the rules .
This pamphlet calls for an indirect taxation forum .
That call is repeated tonight in Mr Secchi 's report and was repeated in Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report to which the Commissioner referred earlier .
The Commission must involve practitioners and academic specialists in helping to sort out the current problems , irrespective of the move to a new system .
Under my rapporteurship on the Economic Committee we have provided funds for this in the European Union 's budget for next year and I hope the Commission will heed our calls .
Mr President , the Fiscalis programme and colleague Secchi 's report have my approval .
The Member States and the Union have an interest in a well-organized exchange of information to improve fraud control .
The opportunity for participation by the associate countries in central and eastern Europe is positive with the emphasis has to be on the countries which are serious candidates for entry such as Poland , Hungary and the Czech Republic .
One criticism is the obscure relationship between pain and gain .
The Commission is financing the lion 's share of the cost of this programme .
It is clear that it has an interest in this .
It is the Member States , however , who will collect the main share of indirect taxation and duty .
My question is whether the advantages and disadvantages are equally shared .
Can Commissioner Monti tell us a little bit more about this ?
More than half of the large sum for this programme has been earmarked for communication and information exchange systems .
Through workshops , civil servants v , guides and handbooks , civil servants are urged to use these systems .
It is difficult to measure the effectiveness of these efforts , however .
Can the Commissioner promise that specific attention will be paid to this aspect in the evaluation report , and that it will be made clear which results have been achieved ?
The programme is strongly directed towards the new VAT system .
Although I do not deny that it is sensible to be as well prepared for this as possible , I note that the final system is a long time off .
The Member States are very divided about the clearing methods .
In addition the switch to the original principle requires considerable effort from companies who have only just got used to the interim system .
This seems in conflict with the aim that this programme should lead to tax reductions .
For the time being I think it would be better to direct the programme towards improving the current interim system .
I would like to hear the Commissioner 's opinion on this .
Efficiency through education , that is the motto for the tax system in the single market .
If the single market is to function properly we need qualified civil servants who can also give out the right information .
It is a question of establishing an obligation to provide information and , at the end of the day , a certain degree of liability for the information provided as well .
We know , for example , that various double taxation procedures are causing enormous problems in the European Union .
In this case a good training course for civil servants may be a major prerequisite for the smooth functioning of the single market .
If civil servants had sufficient technical knowledge of the tax system this would be another firm foundation on which to build the harmonization of taxation .
In particular , the improvement of language knowledge and also the training schemes available in this area , for instance Mattheus , is extremely important in order to have an efficient tax administration system in future .
I believe that in future we should concentrate on creating a situation where the people working in this field also act in an advisory capacity and do not just regard businesses as victims but as the basis for the existence of our system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I first wish to express my appreciation of the work Parliament has carried out on the Fiscalis programme , and in particular on the undertaking carried out by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and its rapporteur , Mr Secchi .
I believe Parliament 's amendments , including those presented verbally on budgetary issues , increase the level of quality of the programme significantly .
I am therefore pleased to say that the Commission can accept all of them , apart from a minor exception relating to Amendment No 12 , specifically with regard to the words " within the committee foreseen by article 11 ' .
I should like to take the opportunity to remind you and the Council representatives of the importance of the Fiscalis programme for the internal market .
The regular operation of the VAT and excise systems depends to an ever greater extent on intense cooperation between the national tax authorities .
These authorities encounter ever greater difficulties in facing the challenges raised by the complex business of the multinationals and by the intricate international frauds committed by the extensive organized crime racket individually .
The need for profound and firmly-established cooperation between tax officials to be able to face these challenges receives general consent .
But this cooperation cannot be imposed by diktat : Cooperation should stem from the creation of a relationship of trust between the national authorities by giving officials the right attitude and giving them the most appropriate means .
Fiscalis constitutes the Community contribution to this committing but necessary task .
It provides for it in three ways : firstly , exchanges , seminars and multilateral controls that will give national officials the opportunity to work side by side and study their respective working methods reciprocally .
This exchange of ideas is fundamental to building the trust I mentioned .
Secondly , the information systems will provide the technical means for cooperation .
Finally , the coordinated training actions of the Member States , which are essential for creating the necessary attitude for cooperation in the national officials .
The Commission will have to take all possible measures to ensure that the Council takes the Parliamentary amendments into consideration in full in reaching its common position .
As it is broadly recognized that the Fiscalis programme should be adopted quickly , I hope the Council will reach a common position that is acceptable to Parliament .

Thanking all those who have supported the programme , firstly Mr Secchi and all the others , I only wish to add , Mr Blokland , that , with regard to the points you raised , greater attention will be paid to the assessment of the efficacy of the programme and the cofinancing between the Community and Member States is deeply rooted in the preparation of the Fiscalis programme .
Apart from the communication and the information exchange system , whose outline is very precise , cofinancing is rooted more deeply in the Fiscalis programme ; I think we can guarantee it from this point of view .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Personal data and privacy in telecommunications
The next item is the report ( A4-0361 / 97 ) by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of Parliament ' s delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector ( C4-0571 / 97-00 / 0288 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , given that , as an eminent lawyer and a Member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , this is a subject with which you are familiar , I hope that you at least will be able to follow me .
This draft directive reminds me of the " Metamorphoses ' - not Kafka 's " Metamorphosis ' , but the more pleasant " Metamorphoses ' by the Roman poet Ovid - because it began with one title and is ending with another .
And it began with one content and is ending with another .
The directive was proposed seven years ago .
Perhaps this is not a long time in the history of a nation , but it is a long time in the history of a legislative process .
However , it seems as if twenty years has gone by since the Commission first submitted the draft directive .
It was called something else then .
It was called the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector , in particular in the integrated services digital network ( ISDN ) and in the public digital mobile networks .
As rapporteur , it was difficult for me to explain what I was doing , because nobody knew what that was .
And I believe that even the Commission did not know what it was , because we were entering unknown territory .
As time went by , the mists gradually cleared , and the Council finally accepted - wisely , I believe - an amendment changing the title to the slightly simpler " Directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector ' .
I believe that the references to the integrated services digital network ( ISDN ) and the public digital mobile networks were a sort of magical incantation , which added nothing to the content of the directive .
So now we have a title which is slightly simpler , but still a mystery to the general public .
The directive was presented as a sort of annex to the general directive on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data , which was adopted without problems : the procedure ended in agreement between the Council and Parliament , without the need for conciliation .
With regard to the directive on data protection in the telecommunications sector , however , there was such an enormous difference between the proposal submitted by the Commission in 1990 and that submitted six years later by the Council and the Commission , that I raised the possibility in the Committee on Legal Affairs of asking to be consulted again .
The Council and the Commission then explained to us that the changes were not that great , that what had been done was to adapt the proposal to the general directive on data protection , that certain new developments had been taken into account - and , so as not to delay the procedure any further , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Parliament finally approved the proposal .
Thus , in the framework of a new and different procedure , progress was made , the dossier was taken forward .
Parliament placed particular emphasis on a few issues .
For me , the most important - from the point of view of principles - was that of subsidiarity .
Subsidiarity is one of those words that people like to come out with without knowing what it means .
More specifically , I believe that talking about subsidiarity in relation to the telecommunications sector is utter nonsense , for if there is a field in which there is no place for subsidiarity , it is the field of telecommunications - almost by definition .
The Council accepted Parliament 's amendments in this regard , so that the word subsidiarity no longer appears in the directive .
Parliament and the Council agreed , moreover , that it is not the purpose of a directive to lay down detailed regulations . That is the function of a regulation .
Consequently , I believe that we have struck a good balance .
The reference to subsidiarity has been deleted .
It is not a question of subsidiarity here .
This a Community directive , which is binding , as to the result to be achieved , but which leaves to the Member States the choice of form and methods ; and Parliament and the Council will therefore leave it up to the competent national authorities to apply it . That is something quite different from subsidiarity .
There were a number of other issues of technical and economic importance , such the question of being able to record business communications for the purpose of providing evidence of commercial transactions .
Another matter which proved to be extremely complicated concerned the possibility of charging subscribers for not appearing in a telephone directory .
This appears to be the reverse of what should be the case .
You would think that a person should have to pay to appear in a telephone directory , and should be entitled to be omitted free-of-charge .
However , it seems that things are so complicated in the telecommunications field that the reverse is actually the case .
All in all , I believe that we have collaborated successfully .
The Council and Parliament have demonstrated the best possible will , the Commission has worked with us , and together we have reached an agreement - after a reasonable period of discussion . This new European Parliament and Council directive therefore provides a good example of collaboration and the successful implementation of the codecision procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can only agree with the rapporteur . In the application of new technologies it is not the technology that should be centre stage but always the people .
Their individual rights and needs have priority and must be protected at all times .
As obvious as this observation sounds , it is often difficult to put it into practice .
The history of the Directive concerning the protection of personal data and privacy in the context of telecommunications has shown this once more .
It was a long and rocky road which only had a happy ending in the conciliation procedure .
The Directive supplements the general data protection directive as regards the protection of privacy in view of the technical facilities available to the latest telecommunications networks .
It gives data protection in the context of telecommunications a similar importance to the protection of health for which the European Parliament has set particularly tough standards in many areas of our lives .
This high standard is an absolute necessity to protect personal data and safeguard people 's private lives against third parties .
On the other hand , there is a danger that we are sacrificing people 's individuality on the altar of the opportunities offered by a technology which is absolutely necessary and welcome and delivering them up without protection to the financial greed of those who run the telecommunications industry .
In other words , we have to arrive at an individual protection scheme which leaves the decision to each person as to how much access to him or her modern telecommunications should have .
Let me quote you the example of direct selling by fax or telephone .
Who has not been annoyed by an unsolicited call from an insurance sales person at an inconvenient moment ?
This will be a thing of the past when the directive comes into force as this and similar applications of telecommunications technology will require the consent of the person affected .
I support the result of the conciliation procedure because while maintaining a high level of protection it has managed not to lose sight of the second main goal : the free transfer of data must be guaranteed .
Let me conclude by pointing out a particularly strange example of the way the unrestricted exchange of data had been put at risk .
Faced with data networks that span the globe , someone actually had the idea that , under the heading of subsidiarity in the European Union , telecommunications should be regulated differently in each country .
They must have got communications and commerce mixed up .
We have succeeded in preventing this , and a good thing too !
Mr President , it is worth being here tonight , at this late hour , to bear witness to the fact that the directive concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector has - as the rapporteur rightly said - reached a safe port .
And it has reached a safe port after a voyage that - to put it bluntly - was long and complicated .
Of the thirteen amendments debated at second reading , eleven were the subject of the final stage of the codecision procedure , and the Conciliation Committee agreed a satisfactory joint text on them all .
The EPP Group will therefore be voting in favour of this joint text , and I have not the slightest doubt that tomorrow , in approving what has been agreed , Parliament will demonstrate its ability to achieve realistic compromises , whilst firmly maintaining its positions of principle regarding the protection of individual privacy and the legitimate interests of legal persons in the stormy sea of new technologies and telecommunications .
I said that a long process was ending today , and it is appropriate to underline , on behalf of my group and speaking personally , Mr Medina Ortega 's excellent management , which we have witnessed on other occasions , but which assumed particular importance during this extremely complex and delicate conciliation procedure .
Indeed , as the rapporteur said , the initial proposal dates from 1990 , but the process of adopting it has been taking place over the last two years .
And , in this frontier territory , in which the speed of technological change - in particular , the introduction of the integrated services digital network , interactive television and video-on-demand - is creating enormous tensions in society , the extent to which building a genuine European society depends on our ability to resolve such problems is made clear .
For it is possible to create an economic and monetary union with bankers and traders , but it is not possible to create a European Union without the citizens . And whilst the citizens are undoubtedly interested in the single currency and the free movement of goods , they are giving increasing signals that they are concerned - and exceedingly concerned - about the protection of their personal rights , and especially their right to privacy .
As I said , eleven amendments were debated , and , amongst the disputed issues , a satisfactory result was achieved - as the rapporteur said - for Parliament 's request that the legal authorization of phone-tapping should conform to the requirements of article 14 ( 1 ) of the general directive on data protection .
That was secured .
And it was secured by means of a flexible and intelligent solution which meets the legitimate concerns of the financial services sector regarding the recording of conversations for reasons of business security , to which the rapporteur also referred .
I should like to draw attention to a number of other matters which I believe are important , notably Parliament 's amendment to recital 25 concerning the stormy sea of the commitology procedure .
Parliament voted that this procedure should not be used out of context , and should not be used to make substantial changes ; and I believe that the result achieved in the conciliation procedure delimiting the Commission 's commitology powers sets a useful precedent for future legislative acts .
The result secured for Parliament 's demand that the legitimate right to privacy of legal persons should be guaranteed also deserves mention .
Parliament considered at second reading that , for example , small businesses should be protected from the avalanche of unsolicited advertising material which can place an intolerable burden on their effective management .
This concern has also been met .
I am coming to end , Mr President .
As the rapporteur said , a result was also obtained for Parliament 's Amendment No 9 concerning the possibility of not appearing in a telephone directory ; and , at this late hour , I shall simply conclude by welcoming the collaboration between the institutions which enabled us to achieve a solution to this undoubtedly thorny problem .
Mr President , as has previously been said here , it is almost seven years since the Commission presented this proposal on the protection of personal details and private lives in public digital telephone networks , i.e. the GSM and ISDN networks .
The aim was that the proposal should guarantee protection for all EU citizens with regard to information found in these various public and private lists .
On the second reading Parliament approved the proposal with 13 amendments , including an amendment saying it should cost nothing to have an ex-directory telephone number .
The Council was unable to accept all these amendments , especially not the proposal about ex-directory telephone numbers , which is why the question was referred to the Conciliation Committee .
I do not think the question about the extent to which a charge should be made for ex-directory telephone numbers has really been answered ; i.e. where this kind of listing of citizens is concerned , whether people should have the right to remain outside such a list at no charge .
That also applies to people who are at special risk .
I certainly think that Parliament has drifted a little away from its original standpoint .
When the European Parliament 's delegation reached agreement on this compromise proposal only four people were actually present , where there should in fact be fifteen people .
I also think it is debatable whether this is a question which requires an EU directive to set binding standards for the Member States at all , since the consumers ' interests are not quite satisfied and not fully protected .
My group is therefore actually considering voting no to the proposal .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many conflicting interests had to be reconciled here .
On the one hand , a compromise had to be reached between the need to afford Europe 's citizens the greatest possible degree of protection of their privacy and the concern of the operators of public telecommunications networks to provide a comprehensive and efficient service .
There had to be harmonization at European level while on the other hand the differing interests of the Member States also had to be taken into account .
An arrangement had to be found which was mainly geared to the standards in the proposal for a directive on the protection of personal data but at the same time was open to future developments .
The solutions arrived at in the conciliation process took satisfactory account of these concerns .
Let me pick out three points .
First , the conditions under which telephone conversations can be recorded have now been stipulated unambiguously .
The wording of the common position in this respect , which was very vague and would have resulted in inconsistent practice throughout the European Union , has been improved .
At the same time , however , the justified interest of the Member States in protecting public security and order has been taken into account in the new derogation .
Second , although the European Parliament was unable to implement its demand that non-inclusion in a telephone directory should be completely free of charge , it was able to reach an acceptable compromise on this point as the actual costs incurred which are to be included have been clearly set out and they will be low .
Third , going beyond protecting the basic rights of natural persons , the compromise now also takes better care of the justified interests of legal entities .
On the one hand this prevents inconsistent application of the Directive and on the other , SMEs in particular , will be protected in respect of their inclusion in public directories and in respect of unsolicited telephone calls .
It is to be welcomed that a simplified wording of the Directive which is easier to understand has been achieved at the end of the legislative procedure , that the terminology and the facts have been adapted to the proposal for a data protection directive , thereby avoiding differing interpretations , and that these two directives - at least in essence - will have to be jointly implemented by Member States by 24 October 1998 at the latest .
The compromise reached places on record the Union 's political will to create a uniform European standard for the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the context of telecommunications , in particular ISDN and digital mobile networks .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , on his , as usual , extremely diligent work .
He seems to specialize in technical , difficult reports but always does it very well .
This report covers two main issues : ( 1 ) data protection and , ( 2 ) new technology .
Data protection is an important principle for civil liberties .
We have the right to know what information is held about us and to correct information that should not be held about us .
The second issue is new technology .
Someone described the new technological devices to me as comparable to the change from sailing ships to steam ships in the last century .
This means that all kinds of information is now much more quickly accessible and far more information can be held on computers than could have been kept in manual records and can be accessed much more quickly .
This poses new problems .
New solutions need to be found .
In the report prepared by Mr Medina Ortega we have got some sensible conclusions .
I would like to support his report .
Mr President , MEPs , I wish to thank Mr Medina Ortega and the other members of the European Parliament Reconciliation Group , Mr Palacio , Mr Clercq and Mr Imbeni , for their efforts made to reach a favourable conclusion .
The European Parliament has played an important role in all stages of the procedure , protecting the directive effectively .
During the course of the reconciliation , the European Parliament made a considerable contribution towards ensuring citizens ' rights , particularly with regard to the provisions on confidentiality of communications and public yearbooks .
As has been recalled , the history of the directive goes back more than seven years and the European Parliament has always played a crucial role in keeping it in the topics to be dealt with , even at times when others thought the subject could be left to subsidiarity .
Parliament 's point of view has proved correct .
The technological progress and market developments have highlighted the need for a Community means of protecting personal data and protecting private life in the telecommunications sector , a need that is now broadly recognized .
The directive represents a key issue in the legal framework for the liberalized internal telecommunications market ; the minimum package of regulations for consumer protection will help create a climate of trust in the information society .
One further point I would like to make is the interest of the third countries in the Community approach to the treatment of personal data and the protection of private life .
This interest of third countries is considerable ; it will be important to ensure not only the correct national application of the directive as from October 1998 but also an adequate level of protection in the global telecommunications market .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Number portability and carrier pre-selection
The next item is the report ( A4-346 / 97 ) by Mr van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 97 / 33 / CE with regard to operator number portability and carrier preselection ( COM ( 97 ) 0480 - C4-0515 / 97-97 / 0250 ( COD ) )
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a few more weeks liberalization of the telecommunications market will be a fact in most of the Member States of the European Union .
After business has been the first able to benefit from the liberalization of the telecommunications sector I am pleased to hear that thanks to the proposal on number portability and carrier preselection , as it is laid out before us , the ordinary consumer will be able to reap the benefits of the liberalization process .
The Commission 's proposal to amend the interconnection directive meets the European Parliament 's position in the most important points , as expressed in its resolution of 17 July 1997 , and of which I had the honour to be rapporteur .
It is of extreme importance to the consumer that he will be actively able to experience the benefits of the liberalized telecommunications market .
The proposal will not only lead to an improvement in the quality of service , it will also encourage competition in the market , which means prices will decrease .
Mr President , the first amendment of the interconnection directive deals with number portability .
This means retaining your telephone number even when you change operator .
This is a highly effective instrument for promoting competition , as the consumer who wants to choose a different telephone company will no longer be discouraged by all manner of awkward number changes .
In time , number portability must also be introduced in the mobile sector , and I would like to ask the European Commission to develop proposals for this as soon as possible .
The second amendment , Mr President , concerns carrier preselection , which means that the consumer can choose which operator he or she uses , especially for long-distance calls .
Carrier preselection is an excellent way for the consumer to benefit in the short term from the European liberalization policy .
Considering the high expense resulting from long distance calls , the introduction of this regulation will be greatly to the advantage of the consumer , yielding hundreds of guilders a year .
The Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs has adopted one amendment which offers Member States in which outdated analogues systems are still in being used the opportunity to request postponement of the introduction of carrier preselection , as long as they can demonstrate that the introduction of this would lead to an excessive burden on certain organizations or groups of organizations .
I thank Mrs Read for her support on this amendment , and I am also pleased that she has decided against further amendments .
Mr President , whilst working on the Green Paper on Numbering it emerged that there is a need for pan-European numbers .
This could for example include one European number for the road rescue services , or one universal service number for the loss of credit or bank or cheque guarantee cards .
Once these numbers were introduced the user would no longer have to remember complicated country codes when abroad , but merely one European number .
The ITU has recently assigned 3-8-8 for the European Union , and on 1 January 1999 the European Commission will start testing a series of numbers , and I would like to ask the Commission to inform the European Parliament about the results of these tests as soon as possible .
Following on , Mr President , I would like to say something about the emergency number 112 .
According to the Council 's Decree the use of 1-1-2 or 112 in the European Union was , supposed to have been operational no later than 31 December 1996 .
During the past few months I have tried to check what has happened about this , and I notice that accessibility via the mobile network is still not optimal in certain Member States , and I notice that in Belgium the police are still driving around with the old emergency number .
Mr President , the parallel existence of two emergency numbers , namely one national and one European number is not in keeping with the intention to have one European emergency number .
It would be good if the Commission started an investigation into the introduction of the essential 1-1-2 number .
Mr President , my group is delighted to agree with the Commission 's proposal on number portability and carrier preselection , and the amendment agreed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Mr President , my compliments as ever to the rapporteur , Mr van Velzen for the thoroughness of his work .
I am grateful to him too for indicating his own support for the amendment carried by the Economic Committee which I drafted .
This proposal from the Commission and the principle of operator number portability and carrier preselection is one that my own political group very much supports as indeed do I. The reason that I was very keen for the particular amendment to go through was that there is at least a question mark over whether carrier preselection is going to deliver the benefits of liberalization to the ordinary domestic consumer , the one who very rarely makes even a longdistance call and almost never in his life makes an international call .
The fact that there is that question mark , at least in my view , is the reason for the amendment which allows derogations for individual Member States where an excessive burden would be imposed on certain organizations or classes of organizations or - and this is important - where there would be a detrimental impact on the development of competition and choice for consumers .
It is very important to recognize that derogation is not unconditional .
Member States would have to demonstrate this excessive burden or detrimental impact on consumers before that derogation could apply .
It in no way undermines the principle , particularly of carrier preselection , which Mr van Velzen so clearly articulated .
Any of us who have had the experience of trying to dial a long international telephone number will remember that by the time you get near to the end , which is the time you almost always make a mistake , you have almost forgotten who you are ringing and why .
Any simplification of that - and of course it is not only about simplification , it is giving real choice to consumers so that they can shop around so that the benefits of competition will come through - is extremely important .
This is not part of the text , Commissioner , but I would like to indicate that I as an individual Member would like to ask a question of the Commission perhaps twelve months from this day so that you could report to us the number of Member States who have asked for derogations , the reasons for those derogations .
It would give this Parliament an opportunity to look and see whether my fears are misplaced - and I do not think that they are - and if they are soundly based then we certainly would want to look for an opportunity to look at number portability and carrier preselection again .
I commend the report to you and am particularly grateful to the rapporteur for his acceptance of the amendment drafted originally by me .
Mr President , 1 January 1998 will be another historic date in the European Community .
Liberalization in this sector will bring with it considerable progress and my thanks go particularly to Mr van Velzen who has really worked hard on this issue and has contributed greatly to making this possible .
A few days ago I presented a book about telecommunications in Austria which represented the state of the art in Austria .
The interest it generated was huge .
Entirely new business opportunities are available in this sector and I believe this is of great significance for our future as well as for employment .
As far as the numbers are concerned it is very important that the number should also be a trade mark .
We can see this in the emergency number 112 , and perhaps 388 will be the code for Europe .
In future we should give much more consideration to what impetus for rationalization we could trigger using numbers like these , as well as considering the cost of change .
I believe an analysis of the most frequently dialled numbers would be a giant step forward for us .
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his brief and clear statement .
We do not always agree , but when we do , I believe it should be mentioned .
Already during the discussion of the Green Paper on number policy for telecommunication services , I expressed my support for the introduction of number portability and carrier preselection .
This is absolutely essential if the globalizing telecommunications market is to function properly .
The introduction of carrier selection alone will give the consumer a free choice of telephone company for international calls ; yet having to time and time key in an extra code again is very customer unfriendly , as the technology in most Member States is not up to date .
But , colleagues and commissioner , legislation will have to be introduced carefully , and the markets will need to be opened up on the basis of reciprocality .
The telecommunication sector is a big employer and has much to lose .
The Commission must therefore see to it the Member States do not curb the simultaneous introduction of number portability and carrier selection out of protectionist considerations .
I would like to ask the Commissioner how thinks he is going to implement this .
Ladies and gentlemen , when we discuss liberalization or the completion of the internal market , crucial to our business community , and therefore to employment , this House is usually divided into a left wing and a right wing block .
I therefore join the rapporteur in welcoming the broad support for this directive in this Parliament , and the Council - membership of which is still , unfortunately , two-thirds socialist - is also unanimous in its acceptance .
This means that our citizens will soon be able to benefit of the liberalization from the telecommunications market , and my group welcomes this .
I understand that you would like to go home , but I asked the Commissioner a question ; namely how does the he think he will be able to check whether this number portability and carrier preselection on the basis of reciprocity is to be introduced simultaneously in all Member States .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , I can answer you at least in part .
Your concern is shared by the Commission .
The Member States , however , have shown a certain preference for flexibility ; and so I think that there is still some way to go to achieve the objective you indicated ; at the moment , I am not able to answer more specifically .
I hope that reply satisfies you , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel .
I will now close the debate , and remind you that the vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11 : 35 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
Mr President , my point concerns the Minutes .
I refer to an intervention by Mr Macartney in which he said there had been some confusion and an error in translation from the original version in French into English .
I have checked the original French version and it quite clearly states ' la viande britannique ' .
My understanding is that ' britannique ' means British , it does not mean English , and therefore it includes all British beef including Scottish beef .
Mr President , I appreciate my colleague 's concern for linguistic accuracy but as you know the President in the Chair at the time was David Martin who is also from Scotland .
We have checked the original version signed by the group and it said ' anglaise ' .
That is why I raised the point of order , just for the record .
Thank you . I think we have looked at all the details of this question , and so the facts of this matter must now be clear .
( The Minutes were approved )
Decision on urgency
Mr President , The Committee on External Economic Relations requests that you reject the urgency application .
The Commission asked on 17 November for an urgent priority according to article 97 .
The Committee on External Economic Relations debated the application at a session on 18 November , and rejected it unanimously on grounds both of procedure and content .
The following concerns the procedure followed .
At the time of the application for urgent priority the Committee was in possession only of a copy of the covering sheet to the basic document containing the Commission 's proposal .
Under such circumstances we cannot be expected to give a Commission proposal serious consideration , however urgent it may appear to be .
Despite this , it would be possible to make an exception for the Ukraine on financial grounds , but as a tranche of ECU 100 million was to be made available , we do not believe that it was not capable of rejection on financial grounds alone .
We need time for consultation and request the rejection of the urgency application .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Organized crime
The next item is the joint debate on the following five reports on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs :
A4-0333 / 97 by Mrs Cederschiöld , on the Action Plan to combat organized crime ( 7421 / 97 - C4-0199 / 97 ) -A4-0348 / 97 by Mr Bontempi , on the draft Joint Action on making corruption in the private sector a criminal offence ( 10017 / 97 - C4-0478 / 97-97 / 0914 ( CNS ) ) -A4-0351 / 97 by Mr Bontempi , on proposals for a Joint Action to create a European judicial network ( 9804 / 97 - C40428 / 97-97 / 0911 ( CNS ) ) -A4-0355 / 97 by Mr Orlando , on the draft Joint Action establishing a mechanism for evaluating the application and implementation at national level of international undertakings in the fight against organized crime ( 10406 / 2 / 97 - C40479 / 97-97 / 0912 ( CNS ) ) -A4-0349 / 97 by Mr Orlando , on the draft Joint Action adopted by the Council on the basis of article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union on making it a criminal offence to participate in a criminal organization in the Member States of the European Union ( 10407 / 97 - C4-0480 / 97-97 / 0913 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , organized crime moves across frontiers in precisely the same way as environmental pollution .
Joint action is required .
Concerted efforts at global , European , national , regional and local level , but also within communities and on the part of the individual .
The European level must be reinforced , but without weakening the other levels .
The narcotics syndicates know no frontiers .
People are smuggled via organizations between different parts of the world .
They have the whole world as their playground .
Hundreds of mafia organizations already have interests within our Union .
We must increase the cooperation within the Union & # x02BC ; s frontiers , but also outside these frontiers towards the east and west .
The plans to start a more comprehensive initiative in this area began at international level a few years ago .
One year ago in Dublin the foundations were laid for the programme of action , which was discussed in Amsterdam last summer , with 30 different proposals for fighting organized crime .
Today we shall be discussing Parliament & # x02BC ; s views on this matter .
We also have a number of legal acts with detailed question that will be discussed at the same time .
It is a question of building a fence - the fence of legal security - which is so clear-cut that we still manage to take targeted and very effective measures against crime , since this strikes a balance not only between the constitutional state and integrity , but also the effectiveness of the measures .
In my proposals I have developed some of the points and gone further than the Council wishes .
I am more specific on some points .
I build a higher safety net on some points , while at the same time trying to increase effectiveness .
I have even rejected some of the Council & # x02BC ; s conclusions .
In addition , I have included in the report some new points of view that were not included , that is , areas that had not been discussed .
The report is , of course , very comprehensive .
In particular , I would like to draw attention to the practical work , since I believe that it is extremely important .
I have endeavoured to listen to my colleagues and also to understand their points of view .
I feel that this has been an extremely good cooperation .
Profit lies at the heart of organized crime .
Many of the proposals are therefore directed at profit , but also at the points of evidence , since this is the narrow sector in this context .
It is a question of finding various new ways of moving forward as far as evidence is concerned .
This is , in fact , extremely difficult in this context .
That is because organized crime often operates in such a way that it is not the people who actually take charge of the profits who are made to carry out the criminal activities , instead , it tends to be other people who do this - which means it is frequently difficult to sort out the evidence .
I believe that practical cooperation through the network is one of the key factors .
In the long term , this will help us to create an area for legal security within the Union .
In this context I would also like to take the opportunity to look at cooperation in the Nordic region .
We in the Nordic countries have had practical cooperation of this kind for a long time , which means that the parliaments take advantage of each others & # x02BC ; experiences before we introduce new proposals .
We also have day-to-day cooperation , which in my opinion is among the most important areas for further development .
We must establish compatible legal systems in Europe and we must harmonize in those areas where we cannot move forward in any other way .
I would like to take the opportunity to extend a vote of thanks to the minister , Mr Fischbach , who has come to Parliament and is holding discussions and consultations with us for the first time on these questions , with the result that we shall have the opportunity to present Parliament & # x02BC ; s views on an important issue under the third pillar - this is , in fact , in accordance with what was decided in Amsterdam , even though it has not yet been ratified .
I would like to extend our special thanks for this .
I think there is a wide range of opinion as to what the issue of organized crime actually involves .
We must establish a definition .
In order to be able to take effective measures , we must know what it is we are talking about .
I therefore believe that the definition is extremely important .
This , like the current law , will also be discussed on 3 and 4 December at the Council of Ministers .
It will be interesting for us to see what actually transpires , and whether they will listen to Parliament & # x02BC ; s views on these questions .
I hope that they will also begin to look a little more closely at special methods of investigation , that is , more clandestine methods .
These are extremely sensitive , but I hope that the Council will address them .
I have addressed these issues in more detail in my report than the Council has previously chosen to do ; they are , of course , sensitive questions .
It is also important to address questions relating to information technology .
We must prevent what happens within the field of information technology when the criminal world begins to make use of it .
We must also ensure that the police have the right opportunities to make use of information technology in order to prevent crime .
These issues should , I believe , also be explored more fully than they have been in the past .
Ninety per cent of the report was passed by the committee .
On those points where other views were expressed we have now put forward compromise proposals .
I would particularly like to express my thanks to those colleagues who have attended and taken part in the discussions , since I feel there has been exceptionally committed , productive and interesting cooperation .
I myself have been able to learn a great deal and therefore hope that the chamber will support this proposal in full .
If it does not , it would , in a sense , be a shame if Parliament did not succeed in taking advantage of the opportunity Mr Fischbach is giving us to put forward our views . This also lends this issue a weight that it would not otherwise have had .
I therefore feel it is right for Parliament to be able to put forward its views .
I also hope and believe that the lengthy work we have behind us will give rise to good opportunities to give prominence to this issue , even though not everyone has had all of their views adopted in detail .
That is why I also want to mention Italy .
The Group Union for Europe is proposing some changes we have had little discussion about .
Organized crime can take many different forms .
I have worked with many Italians and it is clear that experience in Sweden and Italy is very different in this area .
But we have a great deal to learn from Italy , since the Italians have taken some extremely drastic measures .
I am especially addressing the Group Union for Europe when I say this . We must bear in mind - and this is also my personal experience of Italy - that the Italian situation shows how exceptionally important it is to uphold the principles of the constitutional state in this context , to keep up the fight for human rights and the integrity of the individual , and not to forget this whenever we wish to take really effective action .
I eagerly await the Council of Ministers meeting in December , when we shall see whether the Heads of Government are able to live up to the hope they have given the citizens of the Union that they will make this Union an effective instrument against organized crime .
Mr President , I think the direction we have taken of concentrating the entire package of measures to be taken against organized crime into one morning is a positive one .
It is a significant innovation .
We have been talking about the total lack of any international or European campaign against organized crime for a long time .
Today I think we can finally say with some satisfaction that real changes are taking place .
The action plan is a significant change .
For the first time we have had to reflect and give our opinion on a global plan and a coordinated and consistent approach to the campaign against organized crime , although unfortunately the plan has already been drawn up , I think the most significant changes are those resulting from the operating plan , from that fact that since July 1997 the Council has set to work to define specific legislative measures as well .
Today , in fact , our examination relates to the plan and to five joint measures .
Finally , one particularly important change to be noted by the Luxembourg Presidency is that the European Parliament has finally been consulted on these actions in advance .
I should like to remind the Presidency that this relationship will have to be regulated in future as we are forced to run a long way , further than a Parliament can normally do to be able to give a reasoned opinion .
But we have done this to show that we really want to participate and make our contribution .
With regard to the action plan , after this positive decision , I just want to say there are still a few gaps I would like to point out to Council so that subsequent actions can take them into account .
It seems to me , for example , that the problem of urban crime has not been focused on a great deal ; we know it is different from , but also connected with , organized crime .
I can think of some areas of my country , particularly cities such as Naples or other cities in the south and north , where communal crime exists : small , widespread crime connected with drugs trafficking and organized crime .
This problem deserves a specific speech indicating the measures that need to be taken with regard to social prevention and specific intervention .
Perhaps we should talk about city business , but I want to mention this as a key point , as a critical point that has not been dealt with sufficiently - it has not been dealt with .
Besides the social prevention measures , I also recall a very delicate issue regarding the organization of financial crime : tax havens .
Action on tax havens is certainly difficult , but we are still having difficulties in establishing specific actions to reduce or oppose organized crime in respect of tax havens .
We know that tax havens do not just exist in overseas countries , but in our own countries as well , in a variety of ways : in the form of anonymous accounts held in Austria or in excessively protected bank confidentiality .
I believe these points should be recalled in a plan I believe should provide great political , operational and institutional change .
I wish to make one important point in passing .
In the amendments and discussion that at times are the inevitable but also exaggerated echo of national debates , we have a pattern that ought to be superseded : that of a confrontation between the effectiveness of the state 's capacity to pursue crime and its complex , sophisticated current manifestations , particularly at international level , and the sacred principle of guaranteeing citizens ' rights .
I think that this confrontation , considered in a static and old-fashioned way , no longer works , and no longer satisfies us ; we have to start from another angle , that of establishing or recognizing a fundamental right to legality as one of the central aspects of human rights which should be better guarded today in a complex society that is changing a great deal .
The right to legality certainly means a right , a citizen 's guarantee in respect of the law , the state and the courts , but also and above all a right not to have the territory occupied by crime , the economy distorted by crime , and the risk of citizens having to surrender democracy owing to the spread and pervasiveness of organized crime .
A new balance should be sought from this angle and new means introduced .
I am pleased to see that those who have had a very painful experience , as our country has , have been able to try out these new means .
When I say try out , I mean that at the time we introduce these means , I am thinking of participation in organized crime , which , if it becomes common , will be exceptionally important for favouring legal cooperation , I am thinking of the organization of the judicial network which is no more than a collection of judges who , with those connections introduced one or two years ago , must constitute the basis for promoting rapid legal cooperation .
All this stems from the fact that we clearly need to deal with the citizen 's problem by defending his rights vis-à-vis the state - this is a point we always have to emphasize and analyze when that right is violated .
But we also have to realize that other means are required , and so it seems dangerous and wrong to me to deny the potential of these means , when we should be assessing their operation , practice , management and efficacy .
From this point of view , if Europe draws up a plan for combatting organized crime , as it is preparing to do , trying as far as possible to reproduce the conditions guaranteeing a state of law and transferring them to the first pillar , or at all events initiating all the actions which give Parliament a means of control over the Court of Justice ( which , unfortunately , has not yet happened ) , then I believe that , while we are establishing these means , we should point out , with great critical concern as the report does , the need for a system that protects this new principle of legality .
This principle of legality should be based on the need for the democratic system to provide an answer to the destruction of life and democracy by crime but also for the citizens to enjoy their full rights and protection .
We therefore need to approach the citizen 's point of view .
I think that certain figures prove that concern about largescale , organized crime and widespread crime taking various forms is a prevailing concern among Union countries .
The Union should therefore contribute towards finding an answer .
I think that , with Parliament engaged in a lively debate on the possibility of giving an opinion , we will ensure that we move towards a declaration of the right to legality in general as a fundamental new category of human right .
To achieve this objective , I think we have the very important duty of discussing but also supporting the changes that will enable us to fight organized crime and its fundamental attack on the democratic system , not just with words but in a visible , concrete and democratically guaranteed fashion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in completing the presentation begun by Mrs Cederschiöld and Mr Bontempi , I too wish to emphasize the importance of this debate on the affirmation of legality in Europe .
I wish to express my appreciation for the sensitivity shown by the Council and the Luxembourg Parliament and my satisfaction with the discussion held by the Committee on Public Liberties .
I am sorry we have so little time available , but , despite the strict deadlines , we have sought in every way to honour the commitment not to miss this important transition in the life of the Union .
We are dealing with an organic measure and I wish to talk about three of its aspects .
The first relates to the systems of assessing and implementing ways of combatting organized crime ; the second to penalties for taking part in organized crime ; and the third to the Falcone programme .
This third aspect is not on Parliament 's agenda .
The relevant Council documents only arrived on 6 November .
As far as I am concerned , I have done my duty and I too ask the Presidency for this point to be postponed , so as to allow Parliament to express its opinion .
I have performed my own duty of indicating the positions held on the Council 's motion .
Of the two documents examined by Parliament this morning , the first relates to the system of assessing the implementation of measures to combat organized crime .
I consider this document to be highly important politically as it introduces a criterion of consistency in the behaviour of the Member States with regard to the important issue of combatting organized crime and it constitutes in itself perhaps a clearer recognition of why this issue should be regarded as an issue of European interest .
Within the committee , we have sought to praise the role played by the Commission and Parliament and we have provided for several amendments , which are largely shared within the committee , to try and clarify some of the changes .
Again with regard to the first of the two documents , we should remember that , as a result of the position assumed by the Committee on Civil Liberties , the Council has made several changes and some of them , which I will refer to at voting time , have in some way absorbed the motions tabled by the Committee on Civil Liberties .
With regard to the second document , a commendable and truly important attempt has been made , even if a little late , to establish a unified definition of the issue of combatting organized crime , including the establishment of penalties for belonging to a criminal organization .
European cooperation in combatting organized crime can only prove effective if there is a common reference framework for organized crime , if there is a common awareness of the existence of criminal associations with different forms of participation .
One premise stands out in this connection : the states and their criminal law have to adapt to the change in crime .
If crime changes and the laws remain the same , they end up being ineffective and facilitating crime .
The basic problem we have to face is whether today , not just in Italy although it began mainly in Italy , there is a particular criminal phenomenon that deserves particular attention .
That is the basic question !
If we do not think there is any particular criminal phenomenon and there is no particular need to combat this particular phenomenon , we can continue to combat changing crime with antiquated systems , but we must realize that we will not be effective !
The committee thought and still thinks , by a large majority , that there is a special case of a criminal association composed of individuals who participate in differentiated ways .
If this is true , and it is true as proven by the dramatic experience of my country , that the criminal organization involves and has involved not just the traditional criminal phenomenon , robbery rather than theft , but involves sectors of the church , the state and politics , it seems to me that the criminal law should take this into account ; in fact , if it is not taken into account , the risk is to continue fighting a criminal organization that no longer exists or that is no longer really dangerous .
For this reason , we believe that the Council 's motion contains highly important and appreciable aspects and that the amendments presented by the committee comply with Council 's approach .
The respect for fundamental rights certainly needs to be stated forcefully , and this is confirmed several times , in the amendments submitted by the Commission to Parliament , but we should also not forget that legality , democracy , corruption-free institutions and a free economy are direct , subjective positions that should be protected .
We certainly need to find a balance in the knowledge that we need to guarantee the connection that exists between the right to legality and the right to personal freedom .
In the motions presented by the Commission , reference is made in particular to the requirement to take into account the fact that the criminal organization is trying to become less military and more financial ; that is , it is having increasing recourse to aspects connected with finance and money laundering , while the armed military phenomenon , the phenomenon of massacres , is tending to become less significant . That does not mean that the criminal organization has ceased to exist , it means it is becoming more pervasive and dangerous .
The motions put forward are fairly interesting and I think we will have to call upon Parliament to accept the invitation offered by a very large majority of the Committee on Civil Liberties which is seeking to take a step forward towards the European Union and the whole of Europe campaigning against organized crime , to prevent undesirable forms of it infecting the whole of Europe .
With regard to the Mafia in particular , we are all dramatically aware that it is no longer an Italian or Sicilian phenomenon , but has become and is tending to become more and more of a European phenomenon .
I confess that , with the pain of someone who is well aware of coming from a country that is the source of that infection , but with the loyalty of someone who knows that the others need to be forewarned of this phenomenon .
The Mafia wants it said that it does not exist .
The various theories as to the origin of the word " mafia ' include one applying Arabic etymology : in Arabic , " ma fiiha ' means " does not exist ' .
The Mafia needs people to think that it does not exist .
When you are in a country other than Italy or in a city other than Palermo , and it is said that the Mafia does not exist , that is like an official invitation to the Mafia to go to that country and that city .
I would like to thank the three rapporteurs for these outstanding reports .
We shall now hear from the draftsmen of the opinions of the other committees .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs very sincerely , particularly Mrs Cederschiöld , on their reports , on which I have prepared this opinion by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I believe it is most appropriate that we should be debating these reports during a week which started with a visit by the President of the Court of Auditors and in which we have been concerned with his report on the financial situation and the weaknesses of our European budget .
It is one of the principle duties of this people 's Parliament to see that the interests of the citizens and taxpayers of this united Europe are not forgotten .
The Court drew attention to the vulnerability of the European budget as a subsidy budget .
I think that was very important .
If we look at this vulnerability a little more closely , we discover that major frauds occur in the field of personal income by a ratio of about two to one .
We have seen as recently as the Committee of Inquiry into transit fraud what that can mean .
It means billions of ECUs lost to our taxpayers .
What is going on there - the disappearance of whole truckloads of cigarettes or meat - is obviously nothing less than organized crime .
It is really very much in our interests that this situation is combatted .
It really is a scandal , as the President said , how little Member States cooperate in this .
I believe it is the duty of the European Parliament constantly to point out these abuses .
This has been done in your report and I should like to thank you most sincerely for it .
Mr President , if one were to ask the citizens of the European Union what concerns them most , the overwhelming majority would reply that the Union should prioritize the fight against internationally organized crime .
I therefore welcome Mrs Cederschiöld & # x02BC ; s report and the reports presented by Mr Bontempi and Mr Orlando .
One of the most important items on the agenda at the Dublin Summit was organized crime .
A High Level Group including representatives of the Member States and the Commission was therefore set up for this purpose .
The group & # x02BC ; s mandate was to draw up a plan of action .
The Commission has constantly been the driving force behind work on the plans of action .
The Amsterdam summit adopted the plans .
It can be regarded as a first step in our efforts to tackle the serious crime threat and to confront the anxieties of our citizens .
It is therefore gratifying that the Council of Ministers is encouraging both the Member States and the institutions of the Union to jointly put their weight behind the text of the plans of action and make the fight against organized crime truly effective .
The Commission bears an important responsibility for ensuring that 20 of the 30 recommendations in the plan become a political reality .
Today & # x02BC ; s debate shows that all of the Union & # x02BC ; s institutions must accept their responsibilities in the fight against organized crime .
Let me also say something about the points at issue .
Organized crime is nothing new - a fact which Mrs Cederschiöld also underlined - but with the new technology , increased trade and ever faster means of transport , it has grown and changed .
Organized crime has adopted increasingly sophisticated methods and has increasingly become an international phenomenon .
The development of the communications sector has brought with it many positive things .
At the same time , however , the Internet and other electronic contact networks for business and monetary transactions provide organized crime with new opportunities .
The facts speak very clearly for themselves .
We have today in the European Union 15 different legal systems .
We have different definitions of fraud and we have major differences in the regulations for banks and financial activities .
Organized crime understands how to exploit this fragmented situation .
At the same time , this intensifies the need for increased cooperation and greater effectiveness in the Union & # x02BC ; s fight against crime .
It is also becoming increasingly clear to us how organized crime is forcing its way into the Union & # x02BC ; s own areas of cooperation .
This applies to agricultural and export subsidies , State purchasing and trade in environmentally harmful goods , not to mention the extensive trade in drugs and human beings .
At this moment UCLAF is busy investigating smuggling of hazardous substances that break down the ozone layer .
This is an example of the new problems that we must address .
The Cederschiöld report emphasizes that the plans of action are concerned partly with defining the problems and partly with proposing measures .
I also feel that it is important that we should acquire more detailed knowledge about different criminal phenomena .
In order to make headway in the fight against organized crime , we must first have a common approach to dealing with these matters .
This applies both under the current Maastricht Treaty and under the new Amsterdam Treaty .
Unfortunately , it seems that the Member States all too often want to assert their own sovereignty in these matters .
I therefore agree that we should proceed step by step on the basis of a common understanding of how we should handle the new crime problems .
This applies equally to the sharp increase in criminality with regard to electronic devices , hacking into databases , money laundering , and so on .
The Cederschiöld report also advocates cooperation between Member State police forces and judicial authorities rather than a harmonization of legislation at EU level .
I share the view that cooperation must be the first consideration .
It was for this reason also that I recently proposed the long-term Falcone programme of action .
This programme is targeted at education and exchanges between those working on the fight against organized crime within the different national authorities .
This is also the reason why I support the proposal in Mr Bontempi & # x02BC ; s report to create networks for the Member States & # x02BC ; legal experts .
Another good suggestion along the same lines is the idea of a special liaison group for legal experts from the Member States within UCLAF .
This proposal was made by Mr Tomlinson in the transit report which we discussed last spring .
But increased cooperation alone is not enough .
Clear and well defined rules are also needed in order for the different judicial systems to be able to function together .
I am thinking among other things about the need for mutual assistance in judicial matters , including mutual rules for the submission of evidence .
It is not a question of harmonizing penal systems .
It is , however , necessary to close the loopholes in the Union & # x02BC ; s legal systems that are exploited by organized crime .
It is necessary to create effective and equivalent protection in the Member States .
The goal must be that criminals should not be able to escape because of differences in our various legal systems .
The Bontempi report on a joint action against corruption within the private sector is a good example in this connection .
We must be able to get a result , even if the Member States do not have the same penalties for private corruption .
We must , however , define these crimes in the same way and there must be reasonably similar minimum penalties for these .
In the same report , Mr Bontempi complains that the joint action against corruption does not grant any role to the Court .
I completely agree .
We should come back to this once the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified .
The problems surrounding the Court & # x02BC ; s lack of jurisdiction have also been addressed in the Orlando report on a common system for the evaluation and application of international undertakings in the fight against organized crime .
In the same report it was proposed that the Commission should be given an active role in this work .
It goes without saying that I support this proposal .
The Cederschiöld report also underlines the need for preventive measures , which is also addressed in the plans of action .
I share the view that those crime-prevention measures require support both in the form of adequate legislation and the effective application of carefully considered methods .
I regret the fact that the plans of action have not given sufficient emphasis to the social and economic factors that are often at the root of criminality , not least in the cities .
The plans do , however , establish a connection with the structural funds as a means of improving the ability to fight crime in the city .
This is something that I think it is important for us to develop .
The social misery in cities is a breeding ground for organized crime .
I , for my part , see no contradiction in the context of the fight against crime between preventive work on the one hand and repressive work on the other .
We need both .
The Orlando report addresses the question of participation in criminal organizations .
The basis for sentencing a person for participation in a criminal organization is , in my opinion , that person & # x02BC ; s conduct .
I believe that it is important to establish this fact .
The Cederschiöld report also addresses the problem associated with the exchange of information in the same case between courts in different Member States .
I have myself been able to witness how delays in the exchange of information between the different legal systems can directly benefit the criminals .
It can take such a long time that the criminals are simply acquitted .
The Council of Ministers is currently discussing a convention that is designed to improve the opportunities for mutual judicial support .
Work on this is at a very advanced stage and I hope that a political decision can be taken in the course of the next year .
Parliament & # x02BC ; s proposal of a European public prosecutor is of interest in this connection .
I would also like to say a few words about the expansion of the Union towards Eastern and Central Europe .
It is evident that the fight against organized crime and corruption will be an important component in the coming membership negotiations .
The plans of action therefore propose a special cooperation pact against organized crime , and that this pact should be concluded between the candidate states and EU Member States .
Together with the Presidency , the Commission is now busy studying how such a pact should be formulated .
In my view , this cooperation pact should give clear guidelines on how we are to tackle organized crime within the framework of a pre-accession strategy .
The proposals for action should be presented well in advance of the summit in Cardiff next spring .
The aim should then be to include them in the partnership agreements that are to be established with each Member State .
Allow me finally to underline how important it is that we should use all of the instruments available to us in the fight against organized crime .
The Member States already have a number of conventions lying on the table .
I am thinking about Europol , the convention on extradition and the convention on fraud and cheating .
I would like to appeal to Parliament & # x02BC ; s Members to make use of their contacts in their respective countries in order to ensure that these conventions can be ratified as quickly as possible .
Many thanks , Madam Commissioner , for your clear presentation and for telling off our governments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists I should like to thank all the rapporteurs for their intensive work over the last weeks and months .
I shall start with Mrs Cederschiöld , who had a difficult task to perform , namely to combine very different views , different understandings of terminology , various initiatives in the definition of organized crime , and the definition of the necessity for combatting it .
I think she has achieved this magnificently .
That does not alter the fact that there will certainly continue to be other basic views about one problem or another .
Despite this , we can concur with the basic concept of Mrs Cederschiöld 's report .
That obviously applies also to the work of Rinaldo Bontempi and the preparatory work of Leoluca Orlando .
One problem runs through all the reports : through the opinion by Mrs Cederschiöld on the report of the High Level Group , and through the proposals that have been prepared by Orlando and Bontempi on individual measures .

It is music to our ears , Madam Commissioner , when you say that we as a Parliament play an important role , but I have to complete your sentence by adding " if unfortunately not in the right place ' , because in the long term the European Parliament will have to be the primary legislative body for combatting organized crime in Europe , and I shall give my reason this morning for saying that .
There is no point in appealing to our colleagues in the national parliaments and asking them to hurry up with ratification of the current conventions please , because it is the right thing to do .
That makes no difference to the fact that for some fields of criminal activity we shall have to arrive at a Community solution , a European Union responsibility for combatting crime .
I shall try to make this clear to you by using practical examples .
In recommendation 19 , which Mrs Cederschiöld commented on in her report , the High Level Group wants to integrate the cooperation of penal authorities .
Mrs Cederschiöld has said that cooperation should not be centralized , but take place directly between the penal authorities . Then she proposes a multilingual glossary of various legal terms .
I accept that that is a fascinating idea .
One day I should like to consult that work , just for fun .
After Mr Orlando 's speech , however , I have to ask myself if the Mafia issues a multilingual glossary of legal terms .
Or perhaps it is working on one , while we wait .
That is the real problem , and it is also the problem , Mr Fischbach , which has confronted us since Amsterdam .
In Amsterdam we experienced what seemed to me to be a turning-point , as I said yesterday to my colleagues discussing the Méndez de Vigo and Tsatsos report .
Amsterdam was the start of a new phase , not a continuation of the Maastricht phase .
The reason for this is that with increasing economic intensification , and the addition now of the single currency , the accompanying - I might call it brave - de facto state control of internal security simply is not receiving equally necessary attention because national exemption continues to be claimed as a priority .
Here , as in the past , national exemption is presented as a primary objective .
For some elements we may possibly have advanced , for instance , political asylum policy - although my personal impression here is that this has arisen more out of opportunism than because of internal policy , in order to sweep it away somewhere else and remove this unpleasant subject from our agendas .
For all other subjects to do with intensification , however , we saw at Amsterdam that we have a five-year deadline , at the end of which there has to be a unanimous resolution for transfer to the Community framework .
And I wonder if in the final count all 15 Member States will not in fact claim priority for their national interests .
An end has now been put to this with the report Mr Orlando had to write - I commiserate with him on the task - and the title needs another look .
We are being consulted about writing a checklist to examine national implementation of what were previously seen as Community measures .
I prophesy now that we will soon be presented with a joint consultative measure to see what measures the European Union should adopt in order to flag up insufficient implementation at national level of what were previously seen as Community measures .
I do not think this will take us any further in the suppression of organized crime .
In my view we need a courageous decision which says that , if we detect that there are criminal areas that cannot be controlled at national level , either by police or penal measures , then these tasks must be delegated to the European Union within the competency of a Commissioner with the legislative authority of the European Parliament .
That is the first obvious point .
The second point is that this may be just in the future , but I think we should define it precisely here today .
The second point is also that we must in the meantime live with the fact that things are not as we should like to have them , and that we must make compromises .
In making compromises , however , that is , when defining what is achievable now , we must show more courage .
More courage means to me that we must arrive at the closest possible integration within a basis of inter-state cooperation - what Mrs Cederschiöld tried to demonstrate in her report .
But that must not follow the pattern of Europol - and that has to be passed to you , Mr President of the Council .
Based on what I know from the debate in the German Bundestag and Bundesrat , delegates in the national parliaments fear that fundamental laws of a democratic constitution may be violated by the creation of this police force . If , when considering the proposals for the immunity of police forming a European police force , we at national level have to spend more time debating why Europol officers actually need integrated immunity than we do debating what they need in the way of technical equipment and training to hunt down criminals , then I have to say that the Council has the basic concept wrong .
At the same time I should draw attention to the following . The considerations introduced with the Europol Report , and which are repeated in every other Community measure such as the report by the High Level Group , are quite relevant to realizing that the end of border controls within the European Union , abandoned customs barriers , and the European Union itself with its huge economic activity , offer increasing opportunities for gangs of crooks and organized crime .
The Commissioner has herself drawn attention to the fact that in our own areas of responsibility the acceptance of fraud and corruption is on the increase , but in my view we have still failed to realize that we must then pay more attention to the qualifications of officials and organizations which are supposed to combat that situation .
You referred to the Falcone programme , Madam Commissioner .
I think that is essential .
We need officials who are capable of handling modern technology .
We need crime officers who are capable of understanding modern economic systems .
I am fairly certain that in future it will be more important to have better police who are able to operate the most modern computer equipment , rather than to have faster cars with flashing blue lights .
For that reason the main emphasis now being placed on integration of training and qualifications is one of the most important steps taken in recent years .
We have behind us a long period of very intensive cooperative work .
On behalf of my group I should like to end by thanking not just the rapporteurs , but also the Council President , Mr Fischbach : you promised us in Luxembourg that you wanted to abide by all the Amsterdam results that were in Parliament 's interests , including the obligatory consultation of the European Parliament , for all third pillar measures .
In the cases we are considering you have done that .
We should like to ask you to hand that on to the next presidency , as far as you are able to do so , because the European Parliament has some important input to make , as you have seen from this morning 's debate and as you have yourself mentioned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schultz has correctly drawn attention to the fact that organized crime has a relatively easy time of it .
It has money available in almost unlimited quantities , uses it for the purchase of the most up-to-date means of communication which the police can only dream of , purchases and trains people with it , has the most modern and most effective logistics and one huge , decisive advantage : it does not have to abide by our laws .
All these advantages have led to the fact that organized crime in our society and our state is spreading and will finally undermine our society .
I have enquired of experts concerned with combatting crime , and they have made it clear that organized crime already has a hand in almost one third of all criminal statistics .
It is high time , therefore , that effective measures were taken .
Thus our thanks go out to everyone who wants to proceed with more intensive measures for cooperation , beyond the demands of national interests , to improve the lot of Europe 's citizens .
In particular our thanks are due to the rapporteurs , led by Mrs Cederschiöld with her very comprehensive report and the highly important reports on legal cooperation by Mr Bontempi and Mr Orlando .
Whilst we have been successful in achieving some success in police cooperation - I am thinking of Europol and Schengen - with judicial cooperation we are at the very beginning .
It will be necessary here for us to set up additional main aims for measures , as the police will only be as effective as we are successful in establishing a common legal framework , not just for detection , but obviously also within the context of common elements of the criminal code .
On behalf of my group , therefore , I assess as most valuable the network proposed by Mr Bontempi , in which the judiciary and experts can be brought together to acquire the same level of knowledge , to learn a joint legal tradition , as the first steps towards that unification of the legal systems which will now be possible following the establishment of new elements of the criminal code .
It is essential , however , that this criminal code be established to cover the field of organized crime and complicity in organized crime , otherwise we shall remain unsuccessful in the battle against it .
As elected representatives of the people we are responsible for seeing that all possible measures are taken , because our citizens do not like criminals to be enjoying freedom of action , when Europe 's freedoms do not lead to more security for the citizen himself .
I appeal to the Council , therefore , to act on all these measures , and I know that in the capable hands of Mr Fischbach and his colleagues this cooperation will be intensively developed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I do not think there is a single lunatic in Europe who can say that the Mafia does not exist .
The Mafia does exist !
It is very powerful and very well organized ; it is now an international and transnational phenomenon that uses far more effective means than the obsolete means of our small Member States of the European Union , and I would also say outside the European Union .
Today , organized crime , a great threat to the lawful state , is a great threat to democracy in many countries ; it is attacking the economic and production nerve centres of many countries and attacking many young democracies , by money laundering , by international trafficking in drugs , arms and anything else .
All this is now obvious , no-one can deny it .
So it is absolutely essential to have a European judicial network , a stronger connection , more coordination between those involved in preventing and suppressing this phenomenon .
Having said that , however , we cannot forget that , behind the legitimate requirement for more effective means , a temptation could be hiding for , after infecting Europe with unfavourable forms , such as organized crime , as Mr Orlando said , Europe could be infected with other viruses , legal substantialism , that of legal short cuts comprising exceptional laws , suspensions and compression of the right to the protection of individual rights .
We are asked for a balance . We too want a balance , with the full individual guarantee of rights of defence , such as the direct relationship between criminal fact and accused , something that some are beginning to deny .
We believe it necessary for criminals to be convicted with objective controls and not just through information on changes in living conditions that are particularly advantageous .
We do not regard this as a balance ; otherwise , the fight against crime would be counterproductive : the remedy would be worse than the evil , because it would affect citizens who are defenceless against the excessive power of the state and we would leave the real criminals unpunished .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the group of experts commissioned by the European Council of Dublin for this purpose has put together the outcome of its thoughts in record time in the form of an action plan against organized crime .
Fifteen political groupings and thirty recommendations represent an enormous workload , but the pace of progress has been sustained despite the fact that the wider public is as yet unaware of the basics of what is involved .
In connection with this I would like to make the following comments .
Firstly , we should endeavour to transpose into national law the joint actions in the fight against organized crime - the first of which will be adopted at the beginning of next month in the form of joint actions - as soon as reasonably possible .
The state of ratification - or should I say nonratification - of the Europol Convention , or the agreements on extradition , for example , are sufficient justification for this pressing call to Member States .
Secondly as regards the fight against organized crime and the measures to be implemented in this area , it is clear that this is a highly sensitive area especially as regards respect for the right to a defence .
It goes without saying that the Group of the Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , in whose name I am privileged to speak attaches particular importance to this .
Thirdly , as regards the authority set down in the third pillar , the improvement of parliamentary control , which Parliament is right to insist on , has acquired a new dimension in the course of the current Presidency-in-Office of the Council .
At this point I would like to pay a particular tribute to Mr Marc Fischbach , the current President of the Justice and Home Affairs Council for having given parliamentary participation a new momentum which his successors will not be able - and , I hope - will not want to ignore .

Fourthly , I would also like to express my particular gratitude to Mrs Cederschiöld , Mr Orlando and Mr Bontempi , for successfully compiling our work within a timescale which allows the Council to make use of it in due course .
Mr President , today we are examining the action plan to combat organized crime adopted by the European Council at its meeting in Amsterdam , along with four draft joint actions implementing a number of the recommendations included in that plan .
Whilst a great many very interesting things have been said in this debate , I should like to draw attention to a number of other important points that must also be taken into account if we wish to ensure that the European Union takes coherent and coordinated action to combat organized crime .
The European Union must take wide-ranging , coordinated measures to improve , simplify and speed up international cooperation to prevent organized international criminals from increasingly exploiting the weaknesses and loopholes in the Union 's existing judicial system .
In all these activities , however , the Union must pay constant attention to respect for legal and democratic principles and human rights - above all , fundamental freedoms , as interpreted by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
In order to ensure this , it is essential to guarantee the democratic and judicial control of the various actions carried out .
At this point it is appropriate to mention the democratic deficit with regard to these matters which exists in the European Union .
I need only cite the fact that the European Parliament was not consulted on this action plan , and that constitutes a breach of the treaty .
Furthermore , I should like to draw attention to the importance of having global and coherent policies in the social , youth and education fields , aimed at preventing organized crime .
The social dimension of the action plan is too restricted .
Crime is encouraged above all in areas in which the damage caused in the public domain is not repaired .
The action plan must address social concerns such as the need for social security , the growth of poverty , the reduced ability of traditional social systems to integrate communities , the mistakes made in urban planning - resulting in shanty towns , slums , etcetera - and the negligence of town and city councils .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to avoid any misunderstandings , let me say that there is clearly a serious threat from international crime , and this will have to be answered by international police cooperation .
Constitutional procedures , however , require a precise knowledge of what the phenomenon of international crime consists of , and against whom one has to take steps .
A senior policeman once said that he knew what it was , but he could not really describe it . That is not enough for action to be taken .
Thus my main criticism is aimed at the entirely imprecise definition of organized crime .
Mrs Cederschiöld 's report describes gang crime and criminal complicity , but it does not mention one main attribute and characteristic : the infiltration of crime into the machinery of state .
Unclear and imprecise definition makes it possible for any means to be used as soon as things become dangerous .
Then the term " organized crime ' can be used as a sort of skeleton key to unlock anything , any taboo , any basic right , and thus weaken the system of legal safeguards .
One popular example of this is Europol , whose power would be extended in the action plan , but without any extension of legal guarantees .
I do not need to go into democratic and legal safeguards here , or into the fact that there is no sign anywhere of a European Public Prosecutor 's Office .
We emphatically reject the logic of the doctrine concerning equality of weapon power .
The state cannot and must not use criminal methods and means .
The end does not justify the means .
That is a strangulation of basic rights , as critics say when they talk of too many basic laws being unhealthy and of having to try less democracy .
Democracy and basic rights are fundamental and are not available for disposal , not even in the fight against crime .
I emphatically support what Mrs Gradin has said .
I think what is mainly lacking from the action programme is a section on prevention and research into causation .
Research into causes is the way to dig up crime by the roots , instead of playing about with its symptoms . Many thanks to Mrs Gradin , and many thanks to the Council .
Many thanks despite all the controversy , or because of all the controversy , to the three rapporteurs - all of them equally , but more equally to Mr Orlando .
Mr President , may I start by heartily congratulating our three rapporteurs Mrs Cederschiöld , Mr Bontempi and Mr Orlando on the quality of the work they have done .

This joint action plan points up the inconvenience of not having a restrictive force and of favouring a weak consensus which we all dread to some extent .
It presents the advantage of establishing long term objectives and this is something we should welcome .
These texts may also suffer somewhat from the fact that they come to us mainly from Italy , the first country really to have a firm grasp of this whole issue .
However perhaps we should guard against seeing European reality from a purely Italian perspective .
These reports largely deal with particular aspects , sometimes excessively , but do not cover certain other aspects adequately .
The authors have reported extensively on heroin trafficking , tobacco tax fraud , trading in human beings and money laundering , but yet remained silent on murderous political terrorism which is also highly organized crime .
And that is the crux of the issue : the definition provided is imprecise to the extent that rights to defence and the protection of persons may well be open to threat .
Certain professions may be very directly involved and I refer here in particular to lawyers and solicitors .
Special investigation methods will have to be handled with a great deal of care .
In short we should probably redefine the role of Europol , its area of responsibility and its control system more precisely .
We fully support Mr Bontempi 's report dealing with the judicial network in Europe .
However on the other reports we remain less convinced for the reasons I have just indicated .
These technical measures lack political inspiration in our view , and this inspiration is something which may yet be a long time coming .
Mr President , this morning we are debating a series of reports on the fight against organized crime and legal cooperation in Europe .
Our group considers that these serious questions relating to the exercise of justice , public freedom and public order are , by definition , a matter for national attention , as justice is a sovereign right .
And what is more , if justice is to be implemented efficiently and with respect for the rights of individuals it must also remain close to the people .
The state control level seems to us to be the most suitable .
It cannot be denied that , faced with increasingly internationalized crime which operates through organized networks and international crime associations , inter-state cooperation is essential and must be strengthened : we need to ensure its efficiency and guarantee to our citizens respect for the established legal order and security .
The Geneva appeal judges have already stressed this point .
The reports submitted this morning are frequently of great interest and very high quality , and they present proposals which deserve examination .
However we deplore the roundabout way in which all too often it is proposed to bring justice and national public order into the domain of the Community .
This , we feel , endangers the rights of individuals and democracy .
There is room for discussion on this issue , and the debate should be transparent to the people .
European criminal law should not be created too hastily . It cannot be set up without formal consultation of the people involved .
In this respect the draft Amsterdam Treaty and the protocol on subsidiarity indirectly reaffirm the principle which , up to now , was purely based on precedent , that is , the superiority of Community law over all national law , including constitutional law .
We believe that this problem must be debated before the European people and for these reasons of democracy within the European framework , we cannot vote in favour of all the drafts which have been proposed this morning .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in technical terms the action plan and the reports of the European Parliament represent a positive element in combatting organized crime .
That being said , I am not convinced that an efficient action plan will be carried out effectively , because the question is not purely technical but also political , moral and even religious .
There are some obvious contradictions , for example between the political desire to remove frontiers and the desire to combat international crime .
But in fact it is the dominant ideology in the West above all which is latitudinarian , egalitarian and cosmopolitan and which favours crime .
We are well aware that nations are quite often complacent even if , out loud , they denounce the Mafia .
None of this of new .
Historically we now know that after 1945 in Italy , for example , the Americans facilitated the return of the Mafia .
The philosopher Hegel wrote that when man eliminates God and regards himself as sovereign , he creates the moral conditions whereby he need no longer respect his fellow man .
There can be no doubt that this philosophical evolution in the West has led to the current rise in organized crime .
Without a criticism of the current nature of power , mafia organizations which are in collusion with certain political systems or nations will never truly be combatted , even if we claim otherwise .
Mr President , can I say that this whole issue we are debating this morning illustrates how little progress we have made as a European Union in the whole field of judicial and home affairs , compared with the great strides that we have made in certain other areas like the economic and financial sectors and many other aspects of life .
It is now becoming increasingly obvious how important it is that we tackle many of these issues .
There is for example the question of the custody of children of parents who are citizens of different Member States .
There is a question of extradition .
There is the harmonization of judicial penalties which is creating considerable problems .
There is the question of bail arrangements and many others .
These things will have to be tackled with urgency and I very much hope that the British presidency starting the beginning of next year will help to make some progress in this area .
I am concerned too about the plight of people who are arrested and held in custody in Member States of which they are not citizens , pending trial , and who are often held for extraordinarily long periods because of purely technical problems relating to translation of documents or differences between the judicial procedures of individual Member States .
Of course if they are guilty they should be punished , but they should not be in a worse situation than they would be in their own country .
Moving on , if I may , to the role of Europol - which is fulfilling a vital role and to which we have to give our support - it is very important that all the Member States should as soon as possible ratify the convention so that we can make progress .
Organized international criminal organizations have an inbuilt advantage : they do not really bother themselves very much about frontiers , subsidiarity , national judicial differences and so on .
They operate freely and the law enforcement agencies of Member States work with their hands tied behind their backs all too often .
At the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs some months ago we heard from some of the Italian prosecutors involved in the corruption trials in Italy .
They mentioned that in getting information about the things they were investigating from other Member States they sometimes found that they had to write dozens of letters and wait months and even years before they got replies .
Can you imagine the boss of some international criminal organization waiting a year , or writing 26 letters , before he gets a reply from one of his henchmen ?
I do not think his henchman would last very long if he did not reply to the first letter !
We have got to ensure that our law enforcement procedures and systems are able to compete effectively with these international criminal structures that we have today .
However , I must say that I could not support a greater role including operational actions by Europol until we have in place proper structures for democratic political accountability of its activities - they clearly do not exist at the moment .
We must also have in place a system for the investigation by an independent police complaints body of any complaints that there may be from citizens of Member States about the activities of Europol .
Such an independent police complaints body should not be less effective than those existing in the Member States ; hopefully it will be more so .
Finally , can I say that the British Labour Members in this Parliament will be able to support all these reports with the solitary exception of the second report from Mr Orlando , where we will have to abstain .
We have some problems over the envisaged greater role for the Commission and there are also complications about the legal situation that it proposes as far as the UK is concerned .
There are problems there that will have to be investigated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since 1957 , when , at the very beginning of the process of European integration , the goal of establishing ever closer union among the peoples of Europe was proclaimed , we have come a long way .
We have a come a long way , and today we are privileged to have among us an exceptional witness , Mr Fischbach , who , on behalf of the Council presidency - something to which we are unfortunately not accustomed when matters of interest are being debated - can give us the benefit of his long experience - despite his youth - in the Trevi Group .
We have come a long way since that initial proclamation of the goal of ever closer union , and today the goal set by the Amsterdam Treaty is the progressive establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice .
However , as previous speakers have already said , the freedom envisaged is far more the free movement of goods and services than the free movement of persons .
And when it is the free movement of persons it also partly the free movement of criminals ; but adequate means to combat the free movement of criminals effectively have not yet been orchestrated .
Consequently , besides welcoming the new articles 29 , 30 and 31 of the Treaty on European Union - in other words , the substantial modification of former articles K.1 , K.2 and K.3 - which set the goal of the progressive establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice , we must address the following issue : after having achieved a great deal in the economic sphere , we are now getting down to the essence of European integration - a subject which is difficult to tackle : the sphere of values .
As Mr Bontempi has already said , and Mr Orlando has underlined , we cannot continue to make progress without agreeing on certain issues which , because they affect the fundamental rights of citizens , concern values .
We have to define organized crime , and , as Mr Pradier rightly pointed out , we have to adapt the fight against organized crime to current circumstances , since it is no longer simply a question of crime organized for economic reasons , but of crime organized for political reasons within the European Union : in other words , terrorism .
In this sense , with regard to the four joint actions envisaged - leaving aside Mrs Cederschiöld 's excellent report , which unfortunately maintains the action plan 's ambiguity on this point - the Luxembourg Presidency has had the courage to go beyond the narrow framework of the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty still in force and utilize the provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty .
It is not at all a question of bringing these matters into the Community domain , but of addressing the issue of what those values are , and , on that basis , determining how to combat this scourge of European society .
Mr President , I would first like to say that I am delighted that for once Parliament has been consulted by the Council within the framework of the third pillar .
As regards the action plan on organized crime , we can only be glad that a coordinated and coherent Community approach is being sought and that cooperation on policing , justice and customs is being strengthened .
Of course we should encourage the establishment of direct links between the repressive authorities in Member States as a first step on the road to a common justice system .
However it is important to retain the channel of national entities which work with Europol in order to avoid dispersal of information .
We must also define precisely the central system of judicial control which has been called for .
And we must not forget that Europol is first and foremost a police structure .
However we agree that ultimately the methods of special investigation should be harmonized .
On the other hand , the majority of my group certainly does not share the idea contained in Amendment No 14 tabled by the Green Group .
The act of legalizing drug sales would surely not be enough to deprive criminal organizations of the profit of this traffic .
Tobacco and alcohol are freely available for sale , and yet look at the situation there !
If this amendment were to be adopted we would have to abstain from the report as a whole .
Yet we share Mr Bontempi 's fear that the links between organized crime and corruption represent risks for the state of law and for the stability of democratic institutions .
We are pleased to note that there is recognition of the political importance of the debate on legal cooperation and on putting in place in Europe instruments which permit investigators to establish a direct contact with colleagues from other countries which are faced with the problems associated with organized crime .
We are supportive of these first steps on the road towards installing practical instruments which aim to improve the efficiency of international legal cooperation .
On the other hand , the main proposal in the Orlando report on international involvement in combatting organized crime concerns the central role - granted to Member States by the Council - which would have to be attributed to the Commission during the temporary process of evaluation .
Our group does not accept this and we will abstain on the whole report if this clause is accepted .
Mr President , the fight against organized crime ranks high on the political agenda in Europe today .
It is good that we are concentrating our energies on fighting against this kind of cross-border crime which the individual countries do not solve .
But so long as Europe takes vigorous measures against criminality there is a risk of excesses .
That applies also to this proposal regarding the criminalization of participation in certain organizations .
Although such activity is increasing , we must always ensure that the right exists to an effective defence , in other words , a person is innocent until proved guilty and should be held responsible only for what turns out to have been committed deliberately .
Our group will therefore be supporting Amendment No 18 the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
We wish to emphasize the principle of the rule of law .
Clearly , the European Union wishes the countries applying for membership of the Union to respect this principle .
All the more reason , then , why we must not forget it ourselves ; if we did so , we would be extremely poor teachers .
One part of the principle of the rule of law is also the principle of legality in criminal law , which states that the stipulated penalty should be exact , and that it should be absolutely clear in which situations one is considered to have committed an act so reprehensible that a penalty can be imposed .
For example , the list in the proposal for joint action of what activities are criminal is not exhaustive and does not , therefore , correctly satisfy the principle of the rule of law .
I also wonder whether we are not perhaps extending liability under criminal law too far in the committee & # x02BC ; s Amendment No 12 , which means that people are deemed to have committed a criminal offence if they have taken part in a certain type of organization , even if they have not become a permanent or significant part of the structure of that organization .
If we draw a comparison with existing proposals - for instance , that this interpretation of a criminal offence should apply to people who , for example , have participated in computerized crime - then this may well appear to be an example of excessive criminalization .
Mr President , the joint programme , four or five reports and all the speakers do offer certain interesting ideas and proposals , but they have a common basis , a common logic .
They address the problem of organized crime on a national and a European scale but from a one-sided viewpoint , that of the methodology , the philosophy and the practice of repression .
Mr President , I think this is a waste of effort .
Organized crime has been discussed here with this methodology for decades and it has not been eradicated , nor has it been seriously reduced . Instead it has grown and taken on gigantic proportions over the period we are now debating .
The problem , therefore , is to examine the issue jointly and to place greater weight , if you like , on prevention .
We must recognize that the forcing house in which organized crime germinates is the economic , social and political status quo that prevails in our countries .
Under these conditions it develops , matures and expands on a European and a national scale .
Let us not forget that . On this basis the problem must be investigated .
Nor must we forget that this form of crime is closely linked to police , judicial and administrative authorities and also to political leaderships and governments .
Let us not forget the power of the drugs cartels , of arms smuggling and immigration , that is , modern-day slavery .
Mr President , we believe in a combination of the two methods .
Prevention , first and foremost , and , of course , enforced measures of repression .
But this must be done with circumspection , since I very much fear that the expansion that has been introduced here will be a pretext for you to create a gaoler of liberties and a guard over the interests of the few , of a tiny speculative minority of vested interests .
Mr President , Interpol exists in order to combat international crime .
It is therefore quite remarkable that the Cederschiöld report does not say a single word about Interpol .
Unfortunately I get the impression that the former head of Interpol , Carl Persson , who is also the former Swedish national police commissioner , was right when he publicly expressed the view a week or so ago that the EU & # x02BC ; s efforts against international crime are , in part , an unnecessary duplication of work .
Among the demands made in the Cederschiöld report is a call for a centrally determined , harmonized criminal code , that is , a centrally controlled , united state of a sort that that we thought had been consigned to the scrapheap of history .
This is not even the way to build a federal state - After all , the US criminal code is not totally harmonized .
There are , of course , some good suggestions in the report , which we shall support .
We shall , however , be voting against the Cederschiöld report in the final vote , since we are advocates of a serious fight against international crime involving strong cooperation from Interpol .
However , we do not wish to contribute to making the EU into a centrally controlled police state .
Mr President , I would like to recall Mr Orlando 's attention to the denial of the legal bases of our rights with his arguments for modernization and adaptation to new conditions .
All our national regulations contemplate the offence of a criminal association while the proposal made by Mr Orlando is to ensure that this offence is recognized without an offence existing .
This is an open door for the witch hunt , that is , the Europeanization of the Italian legal system , which is a real disaster , as it has put tens of thousands of innocent people in prison for many months and years .
This is Peronista justice , and would be a disaster for Europe .
Our group obviously cannot vote for this report proposing a highly convenient way of shuffling off the real problem , which is one of drugs and drugs trafficking that today represents 80 % of the organized crime business .
We want to draw your attention to the need to legalize this business as a matter of urgency , to wipe out the 80 % of Mafia income .
I would also like to ask Mr Orlando to report me for belonging to a criminal association .
Together with Marco Pannella and other colleagues in my party , in recent weeks I have been distributing hashish on the streets of Rome .
I have done so publicly . I will do it again and a lot of us will do it again because this is the real problem today : legalizing the trade , production and distribution of all drugs .
Mr President , it is a good thing we are talking today in such detail about organized crime , and we shall have to do so more frequently in future .
That is because the level of analysis of their own activities is still higher amongst those who organize crime , than amongst those who make pretty speeches on the subject in this House .
Part of this debate must be that we clarify amongst ourselves what is meant by organized crime .
I should like to make that clear by using an example .
Two things may lie behind a pickpocket theft in a city .
Firstly , it may be a single act by a drug addict needing money to buy drugs .
That is not organized crime .
It may also be , however , that a group of specialists has been flown in to work the city systematically , stealing credit cards , and by evening they are sitting in their aircraft again over the Atlantic whilst couriers take the cards to other parts of the world , where they are used .
For that one can earn about ECU 25 , 000 .
The booty is changed into cash through a professional organization of fences , the cash is collected and re-introduced into normal commercial circulation by means of money laundering .
Here we are talking about organized crime , and the difference must be noted .
It must also be part of the discussion that we make clear to ourselves that there are interfaces between so-called normal society and organized crime .
What do I mean by that ?
What makes the fight against money laundering so difficult is the fact that the techniques used in it differ in no way from those used by tax defaulters when they want to launder their illegal money .
For this reason there is a bodyguard of people , even in politics , who in the interests of their clients want to prevent stricter laws .
Those are the people for whom banking secrecy is more important than the secrecy of the confessional , even though they go to church on Sundays .
We must also include debate on weaknesses .
One obvious weakness , Mr Council President , is that only now do we have the study group on high-tech criminality and the use of technology in organized crime .
What world have the ministers been living in ?
If one knows that organized crime can call on a great deal of money and possesses business structures , then it must be obvious that these organizations can buy in specialists and technical experts and even modern technology .
And they do just that .
They have been doing it for years .
It is high time for us to begin to consider how we can make certain technologies safer from abuse .
There must be debate like the one we had on dual use products in the armaments sector .
These were products which could be used for various tasks , and in whose whereabouts , therefore , we had to take an interest .
I should like to name two examples . The equipments one needs to counterfeit credit cards can be obtained freely on the open market without a licence .
No one is concerned about where these machines go .
Whilst we take great care that no one gets hold of the paper needed for printing money , no one pays any attention to plastic money .
That is a contradiction .
A second example is that we have a proposal from the Commission on how one should deal with encryption .
Commerce does not want any limitations .
When I read this paper I see that commercial interests have completely taken over within the Commission , and security interests take second place .
We must not allow this .
Mr President , trade in human beings , paedophilia and child abuse , arms and drugs trafficking , corruption , money laundering and fraud are the characteristics of a civilization of today which has lost its greatest values and is dying , as Paul Valéry said , from the death of its instincts , the very principles that formed the basis of civil life , of relations between human beings .
A common measure needs to be taken as a matter of urgency indicating the path of our commitment to answering the challenges of the third millennium .
We need to create a strong , firm basis for fighting the sad present-day phenomena such as slavery , which is organized crime on a world scale , without scruples , that is , attempting to import into Europe today , by means of mass immigration , unfortunate people who add to the fraud with a mockery of repatriation ; and paedophilia and child abuse , which reflect a sad reality , burdening weaker categories largely in need of protection with the outlet for instincts that are no longer human .
Finally , we are trying to make the facts follow the words and the Union is trying to put the system of police cooperation into writing , by attempting to use common criminal policies .
Unfortunately it is doing so , or trying to do so , without first associating Parliament and without managing to make a suitable choice between intergovernmental cooperation , which in our opinion is now out-of-date , and harmonization of the current criminal laws of the member countries , a road we have yet to follow .
Organized crime is a real counter-power .
To be fought effectively , we need to have a valid system of rules recognized by everyone , with legal cooperation running from the intergovernmental sphere to the Community section , establishing effective penalties that include criminal liability and therefore imprisonment and extradition .
In that way , we would establish a system of fighting it , which can be all the more effective as it is capable of having a system based on absolute values suited to the requirements of the present day .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first , I too wish to congratulate the rapporteurs on these reports .
As has already been emphasized in this debate , everyone is aware of the difficulty of combatting organized crime , which takes advantage of the free movement of goods , capital , persons and services , as well as technological innovations .
I believe that the time has come to abandon traditional models of combatting crime , based on antiquated ideas of impermeable borders , and begin to employ methods based on close cooperation between the judicial , police and the customs authorities beyond our national borders .
We must not forget that it is especially important to the citizens of Europe that their public and private safety be guaranteed , and I therefore believe that it is the European Union 's responsibility to combat organized crime by strengthening police and judicial cooperation .
This is the sense of the action plan 's political guidelines , which also stress the need to improve the implementation of the measures already adopted - essentially relating to extradition - by promoting the development of preventive instruments .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Cederschiöld , on the need to promote and step up the information campaigns on the effects of the activities of criminal organizations , and especially to foster effective measures to tackle conditions which encourage a willingness to support organized crime .
However , like my colleague , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , who spoke earlier , I profoundly regret the lack of a clear definition of organized crime in the action plan .
In this regard , we must not forget that the concept of organized crime covers many different types of crime .
I believe that a full definition of organized crime should comprise - in accordance with the provisions of article K.3 ( e ) of the Amsterdam Treaty - the constituent elements of criminal acts and the penalties in the fields of organized crime , terrorism and drug trafficking .
Organized criminals commit serious offences . They are dangerous felons who undermine democratic institutions and cause a feeling of insecurity to grow amongst the citizens .
Organized crime is not only the business of what we might call " criminal traders ' .
It involves not only the pursuit of profit and other economic benefits , but also violence - unfortunately including terrorism .
Nevertheless , I wish to conclude by saying that , overall , this debate represents a significant step forward and gives an important political signal . I would stress that the people of Europe require a response to their desire for an efficient justice system , and we must therefore present them with a body of law which provides an effective solution to the problems of cooperation in the field of combatting organized crime .
And I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that we have taken an important step forward with this action plan , although we still have a long way to go in the fight against organized crime .
Mr President , I want to congratulate the rapporteur and say that it is not before time that we had this debate in Parliament ; but the more we talk , the less we appear to do on issues like this .
The criminal fraternity throughout the European Union has enormous resources - resources unimaginable even to the European Union budget . They use it for bribery , corruption and the free flow of drugs and laundered money throughout the Community .
In my own constituency , some years ago , there was no will to tackle the problem of drugs in parts of that inner city constituency .
It is only in the recent past that the Irish Government has acted to confront the drug barons .
Before that , people took to the streets .
People knew who the drug-pushers were .
They knew which people were laundering money .
They knew exactly what was going on but there seemed to be no action .
The government has now introduced the Criminal Assets Bureau .
By this means they have confiscated property and frozen bank accounts throughout the European Union belonging to the criminal fraternity in Ireland .
Unfortunately there is another element , the witness protection scheme .
Some of the hardest criminals are turning witness and are now offered very lenient sentences .
It has an upside and a downside , the witness protection scheme .
Quite frankly , I do not think it is a particularly just system because some of the hardest criminals are being released .
Four or five very hard criminals may be given soft sentences to convict one .
We must look at that particular aspect of legislation .
Mr President , organized crime has a great capacity to adapt to the situations to increase its trade .
At the moment , one of the most lucrative trades is trading in human beings : a trade that , on the one hand , serves to strengthen the networks of these criminal activities and , on the other , is obviously a source of considerable profit .
Italy is an extremely weak point today , as its coasts are experiencing an unprecedented invasion .
I am sending a warning to this Parliament , as the Italian government is trying to minimize the situation and is sending its governors around saying that everything is in order so as to obtain the application of the Treaty of Schengen .
This is not true : the situation is out of control and unmanageable , and the Italian State is also responding with the verbal assurances but is proceeding with substantial measures , such as the laws that actually favour the indiscriminate entry of people into Italian territory .
These masses of desperate people who are pawns in crime are passing through Italy and invading the whole of Europe , first the Po Valley and then the rest of Europe .
We therefore need great control and so I ask Parliament to take every possible measure for this phenomenon to be arrested .
Mr President , the fight against organized crime is the issue on which the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , of which I am chairman , has produced a series of resolutions .
We always remain extremely critical , but this morning I would like to congratulate our colleagues who have worked together so amicably in such a short time .
I would also like to congratulate Commissioner Anita Gradin , the President of the Council , and Mr Fischbach , because I think what is happening today represents the completion of their cooperation .
I hope it is of help to you .
I understand from the Commissioner , as well as from the minister , that something will actually happen as a result of their contribution .
So I do not really want to speak at length about everything that is suggested in these resolutions , as they are the people best qualified to do so .
There are only a few points .
First , organized crime needs to be fought not only paper , but in the tough real world .
That is why we have to wait and see what will happen to all those excellent proposals from both the Commission and ourselves .
Two more remarks .
Firstly , Mr Bontempi has already talked about it at length , but I would like to draw you attention to it once more , something easily said , but more difficult to do , namely that in everything that we are doing at present to combat crime we have to keep in mind that this must be done in the most responsible way possible in order to ensure that personal protection is guaranteed .
We must not become a police state , nor a " police Europe ' in which individual liberties and individual protection are sacrificed on the block of collective fear .
This will require some more thinking on our part .
The second point concerns the small and diffuse margins between organized crime and business crime .
Links between these two exist .
The Mafia infiltrates the circuit of decent politicians , business people , and other honest citizens .
Business people , politicians who , and we all know this , have links with the Mafia circuit .
This muddled , grey area is what we have to be aware of .
It has to be mapped out better than it is at the moment .
Mr President , I hope Mr Fischbach 's exemplary working method will be passed on as a baton to the next Presidency .
Mr President , in spite of the deficiencies noted by the rapporteur , we must welcome the action plan against organized crime which targets a form of criminality which is on the increase as a result of the development of the internal market .
The fact is we must not unwittingly allow the free circulation of persons , goods and capital to further a single market of drugs , fraud , prostitution , illegal arms trafficking , trade in human beings , money laundering and much more .
It seems to me that the harmonization , or even the introduction , in every national criminal code of a legal definition of the concept of organized crime would be a condition sine qua non of the proper implementation of this kind of action plan ; how can we effectively fight an ill-defined and poorly identified enemy ?
Moreover , before we dream up new ways to fight organized crime , would it not be better to exploit the existing means more effectively first ?
The report quite rightly advocates that priority be given to improving cooperation between Member States which have not yet signed existing agreements on repression and convergence of penal procedures , or which do not exploit all the options offered by these agreements because of national sovereignty considerations .
In this area where results have been shown to be insufficient , despite increased cooperation , harmonization is essential ; in this case we must consider a progressive convergence of criminal law in the Member States and the establishment of minimum standards .
What is clear is that criminals involved in organized crime are benefiting to the full from the inconsistencies between the different systems and from any reticence to cooperate on the part of Member States .
So it is high time that the fight against this form of crime which is constantly on the increase was coordinated at a European level ; the action plan presented to us is a step in the right direction .
However two previous reports already stressed the need for increased action : these were the Schulz report on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and the Reding report on the fight against terrorism .
Despite the interesting progress contained in the Amsterdam Treaty , cooperation between the forces of order and criminal systems is still far from satisfactory , because all too often developments come up against the obstacle of national sovereignty , and we forget that the absence of effective cooperation at EU level does not serve the people , only the criminals . Only when we realize that the number of national problems which can only be resolved at European level is on the increase will we really be in a position to fight organized crime effectively .
Mr President , one minute 's speaking time is not exactly a long time for discussing three or four reports , so I have to limit myself to one single thought .
My experience in my own country is that government capitulates systematically to criminals .
In large cities like Brussels there are streets and areas where the police is no longer allowed to take action , where even public transport no longer goes , and where the remaining decent citizens , those who do not have the means to flee , are at the mercy of the law of the jungle .
My thought is therefore the following : when government does not have the courage or the wish to tackle such small local problems , how will it have the courage to tackle international crime ?
Briefly , the principal problem in the fight against crime is by no means that the European Community authority is still in its infancy - and I do not advocate such a communal approach , but merely more effective cooperation between Member States - the problem is a question of mentality and the political will to combat crime .
I believe that at present this political will and mentality is sadly nowhere near strong enough in Europe , while it does exist in a small city state like Singapore , where they have been successful in stamping out crime .
Mr President , I would like to make a few brief remarks on the valuable work carried out by the rapporteurs who have diligently illustrated their work .
The first thing I would like to point out is how subjects of this kind , particularly the approach we give them , are directly connected with more general questions we dealt with yesterday , during the debate on the decision to be made on the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In pursuing general arguments , we are always sensitive to issues of political integration of the European Union , but it is when we have problems such as this that we show our capacity and real will to proceed in the direction of the political unity of the Union .
From this point of view , I think that the work carried out is so important but also requires more courage , and I believe this opinion is shared by the government of my country .
Cooperation between the Member States is no longer sufficient ; we need to find courage in internal security policies , the fight against crime and other important issues such as taxation , proceeding towards harmonization , towards a more uniform set of rules that enables us to deal with and specifically solve the actual problems .
I think this is the difficulty that needs to be worked on , by finalizing the texts and working to ensure that our social analysis of and decisions on these phenomena are accompanied in the near future by specific harmonization measures as well .
Having said that , I would like to add what I believe to be the real priorities .
We should try to make an effort to identify the subjects we can deal with at European level and separate them from other issues that can be resolved by cooperation between the Member States .
I wish to mention three : the first affects us directly and is the fight against Community fraud .
The legislation needs to be harmonized in this sector .
Only three Union countries have included Community fraud in the criminal code .
As we always make so many graded lists about fraud , we will start by recalling those who have not yet fulfilled their duties from this point of view .
The second issue relates to the fight against crime in the sector of trading in people , or clandestine immigration .
We cannot make a caricature of this problem as Mr Formentini did , because the problem is now a general one .
Crime initially related to cigarettes , then drugs and now drugs and human beings .
The other issue is that of money laundering .
These are the three major issues on which we can work with a little more courage , even than in the important work carried out by the rapporteurs .
Mr President , corruption threatens society , organized crime threatens society . Added dangers accrue , therefore , from the interplay between corruption and organized crime .
We in the Freedom Party have always made a stand against corruption of any kind in Austria .
We have made a name for ourselves for that .
So we basically welcome the action plan - I do especially in my capacity as a judge in the criminal court - but most particularly the initiative to create throughout the Union a criminal code to combat active and passive bribery , even within private commercial activities .
International development and the annual report on fraud make quite clear the need for relevant regulations within the criminal codes of Member States , and for international prosecution procedures .
We do have ideological reservations , however , on the indictment of artificial persons and in contrast to Mr Bontempi we believe that for democratic reasons a treaty between nations would be preferable .
Mr President , I hope this discussion can be received by public opinion for what it is , beyond the technical , legal or relevant issues .
It is a coordinated response we wish to make to the need for safety and legality demonstrated by our citizens , and it is a common undertaking we are making today , with this discussion , to combat crime so that it cannot benefit from our system of rules and democracy and then place it in crisis .
It is an honest reply because this discussion leads us away from temporary uncoordinated measures and we are responding with an action plan : 30 recommendations , some of which have already been converted into specific common actions , like pieces of a common design .
This is the meaning of a choice that is strategic and also an undertaking that can be measured and assessed .
The gaps and limitations of this design also need to be mentioned , however .
It seems to me that there is a lack of a more definite harmonization , of a clear definition of organized crime , which makes everything weaker , not so much because we are not managing to define crime but because it is difficult to define the organization .
It should be recalled , however , as pointed out by our rapporteur and then taken up by Commissioner Gradin , that there is a weakness in identifying the causes and all the strategies of prevention .
We should also do this to answer those who came to talk to us in the Committee on Civil Liberties .
I mentioned an honest and , I would add , a balanced answer .
The balance should be sought and assessed particularly in this Parliament , a balance between the need for an effective fight against crime and the need for this fight not to injure the fundamental rights of citizens .
It is not a comparison , as recalled by Mr Bontempi , but a construction of a system of legality .
It is a balance that should always be maintained , and the means we are approving today , from a reciprocal assessment to points of contact , to letters rogatory , are means of achieving legality .
Being Italian , and as Italy has been brought up several times , I can only say one thing : we do not want to export the emergency to Europe , or laws , or refugees , but we believe that with effective cooperation we will all be the winners , including Italy , in this sector .
Mr President , Mrs Colombo Svevo is right and I want to say the same : an honest and balanced answer , a virtuous course that begins this morning , a course of cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
And here I wish to express my appreciation to Minister Fischbach and Commissioner Gradin .
An honest and balanced answer that seeks to bring together the requirements of European cooperation and respect for individual national regulations : first , respect for rights , correct proceedings , fair proceedings , rapid proceedings , and the presumption of innocence ; secondly , the identification of an organized crime : participation in the crime should be direct and certainly personal .
But the question is not whether participation has to be direct or personal ; the question is what is an organized crime ?
An organized crime consists in getting organized to commit a crime .
We are here for that reason , because otherwise we would have no reason to talk about a criminal organization .
One further reference to the quotation , already maintained and contained in an amendment as well , relating to the phenomenon of the collaborator , the terrorist .
The text drawn up by the Council and the Committee on Civil Liberties does not refer to collaborators and terrorists , because we consider that to be a very complex , controversial issue burdened with so many ambiguities that it cannot be dealt with just in an amendment .
For this reason , I think it is inappropriate and wrong to include this issue in a framework which needs to remain organized , honest and balanced , as Mrs Colombo Svevo says .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of this debate there will be an opportunity to demonstrate that organized crime can only be fought successfully within a common European legal environment .
The proposed joint action for construction of a European judicial network points to this and we support it .
What we need is a sort of legal internal market .
What we are seeing is a legal Europe puffing along behind a commercial Europe .
All limits have been lowered or already largely removed for internal European trade .
Legal limits , however , are being defended with great vigour .
This is leading to products , services and capital being freely exchanged , but the legal instruments for safeguarding commercial trading are being blocked at the frontiers .
Why is this so ?
Why is not actually possible to deliver direct a payment order by a German court in France ?
Why cannot an Italian witness be directly summonsed to appear before a Belgian court ?
Apparently national sovereignty prohibits this .
I do not want to be misunderstood .
I support the existence of a national state and we will need it for a considerable time as an organizational model for the completion of public tasks .
But national sovereignty must serve the interests of the citizen , in this case the protection of his rights and freedoms .
Where it does not do this , it must be examined .
If from time to time national sovereignty is quoted to counter legal communication , then that is simply a distorted picture of national sovereignty and has actually nothing to do with it . It is more a sign of backwoods crankiness .
Sometimes one can even detect evidence of legal racism .
Foreign legislation is opposed because it is foreign and not one 's own .
Yet the constitutional status of all Member States in the European Union is fixed and securely anchored .
There is , therefore , absolutely no reason why Germans should not be summonsed before a British court , or why verdicts should not be delivered directly .
We need workable solutions to this .
Workable solutions must be found .
This would happen under the European judicial network , which we therefore emphatically support .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Madam Commissioner and ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my thanks for the excellent cooperation , the kind words and a very comprehensive piece of work .
Time does not allow me to summarize the entire debate .
I shall therefore focus on only a few points which I think need to be emphasized .
One point relates to the Community : the preventive measures which Commissioner Gradin addressed and which have also been touched upon by several others , and the social angle .
These points were not included in the High Level Group & # x02BC ; s document , but I have incorporated them into my report and would like to emphasize them .
To Mr Gahrton , who has not even shown enough interest to stay on , I would like to say briefly that I think he is using this chamber for domestic policy debates .
I do not even consider his oversimplified contribution worthy of an answer in this connection .
I would , however , like to have that included in the Minutes .
To Mrs Thors , who is unfortunately not here , I would like to say that the report takes her concerns fully into account .
In fact , it addresses precisely the points that she was calling for , that is , motive , intention and active participation with regard to criminal organizations .
They are therefore included .
Finally , I would like to say briefly that it is the excise duties and contributions that we shall take with us from this debate .
These questions must be brought into focus .
We cannot allow taxpayers & # x02BC ; money to end up in the pockets of criminals .
I hope that the debate results in our continuing henceforth to pursue with greater vigour and intensity - and working more closely with the Commission and the Council - what Nassauer termed a " legal internal market '
Mr President , to conclude this discussion , I wish to raise three points .
First , it is important that this formal sitting was chosen for the beginning of a new phase in the work of the European Union and also Parliament in the fight against crime .
I believe the discussion has been very useful and has offered us conditions for correcting the delays and taking more useful action in the future .
Secondly , there seems little evidence to me that the introduction of new instruments includes regulations other than Italian ones .
I would like to point out that the criminalization of private corruption , which is an important aspect of innovation , is a very important aspect ; it does not exist in many regulations , it does not exist in our regulations and so its introduction shows that Europe is working through the best experiences acquired over the years .
Finally , I would like to recall that keeping the balance mentioned by Mrs Colombo Svevo between the requirements of safety and the requirements of freedom is something sacrosanct , and it is something else to discredit instrumentally and with entirely false information , an experience that has made it possible to combat corruption and the Mafia in our country effectively .
I ask everyone , if we want to take this seriously , to accept the balance and not the instrumentalization .
Mr President , like Mr Fischbach I wish to express my thanks for the good and wide-ranging debate .
To save time , I shall largely agree with the comments made by Mr Fischbach , so that we also manage to finish the next debate this morning .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon tomorrow .
Cooperation priorities in justice and home affairs
The next item is the report ( A4-0367 / 97 ) by Mr Nassauer , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft Council Resolution laying down the priorities for cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs for the period from 1 January 1998 to the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam ( 10021 / 1 / 97-C40426 / 97-97 / 0910 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on justice and internal political priorities has now reached a rather different plane , because we are conducting it not just on the basis of the Maastricht Treaty , which is still valid , but with the draft Amsterdam Treaty in mind .
For this reason the proposed resolution of the Council , quite understandably , uses the effective date of the Amsterdam Treaty as the deadline for this list of priorities .
At the same time , Mr President of the Council , I want to call for an examination of whether we could not keep to the usual one year deadline for checking these priorities , should it turn out that the effective date of the Amsterdam Treaty were to be delayed .
For , as the previous debate has shown , this field is of increasing importance for the whole European Union .
The first conclusion must be that work in this field must be intensively continued , regardless of the threat from the Amsterdam Treaty It will , however , have difficulty keeping the new legal instruments of the Amsterdam Treaty directly in its sights , because it is possible that modifications will have to be made after the effective date .
You , Mr President of the Council , have involved the European Parliament in good time and very fairly in your procedures , and this needs to be emphasized .
You made the welcome suggestion of hearing the European Parliament as a matter of principle during the earliest dealings on the Amsterdam regulations , and not just during the most important elements of the work .
We have certainly appreciated that .
I must add a comment addressed to you , however , when I say that we shall have to make some effort so to organize our deadlines that we do not delay the progress of procedures .
I want to make a second comment . Taken together with Amsterdam , we will have a substantial increase in legislation .
I think we will have to pay more attention to the quality of our legislative texts than has been the case in the past .
For instance , when I look at Parliament 's amendments to legislative texts , I see that they lead in most cases to an almost dramatic expansion of texts which were originally shorter and more precise . This arises from many good political intentions , but leads to the texts becoming lengthy and confusing , and this is on the increase at European level .
In short , with this procedure we shall add to the flood of standards and the incomprehensibility of the law , something we otherwise complain about .
We must take great care to see that our legislative texts are shorter and more precise .
I should like to turn my attention to a few details in the list of priorities .
Mr President of the Council , it would be a good thing if a new list of priorities were to make some mention of what happened to the old ones .
A little success rate control would be helpful for all concerned .
One would be able to write in what had been achieved , and what had not , and the reasons why something had not been achieved .
In this case , unfortunately , we have had cause to complain repeatedly that freedom of individuals in the European Union has not been achieved to the extent laid down in the treaties .
The Commission has meanwhile done its homework in the form of the Monti Proposals .
It is now up to the Council to find an answer to the Commission 's proposals .
My third point is on the judicial network we have been dealing with .
Up to now it has been the only legislative expression of the area of freedom , security and law that we all aspire to .
It must be possible to extend this network with appreciable benefits for our citizens .
Europol comes into being next year in all probability , and will be able to start its work .
Development work on the next stage of Europol must not then be delayed .
We ask that of you , Mr President of the Council .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the Luxembourg Presidency for its excellent cooperation .
I am not sure if one can really talk of priorities in this list .
It is rather more a collection of bits and pieces , and something of a contrast with the actual results in the Council .
It is true that in the field of justice the Council 's aims will have to be more ambitious .
They must keep step with the development of the internal market if we are really to create an area of freedom , security and law , as set out in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Why indeed should parties , witnesses , defendants and experts not be summonsed as though we were one state ?
Why should parties not be required to appear personally as though we were one state ?
Why not , indeed ?
Let me deal with another point , concerning the duration and cost of cross-border court cases .
There was a study done on this by the Commission in 1995 .
The cost and duration of cross-border legal disputes lead to the fact that we are faced with a straightforward denial of legal rights .
It is in practice pointless to initiate a case on the other side of a frontier because of the costs and the time taken .
I see a real priority here , because it has become an obstacle to the internal market . Let me point out another thing .
It is exceptionally unfortunate that according to the Amsterdam Treaty on this subject of cooperation within the civil law the Intergovernmental Conference only allows Parliament a joint right of decision where visa policy is concerned , and then only in five years time .
Considering the poor results achieved by the Council in this field so far , that is difficult to understand .
I am sure the European Parliament could participate in our achieving very much better results .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I share the Mr Nassauer 's view of this because of the initial position following the Amsterdam Council , and because of the agreement by Mr Fischbach , which I already mentioned this morning , it can be hoped that successive presidencies will keep Mr Fischbach 's word .
I hope they will say that they will apply Amsterdam and carry out obligatory consultation with the European Parliament .
This would require of the European Parliament a consequent and comprehensive reform of its rules of procedure , or we shall be unable to keep pace with our workload .
You expressed that very politely , Mr Nassauer .
I will put it in my own way a little more bluntly .
Part of what we produce here could well be left alone .
That does not alter the fact , however , that the priority list - Mr Rothley called it a collection for bits and pieces - has no apparent theme .
I have to say that I get the impression that the Council did not really quite know where to set its main emphasis in the priority list .
For that reason I shall first deal with the fact that the most important thing is what can be activated from amongst the policy areas covered by the ratification procedures which are about to end .
Now let me return to Europol , Mr Fischbach .
Here I must emphatically contradict you .
I have a very high regard for you and I know that you are a constant defender of the constitutional state , but you cannot stand here and say on the subject of the immunity agreement that , just because it still has no operational authority , we can simply leave the question of immunity to you .
Put another way , that is saying that when it has obtained the operational authority , then we shall take it away from it again .
Or that is how I interpret it .
Unfortunately you do not have a microphone , so I shall repeat what you have just said : " I did not say that ' .
Thank you , Mr Minister , that is what I wanted to hear .
Now let me say that we no longer need to give the police this immunity , and I shall say why not .
The collection of data is also a violation of citizens ' basic freedoms .
They can already do that .
I must tell you that wherever police forces exist , Mr Nassauer , and you are a former Minister of the Interior , wherever police forces exist there have to be two things in parallel .
When a police force is created with the right of interference in a citizen 's freedoms , then there must be a legal guarantee and parliamentary control .
These do not exist here .
Now let me add that where the collection of data has to do with personal habits , race , origins , or sexual preferences , Europol officers can go ahead and collect all of it . The individual citizen affected by Europol 's activities must have the right to knowledge of that data and the right to control its availability .
So , if you are looking for a priority , Mr Fischbach , I would recommend to the Council that it withdraws the immunity regulation in its current form as quickly as possible .
Furthermore , may I quote Mr Nassauer 's report , which was passed by this Parliament with a large majority : we , as the European Parliament , require that all accompanying regulations on Europol be submitted to the European Parliament for consultation before they enter the ratification procedure .
A start can be made straight away with the immunity regulation .
You quite rightly said in the priorities that the policy on asylum would become to a dramatic extent the subject of debate in European politics over the next few years .
I ask the Council , therefore - and I say this emphatically on behalf of our group , because we are giving asylum policy a leading position in our work - to prepare , as early as next year , specific ideas about how it will deal with the harmonization of asylum policy , both technically and in content .
I should like to say about content , that I assume - at least for as long as you , Mr Fischbach , are Council President - that the Council will not succumb to the temptation of believing that asylum policy can be devolved to Europe , simply because it is a delicate and touchy subject at national level which people would like to be rid of at that level , in order for minimum standards to be yet further reduced , something not achieved at national level .
That is an asylum policy which we will not support .
Mr President , when we are talking about the priority schedule for justice and home affairs , we have to say that in this area many decisions have been made over the past few years .
Absolutely .
However , there is a serious problem about the decisions which have been taken .
For a large part it is fake legislation , imitation legislation .
They are not directives as we know them in the first pillar of the European Union , but rather recommendations and such like .
The problem here is that it is completely unclear to what extent the measures taken have been implemented nationally .
Mr President , the Council and the Commission need to draw up a report on the progress of the implementation of Union level decisions into national legislation .
I believe a report of this kind should be discussed in this Parliament as well .
Mr President , many decisions have been taken .
Many decisions have also not been taken , including extremely important ones .
Looking at asylum and immigration policy , I ask the Council and the Commission : where is the decision on sharing the burden of displaced persons fairly ?
Before we know it Algeria might explode , and no decisions will have been taken on such an issue .
Where is a proper strategy of the external border of the European Union ?
It has been the subject of discussion for six or seven years .
And priority schedules or not , it is time decisions were taken .
Mr President , more and more discussions are taking place about the establishment of a European Magistrate 's office , and of public prosecutors at European level ; they would for example supervise Europol and so on .
This does not strike me as very desirable , as the supervision of Europol should be political .
My final question is - and with it I conclude my remarks - the Council and the European Commission prepared to draft a report on the establishment of a European Magistrate 's office , including the advantages and disadvantages ?
Mr President , this report , like the earlier reports , expresses some technicalities that one can endorse .
I am broadly in agreement with what Mr Rothley said on these points .
But the most important thing for me is that this is a snapshot of a process of development .
It is , so to speak , the EC & # x02BC ; s route from a Common Market to Union law - or , as Mr Nassauer put it during the earlier debate , a legal internal market .
It is an integration process which - and this is a fact that has largely been overlooked in this debate - involves dismantling the national institutions and legal traditions on which Denmark & # x02BC ; s law-governed society , for example , is built .
It is evident both in Mr Nassauer & # x02BC ; s report and in the earlier reports , and the keystone can , of course , be found in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Of course , the proposal in question only applies to the implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty .
And page 6 of the report states that " the Treaty of Amsterdam Treaty makes substantial changes to the existing third pillar of the Treaty on European Union and places the cooperation of Member States in the fields of justice and home affairs on a new legal footing ' .
The set of priorities we are referring to now is , so to speak , an anticipation of this , and what we regard as the end-point in this development process - in viewing it as a snapshot - is , of course , also described quite clearly in Mrs Cederschiöld & # x02BC ; s report . I regard this report as a bogeyman , but it is heartening for others ( Commissioner Gradin , for example ) , in that it advocates a harmonization of the Member States & # x02BC ; criminal codes .
This is actually the end-point of this development process - and , what is more , it is taking place without the national democracies having the opportunity to react .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to emphasize one fundamental point , and that is that a very important part of the quality of any democracy is measured by the degree of open control that can be exercised over the police and the penal institutions .
I can state that on a whole series of key points , these proposals , these priorities - not to mention the earlier reports - break with this fundamental principle , for instance the Europol Convention , which entrusts control only to this Parliament ( and not to the national parliaments ) and to the European Court of Justice - not to the national courts , as require , for example , in the Danish Constitution .
Mr President , I think I already overran my time earlier .
You should have interrupted me .
I am sorry , I was not paying attention .
I just wanted to say that of course I am delighted with this excellent report from Mr Nassauer .
It is a simple indicative programme , ladies and gentlemen , not a definitive one .
From it you can tell that the Council wishes to exert all the pressure it can to achieve results which are as firm and conclusive as possible using a maximum of actions , plans and initiatives .
So we must work with both accuracy and determination to achieve these results .
And this is what this programme actually means .
We have achieved quite a few of the points from the 1996 programme , which was the first one , albeit biennual .
I hope that this one will not go further than January 1999 when we all hope that the Amsterdam Treaty will finally be ratified .
But please do not hold it against the Council that it wishes to do too much , we have good intentions and I think that tribute should be paid to our efforts in taking this step .
Mr President , the basic principle is free movement of persons within the European Union , but many people fear that this will become free movement for criminals and swindlers .
That is why the third pillar was added within the context of the Maastricht Treaty .
My task within the Commission is therefore to work towards realizing the free movement of our citizens .
So I welcome the fact that we are having a special debate about Mr Nassauer & # x02BC ; s report on the priorities for judicial and domestic questions .
The aim is that we should in future be better able to handle the problems that we encounter .
Among the areas I am thinking about are refugees , organized crime , the drugs trade , the slave trade involving women and children , and fraud , corruption and effective police cooperation .
When the new Amsterdam Treaty comes into force we shall receive new , increased opportunities for cooperation .
This is an important step forward .
The Commission , the European Parliament and the Court will all be given a stronger role in connection with the third pillar .
This is important in order to counter the anxiety felt by the citizens with regard to the threats to their safety and security .
Increased openness , greater effectiveness and better democratic and judicial control are necessary in order that people should know that this affects them .
In the short term the Commission will complete the work under the Maastricht Treaty .
This includes the proposals that are now being discussed within the Council of Ministers .
Here I would like draw attention in particular to the Commission & # x02BC ; s proposal regarding admission , that is , accession , temporary protection , measures against corruption , the fight against synthetic drugs , the fight against the slave trade involving women and the fight against sexual exploitation of children .
The Commission is , of course , from now on also actively working to ensure that the plans of action against organized crime that we have just debated are carried out effectively .
In this connection I would also like to draw attention to the important cooperative projects that we have initiated through the long-term working programmes , for example , Grotius , which is leading to increased cooperation between judge and prosecution , and thus cooperation within the judicial system ; Sherlock , which of course is aimed at cooperation with a view to preventing forged documents ; and Oisin , which is aimed at bringing about cooperation between police forces .
Each of these programmes plays its own part in increasing legal security within Europe .
We also have the Stop programme , which involves cooperation between authorities in the Member States with a view to combatting the slave trade in women and children , and the Daphne programme , which gives support to voluntary organizations engaged in the fight against sexual exploitation of , and violence against , women and children .
Both of these programmes have met with a very big response .
Later today , Parliament will discuss Mrs Zimmermann & # x02BC ; s report on the Odysseus programme , which is aimed at those who work with migration and asylum issues .
As proposed in the Nassauer report , the Commission will continue to take new initiatives with the aid of the new instruments that we now have at our disposal under the Maastricht Treaty .
I am preparing five different initiatives : one regarding enforcement of court rulings , one on legal aid , one on missing children and sexual exploitation of children , one on asylum procedures , which is missing from this debate , and one on credit and payment card fraud .
Both I myself and the Council will , of course , be sure to consult Parliament about these reports .
In parallel with our ongoing work under the current treaty , we are also preparing ourselves for the day when the new Amsterdam Treaty comes into force .
This work has already begun .
One of the questions that must be answered concerns the integration of the Schengen Agreement into Union cooperation .
As a result , the Union & # x02BC ; s regulatory framework will be extended , even if the fields of responsibility within the third pillar are not expanded as such .
There are concrete agreements within Schengen that as yet have no equivalent within the EU .
This has two important consequences .
First , the Union will operate within a broader field of activity than at present .
Secondly , the expanded regulatory framework will impose greater demands regarding safety and freedom for the eastern and central European countries which are now preparing themselves for membership .
Schengen will be one more dimension that needs to be incorporated in the coming negotiations .
Two working groups are now fully occupied with the practical preparations .
One group is devoting itself to integration within the Union work and the other to the matter of what form the cooperation with Norway and Iceland is to take .
In the long term , the most important question will be how we are to take up the growing challenges in the area of justice and home affairs .
One of these concerns the development of internationally organized crime within Europe .
The most important consideration here is to meet the citizens & # x02BC ; demands that we should combat the crime threat effectively .
The Europol Convention will be an important tool in this connection .
The aim is that the convention should be ratified before the end of the year .
I also hope that the Member States push on with the ratification of the extradition convention and the convention on measures against deception and fraud .
At the same time , like the committee , I regret the fact that the Hague Convention on judicial scrutiny in connection with cross-border disputes has not been ratified by all Member States .
As I said in my introduction , the Amsterdam Treaty will mean that cooperation in justice and home affairs will be raised to a new level .
The treaty includes an ambitious five-year work programme that looks into how questions of border control , migration and asylum are to be integrated with the first pillar .
Questions relating to the police and tariffs , as well as to criminal and civil law , remain within the third pillar .
But even in these areas , cooperation will be developed through framework decisions , and so on .
In my opinion , a careful review is needed of the new treaty & # x02BC ; s consequences for justice and home affairs issues .
I have therefore set in motion a study which I propose to present to the Council of Ministers and Parliament in the form of a wide-ranging report .
I hope that this report , like a White Paper , will serve as an important basis for a full debate on how we are to bring about a Europe that is characterized by freedom , safety and justice .
Thank you , Madam Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
In principle , the vote ought to take place now , but if not it will take place this evening .
Votes
Mr President , there are actually three oral amendments , which I now propose to read , agreed with the rapporteur and the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , in order to clarify several aspects of the budget and financial control .
The first amendment is an addition to article 4 paragraph 2 which reads , " in the event of recourse to subcontractors , the latter shall be selected by tender , organized pursuant to the current financial provisions ' .
It is therefore a general precaution .
The second amendment is an addition to article 7 relating to cooperation with the CEECs and Cyprus and reads , " the costs of such participation shall be added to the appropriation for that programme ' .
The third amendment , which supplements article 9 , relates to the fact that , since it is a five-year programme , it covers two different financial budgets .
It is therefore worded as follows : " this financial appropriation will be partly covered by the 1993-99 financial perspectives ' .
I apologize , but the approval of this measure has required very tight deadlines .
However , it has been possible to incorporate these three oral amendments and thus subsequently amend the measure with the consent of the Committee on Budgets , if Parliament will accept this .
Madam President , as I cannot see the Socialist Group coordinator at present , I wish to say , on behalf of the Socialist Group , that I am unable to accept these oral amendments tabled at the last minute .
The vice-chairman of the Committee on Budgets submitted these amendments and during discussion of them in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy there was consensus .
It concerns budgetary specifications .
I urge that this be approved .
It was due to an oversight during the vote in committee .
Madam President , after the committee submitted Amendment Nos 3 and 14 , the Council amended the wording to which they related . I therefore consider the aforesaid amendments to be superseded , accepting the final wording proposed by Council .
Are there any objections to Amendment Nos 3 and 14 being considered as null and void from now on ?
As there are no objections , this will be the case .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
A corrigendum is to be made to all the language versions .
Also , Amendment Nos 6 , 7 , 10 and 11 have been cancelled .
Madam President , there have been a certain number of corrigenda , but they do not go far enough .
For example , Amendment No 21 by my group was altered in a completely wrong way to the extent that it now says the opposite of what we intended .
At best , it would certainly be completely incomprehensible .
There are also a number of translation problems in the French version .
Our Amendment 20 has not kept its original meaning at all ; in its current form it would add to Mr Orlando 's argument and this is completely at odds with our own argument .
There are other instances - I could go on .
I therefore propose deferring this report to the next part-session as we cannot vote on it as it stands today .
Mr Dupuis , are you making this proposal on behalf of your group ?
Yes , Madam President .
I would like to hear the opinion of the rapporteur .
Madam President , I believe we expressed our appreciation this morning to the Luxembourg Presidency and the Commission for enabling Parliament to assess such an important wording before the 4 and 5 December part-session .
It would be really odd for us to return this report now .
I therefore insist that we proceed as requested by the committee .
I think that clarifies things .
I will put Mr Dupuis ' request to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request ) I can assure Mr Dupuis that we will check all the language versions very closely in order to avoid any inconsistencies .
Madam President , thank you for rejecting the amendment by Mr Dupuis .
The amendments by the Group of the European Radical Alliance in any case follow a completely different path from Mr Orlando 's .
But before we vote I would again like to raise the question of the many linguistic corrections .
There is a reason for this .
The Council was kind enough to send us these texts for consultation in advance of the Amsterdam Treaty , but with a very short deadline , which posed a considerable time problem for the numerous translations .
But when the Council then did what followed , there was no way of coping .
First , it sent us a text . We are very thorough in our consultation procedure , but in the meantime the Council amended its own text without consulting us or waiting for our views .
That is an impossible procedure .
Parliament really cannot be treated like that .
I must ask therefore ask the President to report to the thunderous applause of this House to the Council .
Thank you very much .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Schulz .
I would have liked the Council to have heard your comments .
Unfortunately that was not the case , but we will be happy to forward them for their attention .
Madam President , with regard to Amendment No 12 , I wish to point out that after the vote on the amendment the committee experienced a certain amount of confusion , so the Council drew up a wording that seems more correct to me .
I therefore report the committee 's rejection of the amendment as it had been draftedincorrectly and might lead to possible legal criticism , to quote an expression used this morning .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
It is very satisfying to note that the Conciliation Committee has succeeded in arriving at a sensible and particularly satisfactory compromise between the Council and Parliament in connection with the adoption of this Directive .
It is most gratifying that both Council and Parliament have from the outset been in agreement that a high level of protection should be given to personal data within an area such as the telecommunications sector , where technological development is advancing extremely rapidly .
Nevertheless , Parliament has in the conciliation procedure been able to introduce an even greater level of protection than the Council had originally desired .
One example that can be cited is the extension of the Directive to embrace legal entities .
The provisions relating to monitoring and recording of telephone conversations have also been significantly improved in the conciliation text .
It should be emphasized that the proposed Directive is an extremely important legislative act that deserves full support .
Secchi report ( A4-0344 / 97 )
It is not possible to determine when it would be best for the EU to introduce fully harmonized regulations on VAT , but there is no doubt that if such a harmonization is to take place , the Member States must be extremely well prepared .
The Fiscalis programme is therefore a necessary initiative , which means , among other things , that national public officials acquire a thorough knowledge of Community law .
This knowledge is absolutely essential if these public officials are to continue to provide the best possible service to the citizens .
Another aspect of this question concerns the many advantages that it is hoped to achieve through formal cooperation between the Member States in the tax sector as a whole .
The Fiscalis programme is aimed at creating a solid and sensible basis for future harmonization of VAT and other taxes .
This does not , however , mean that the Member States are at this point in time committing themselves to any set time-frame for such harmonization .
The Fiscalis programme , which aims to establish coordinated European actions in support of the individual national systems of indirect taxation , is an innovation in the European tax policy .
In fact , not only does Fiscalis aim to harmonize and coordinate the existing tax system and even ensure uniform operation of the tax authorities with a view to adopting the final VAT regulations but , as rightly pointed out by Mr Secchi , it should provide a means of indicating the requirements and difficulties encountered by some national authorities in performing their duties and should be able to transfer the winning experiences implemented in other Member States for the same problems .
As mayor of an Italian municipality and aware of all the actions aimed at improving the efficiency of the public authorities , I appreciate the European Commission 's decision to consider the training of human resources to be a priority objective of the programme and , agreeing with Mr Secchi , I believe it advisable for training to be provided by exchanges arranged between officials of different tax authorities .
I also agree fully with the rapporteur on the need to set up a network of cooperation between the national institutes and academies operating in the taxation training sector .
I offer my congratulations to Mr Secchi and fully agree with his report .
W.G. van Velzen report ( A4-0346 / 97 )
Numbering is one of the most conspicuous aspects of telephony and is therefore an area that concerns the consumer very directly .
At Parliament & # x02BC ; s request , the Commission has proposed a very workable and sensible modification of the Interconnect Traffic Directive .
Number portability is an extremely significant area and it is important that a system should be introduced quickly that ensures the transparent , fair and objective allocation of numbers to the fixed lines .
The rapporteur is absolutely right to emphasize that the same policy must be introduced , with relevant regulations , in the mobile communications networks .
The necessary arrangements must be introduced as early as possible so as to have the desired effect and to give the operators the time to carry out changes and adjustments .
It is therefore not possible to go along with the Commission & # x02BC ; s view that the time is not yet right for regulations on number portability for the mobile networks .
I therefore give the report my full support .
Cederschiöld report ( A4-0333 / 97 )
We are of the opinion that the report deals with an extremely important area for the future work of the European Union .
In making this statement on our voting , we wish to emphasize our view that in a number of areas , the report contains more far-reaching harmonization requirements than can objectively be regarded as justified in the light of the plans of action for combatting organized crime .
Among other things , we wish to draw attention to our doubts with regard to the following requirements made in the report :
there should be a harmonization of provisions in criminal law ( point 12 ) , -a public prosecutor should be introduced at European level ( point 35 ) , -in the absence of a more precise definition of the already evident need for greater public control and inspection , Europol & # x02BC ; s position should be expanded in relation to the national police forces ( various points ) .
Mrs Cederschiöld 's report deals with the action plan to combat organized crime .
This plan was drafted by the High Level Group at the urgent request of the European Commission .
What the group has done is in itself praiseworthy , and considering the way it is implemented by the Council , it appears to be effective .
Yet the plan is not always sufficiently clear .
A strong point of criticism from the rapporteur , Mrs Cederschiöld , is that no clarity has been established on the question whether crime will be combatted by harmonization of the definitions of the most important punishable crimes , or by the system of improved cooperation between the Member States , whilst keeping intact the differences between national judicial systems .
In the plan , this choice is not made .
This is also where the problem lies .
Although the report aims for a pragmatic approach , the European Parliament 's wish for the harmonization of criminal justice and the establishment of one large European judicial area resounds from it .
It is obvious that with this choice we would be deeply encroaching on sovereignty , the heart of the Member States .
This will be an extremely painful process , and one can ask oneself whether it would all that useful right now .
I would therefore be more inclined to opt for pragmatic cooperation without losing the differences between the national judicial systems .
As the report and our choice differ , we decided , despite all our sympathy for the action plan and the report , not to support this plan .
You will recognize this thinking in the way we will be voting on the other reports on ' the combat of organized crime ' which was discussed this morning .
I would like to support the recommendations put forward by Mrs Cederschiöld .
In her draft resolution she identifies the inherent flaws and weaknesses in the current EU approach to tackling organized crime .
Organized crime is a sophisticated international business operation .
They recognize no national boundaries and because of their huge resources they are able to employ the best brains in the legal , financial and other technical fields .
In response the EU approach is uncoordinated , fragmented , under-resourced and operates on a national basis due to the chauvinistic attitude of interior ministries who wish to protect their own little ' empires ' based on outdated notions of national sovereignty .
We must change these attitudes , achieve greater harmonization of our legal , judicial and policing systems if we are to win the war against organized crime .
Any sensible person could not help but be shocked by the slow pace at which the Member States of the European Union have undertaken to join forces and coordinate their actions and procedures in the fight against organized crime .
The globalization of the economy and of financial channels allows operators - including the criminal fraternity - to recycle , or rather launder without any difficulty or control the enormous profits gained from prostitution and drugs and arms trafficking .
As everyone knows , the collapse of communism in central and eastern Europe laid a fertile ground in the debris of state controlled structures for various forms of gangsterism , racketeering and corruption .
The free circulation of capital and individuals within the Union , combined with technological development burst open the borders for everyone , including criminals , and thereby promoted trafficking in cars , drugs and human beings .
Under these conditions , how can we imagine that purely national legal and judicial systems and policing are in a position to confront the plurality of ever more organized serious crime ?
How can we accept the unbelievable amount of time taken to process requests for information or cooperation between magistrates in different countries ?
How can we accept that the Europol Convention has not yet been ratified by all the signatory countries ?
So of course I am delighted that on 17 June the European Council of Amsterdam adopted the action plan on combatting organized crime .
This is a step in the right direction .
Furthermore I would like to pay tribute to the efforts of the Council of Europe towards drafting an agreement against organized corruption which is rampant in international markets .
If there is one area in which the Union must prove its capacity to meet the legitimate aspirations of its people , it is that of the security of individuals and goods .
A corrupt Europe has no future .
We must act now .
It is regrettable that this report , which deals with organized international crime , does not say a word about Interpol , whose aim is precisely to combat crime at international level .
Instead , the report is aimed merely at advocating , in a more or less explicit manner , an " EU FBI ' , which is to harmonize the policing and judicial systems in the EU states in accordance with the body of law governing the creation of a future common European criminal and judicial sector .
In my opinion , this development is neither reasonable nor appropriate .
It can scarcely be reasonable at this juncture to set up a policing organization that is to compete with Interpol .
Instead , work with Interpol should be intensified in order to enable this organization to challenge international crime more effectively .
It is also proposed that Europol should be given more powers , one of them being that it should also include operational activity - this in spite of the fact that Europol is subject to inadequate parliamentary and judicial control and characterized by a serious lack of openness and protection of privacy and personal data .
I can agree to several of the proposals in the report .
The best way of fighting crime and criminality in the long term is to reinforce the democratic foundations within society in the fields of child welfare , education , working life , etc .
I would particularly like to underline the importance of improved cooperation between the Member States in combatting cross-border crime .
I advocate intensified intergovernmental cooperation in this area along the lines of the Nordic model .
It is important that there should be no criminalization in the absence of malice .
The proposals regarding the interpretation of a criminal offence within a so-called criminal organization must therefore be based on this principle .
I am , however , opposed to centrally determined forms of judicial cooperation , where the main aim is a harmonization of the legislation .
The EU must not be developed into a centrally-controlled police state - using Europol as a tool - with large information systems that are subject to inadequate democratic control .
In view of the fact that the report contains several proposals along these lines , I shall be voting against it in the final vote .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for the Cederschiöld report , since we believe that effective and improved efforts are needed in order to be able to cope with the growth in the organized crime that is operating across the Member States .
We are , however , uneasy about some of the statements made by the rapporteur - statements that aim to involve supranational institutions such as the Commission and the European Court of Justice more closely in judicial cooperation .
Judicial cooperation should remain within the confines of the third pillar and the Commission and the European Court of Justice must not have any further powers .
Harmonization within the field of criminal law must not be a goal in itself and the existing intergovernmental instruments should be made effective before new initiatives are undertaken .
We advocate effective and practical cooperation between the Member States in the judicial sector .
Such cooperation will be an effective counter-measure to organized criminality .
Orlando report ( A4-0355 / 97 )
Madam President , we were unable to approve the report by Mr Orlando on the implementation of international agreements to combat organized crime , because , according to an excellent text by the Council , the Parliament desired systematically to transfer the prerogatives of the Council to the Commission .
In the domain which affects one of the major sovereign areas of responsibility of nations , it seems clear to us that it is up to the Council to act and not the Commission , which is an administrative body with questionable democratic legitimacy .
Furthermore , in terms of efficiency in an area in which the specific factors , traditions , the philosophy of law and national origins have such a strong role to play , we consider it much more expedient to leave it up to each nation to act .
The report gives the Commission a much stronger role in the evaluation system .
We are of the opinion that it is the Council & # x02BC ; s presidency that should continue in future to bear the responsibility for this work .
The Council is - and should be - the highest decision-making body in the European Union .
We see no reason to reinforce the Commission & # x02BC ; s role in this context .
For this reason we shall be abstaining at the vote on this report .
Mr Orlando has proven his pugnacity in drawing up these different reports , and we can only welcome it .
These three reports deal with one issue : organized crime .
The European Parliament has got to prove its unstinting determination in the fight against all Mafia practices .
Mafia organizations are growing stronger in countries which already have competent services to combat organized crime .
We could question the means put in place at Community level to eradicate this scourge .
We have no choice but to affirm that Mafias are emerging , not only in eastern Europe , but also in the heart of the European Union .
I agree with the recommendations of the rapporteur which refer not only to the way these groups are evolving , but also to the spread of crimes and offences .
Reference is also made to money laundering , and as far as this goes , I too demand an end to all the hypocrisy .
Within Europe or the European Union we must provide judges with a wider range of methods of investigation , especially to check suspicious bank accounts ; without these there is no point in legislating or discussing the issue further .
The European Union is becoming fussier and fussier about the help given to certain areas of activity .
I hope that it will demonstrate the same concern to implement quickly the means to combat organized crime effectively .
If the European Union does not score a few points in this war , it will lose yet more credibility with its citizens .
Orlando report ( A4-0349 / 97 )
If we are serious about tackling organized crime we have to ensure more effective coordination throughout the European Union before we can properly start cooperating with third countries .
Intergovernmentalism and lack of transparency is not the way to convince European citizens of our determination to win the war against organized crime .
I believe there are many excellent proposals in this report that are well worth considering if we want to send a message to international criminals that we mean business !
Nassauer report ( A4-0367 / 97 )
Madam President , the Nassauer report on laying down the priorities for cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs represents a return to the European Parliament 's usual cliché on the free movement of persons which supposedly could not exist in the Union as long as any degree of control remains in place at internal borders .
This idea has caused a great deal of harm already and will cause even more in future if the Amsterdam Treaty is ratified , because article B of the New title 3 A in the Community section states that within five years the Council will have to put a stop to measures which " pursuant to article 7 A aim to guarantee that citizens of the European Union or of a third country will not be subject to any controls when they cross internal borders ' .
As usual those in favour of a federal Europe are trying to make people believe that they are only being asked to apply a decision which had already been made , and that legally and morally , they would have no room for manoeuvre .
But in reality this is not the case , for article 7 A never said that free movement of persons implied there would be no controls , and even less that this would also apply to persons from third countries .
Furthermore , the Treaty of Amsterdam , in article B cited above , does not set any pre-conditions for the abolition of controls of persons at internal borders .
The accompanying measures are only evoked in article A , but this article deals with a legally different problem , i.e. the integration of Schengen , and nowhere does it say that the conditions evoked - which , by the way , are in a very allusive form - represent pre-conditions .
So the peoples of Europe risk once more being trapped by a European Union which is fulfilling the objective function of demolishing their defence when it should be aiming to strengthen it .
This corruption of European institutions which constantly work against its own side must be put right urgently , and initially by rejecting the Treaty of Amsterdam , for if not Europe will be lost .
I welcome the production of this report by Mr Nassauer and I support its key recommendations .
In particular , I endorse the proposal that Europol should be given precisely defined operational and executive powers determining which national police bodies are to be responsible for all the measures carried out in their countries .
A fully operational Europol is critical to ensuring successful cooperation in the area of justice and home affairs .
It is nothing short of scandalous that the Europol Convention is not ratified .
After the Dutroux scandal in Belgium there was a flurry of activity and there seemed to be a determination to ensure that Europol would be given the necessary powers to discharge its responsibilities .
Things have now ground to a halt and if Member States genuinely wish to create a citizens ' Europe the progress must be made in the area of justice and home affairs .
Progress on Europol will be the litmus test of proving how serious Member States are in relation to delivering on their promises .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Situation in Iraq
The next item is the Commission statement on the situation in Iraq .
Mr President , I think we , and indeed the whole world , have followed the developments in Iraq very closely and with bated breath .
It hardly needs stating that the Commission and the Council , and most certainly this Parliament , will agree that the United Nations , the Secretary General , and the Security Council all must have our full support in their aim to have Iraq meet the relevant Security Council resolutions .
Naturally the United Nations and the Security Council is the obvious place to debate and decide on these issues .
I am sure you have will noted with a certain amount of relief the encouraging news which reached us today from Geneva , where the five permanent members of the Security Council met yesterday .
Without having exact knowledge of what was discussed in detail , it appears that some form of compromise has been reached , to which Iraq still has to respond .
But this compromise would in any case allow the UN Committee of Inquiry , UNSCOM , resuming its work with its original membership , so that this work can now be continued ; which is extremely important for the safety which is needed to dismantle all the capacity which Iraq has at its disposal to produce weapons of mass destruction .
It is clear that if this conflict with Iraq drags on , it will have serious consequences , not only in the sense of security , but also as regards the enforcement of oil and food resolutions , if I may call them this for the sake of convenience ; which in turn would lead to harmful consequences on the humanitarian aid which may be given to the people of Iraq , and would also hamper aid efforts to northern Iraq .
There is not much more the Commission can say about this at the moment , apart from expressing the wish that the indications ( which are there ) that the crisis has been averted , are being confirmed .
In the current state of affairs I am not able to more positive about in drawing this conclusion , but if we also take note of the statements and announcements made yesterday by the British Foreign Secretary after the consultation between the five permanent members , and of the text which appeared today in Telexpress , then we can hope with some justification that the crisis can be averted .
Mr commissioner , thank you for your report .
We are of course very happy that it at least appears as though the current crisis has been avoided , even though it would be an overestimate of Europe and the European Parliament to assume that the effect of today 's session was so great that Saddam reacted to it .
I do think , though , that a number of questions remain to be answered , not just the fundamental questions you posed , Mr Commissioner .
Firstly , is it your opinion , Mr Commissioner , that the necessary unified European position in this crisis could have been established quickly enough ?
I am aware that that is not the job of the Commission or of the Commissioner , but I should still like to ask if you , as a Commissioner , could assume a common European line during all your discussions and efforts .
Secondly , how much , in your view , has the current crisis in Iraq to do with the situation in Israel ?
Is the impression correct , which you also may have gained , that the necessary solidarity within the Arabian area itself was not forthcoming because of the Israeli crisis and the opinion of many Arab countries that America had applied too little pressure in the days leading up to the crisis ?
The third point that causes me and all of us particular anxiety is obviously the humanitarian aspect .
However unacceptable this Group - and , I believe , all in this House - perceive Saddam 's actions to be , just as it is not acceptable that monitoring controls were not good or effective enough , so too do we fear that humanitarian aspects , particularly those concerning children and health problems , are suffering very much under these sanctions .
I should like to ask you if it is your impression that essential humanitarian aspects have been included in the programme of oil in exchange for food , which you mentioned . Or should not indeed greater essential humanitarian aid have been forthcoming ?
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his statement .
It is in fact an extremely strange , of course , that our Commissioner has to make this statement , as we would really expect the Council to talk about foreign politics in this House .
But the fact that a prelude is being used is welcome , a prelude of which our Commissioner is quite capable .
I am in actual fact sorry that this Parliament did itself not take the opportunity to take the initiative to move towards a policy .
There was a cautious resolution which supported the UN policy - I think this would anyhow have been a good back-up - and also an inducement to the Council to start working on a communal position on Iraq .
Unfortunately Parliament has let this opportunity slip .
I think it is very important nonetheless that we as a Parliament have the courage in these kinds of extremely dangerous situations , to say what we think ourselves , not only on this one , but also on Cuba and other issues , to give a signal from Europe , if nothing else .
I assume that on this kind of issue we should be able to come to agreement .
My question on Iraq , which is a state with an exceedingly criminal government , is whether it is not our responsibility to say something about it , particularly because peace in the Middle East is threatened by it .
When I hear the Israelis say , we live on only a small strip of land ; a few bombs , a few long range missiles with biological and chemical weapons of the kind being developed in Iraq , and we would have had it ; then we should take these noises seriously .
Furthermore , it would not have been the first time Europe , too , might be threatened by long range missiles .
It was mentioned earlier that from the Serb Republic Scud missiles can easily reach Rome .
In time this will also be possible from Iraq , so it concerns us directly .
Mr President , I would like to ask you : has enough been done in the field of foreign trade measures to prevent Europe also giving succour to the production of biological and chemical weapons in Iraq ?
Have you looked at this in the recent past ; and would you please reply to this ?
Secondly , the humanitarian aspect .
This has surely always been possible .
It is only really Saddam who is stopping humanitarian aid reaching his people .
Is there not the danger that if we direct all our energies to the humanitarian aspect , this aid will end up in the hands of Saddam and his army , and not in the hands of the people , who are at the heart of this ?
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , thank you very much for your statement .
I would like to start by completely agreeing with Mr Oostlander and I would like to add that I find it is extremely regrettable that the two large groups in this Parliament have clearly rejected their actions from within this Parliament .
As the Commissioner said : Saddam Hussein appears to have accepted that UNSCOM will continue the investigation with the Americans .
This must have been the result of negotiations between the 5 permanent members of the Security Council and that is a welcome and necessary outcome of the conflict .
Does the Commissioner perhaps have any more background information on this agreement , and can he confirm that in exchange no concessions have been made to Saddam ?
Obviously the credibility of the entire UN system is at stake .
For years UNSCOM has been destroying weapons of mass destruction and the investigation is being constantly obstructed .
Straightforwardness , Mr President , should and must be the only answer .
The thought alone of concessions to Saddam is unacceptable .
Saddam must implement Resolution 687 without delay .
After that he may be able to a look forward to the sanctions being lifted , but not before .
Saddam can arrange for the often quoted light at the end of the tunnel by not obstructing the investigation any further .
Once that has happened , the destitute Iraqi citizens who are being held hostage by Saddam will experience an improvement in their lot .
The international community , Mr President , must act as one .
An empty slogan , perhaps .
For that matter , unilateral action by the United States would not provide the answer , even though Saddam may have hoped for it .
But nor should economic interest in the short term break this unanimity .
Can the Commissioner finally indicate whether there was European harmony , for instance , when they took their position in the United Nations , as is required by the Treaty of Maastricht ?
And if so , what was the result of all these efforts ?
And if not , why not ?
Mr President , at the eleventh hour the apparent temporary solution to the Iraqi / United States crisis has avoided a tragedy of major dimensions for the Iraqi people , that is , a prolonged air bombing and missile offensive by the United States armed forces .
We cannot but express our deeply-felt relief for such an apparent solution and our thanks to those members of the Security Council of the United Nations who worked against time to restore the UNSCOM role in Iraq and to avoid further bloodshed .
On this side of the House we nurture no sympathy for the Baghdad dictator and his desperate gambles with the lives of his people .
At the same time we cannot accept a return to the status quo ante and endless prolongation of the most cruel and senseless sanctions which , in less than six years , have led to one million dead civilians and to a veritable slaughter of the innocents at the rate of 4 , 500 children a month .
The lifting of the embargo on non-strategic goods is overdue , as is in our view a gradual lifting of the oil embargo far beyond the arbitrary limits of the food for oil problem .
Enough is enough .
The European Union , shockingly absent and passive up to now , has to step forward and convince our American friends that this carnage must be stopped , that a temporary solution of this crisis could lead to a worse crisis in the future if diplomatic , political and economic alternatives are not pursued to replace the threatened use of B52 stealth bombers and tomahawk cruise missiles .
Mr President , like everyone here I am delighted both personally and on behalf of the Radical Alliance that right seems to be winning the day .
We owe this to the reticence of a certain number of permanent members of the Security Council regarding the military option , and possibly to an equal extent , to Russian diplomatic initiatives .
Be that as it may , and let 's be clear about this , we have no special sympathy for the Iraq regime , not more so than we ought to have for the Syrian regime , for example . However it is clear that a peaceful , fair and lasting solution has five conditions : the withdrawal of the embargo which serves only to harm the Iraqi people ; the relaxation of the oil blockade ; which all too clearly serves only the interests of the Americans ; the abandonment of the financial compensation due to Kuwait which Iraq does not have the means to pay as a result of the sanctions ; also a clarification of the missions of UNSCOM which should not serve as a pretext for indefinite supervision ; and a progressive reintegration of Iraq into the international community .
It is certainly not up to the Americans to say who should govern Iraq , but it may fall to them and to a European diplomatic mission , finally unified on this question , to create the conditions for a democratic evolution by using a more generous approach in a country where the leaders exploit a collective paranoia which we do nothing but feed .
Mr President , although this is a question which is a matter for the United Nations Security Council , and at European level , the Council and not the Commission , as you are responsible for the implementation of the embargo on Iraq on behalf of the European Union , I would like to ask you , Commissioner , if it is not time to look seriously at the basis for maintaining the embargo , which by all the evidence over the last seven years has not reached the objectives it was set .
It was supposed to destabilize a dictator who seemed scarcely affected by its consequences , if we judge by the recent expulsion of the United Nations experts .
On the other hand , this embargo , our embargo is overwhelming the population by its devastating effects on food supplies , care and education .
Will this determination effectively to imprison Iraqis improve our image in the region or will it strengthen the forces which are most hostile to us ?
Would it not therefore be more appropriate from now on to change our approach radically and to dissociate completely the question of chemical and nuclear weapons ( on which the international community should exercise the greatest vigilance ) from that of an embargo which has not contributed in any way to resolving the problem and which has only increased the suffering of a people ?
Mr President , I welcome Commissioner van den Broek 's opening remark that this is a UN matter and this is not necessarily the most appropriate forum .
It is important that we keep in mind that this is indeed a matter for the UN and , therefore , it is important that there be no doubt that Iraq has to comply with UN resolutions in every respect .
We feel relief that there has been - we assume - a solution to the problem .
Our relief must not be allowed to hide the fact that the inspectors should never have been expelled in the first place .
This is another example of Iraq 's attempts to divide and rule : to separate out elements of the anti-Iraq alliance .
Will the Commissioner agree with me that the most important thing the European Union can do is make it absolutely clear we are united behind UN resolutions and we will not have any weakening of the EU position confronting Iraq ?
That is the most important statement he can make today .
Nothing must come out of this forum which implies any weakening of the resolve of the Member States of the European Union or that the dictatorship in Iraq will get any succour from the European Union .
We will reinforce the UN resolutions and we will stick by them .
Mr President , just like Commissioner van den Broek , one must naturally be relieved at the return of the UN weapons inspectors and by the fact that Iraq has accepted , in order to avoid further conflict with the USA .
What one does find troubling , though , is that this solution came about without EU involvement and that it indicates an increase in the role of Russia in the Near East , which has led to a weakening of the position of the USA as well as disclosing a splintering of Europe .
The crisis about weapons inspections which was initiated by Saddam Hussein has once more been symptomatic of weakness in the European Union 's foreign policy , and has disclosed its lack of a common policy for foreign affairs and security .
I am aware that sanctions against Iraq and the Iraqi question fall primarily within the competence of the United Nations , but it would have been really useful for the EU to show solidarity in this as well .
I very much regret that the European Parliament was not in a position to act as a sort of flanking measure by passing a joint resolution , and I am very thankful that the Commissioner has taken this up today in his explanation .
One must be aware , however , that this was just an emergency repair .
A resolution would have been a clearer instrument and would have emphasized the formation of opinion in the European Parliament in order to strengthen the UN resolution and show a certain amount of solidarity with the USA .
If we want the USA to show a continuing interest in our security problems , we should make it clear once more that we feel ourselves to be in a rather critical position vis a vis solidarity with America .
I do not want to repair errors in the inadequate American strategy , but my question to you , Mr Commissioner , is this : does the Commission have a strategic plan concerning Iraq which might prevent the constant repetition of such crises ?
Mr President , while totally condemning the policies pursued by Saddam Hussein and the appalling violations of human rights , particularly against his own people , can consideration now be given , firstly , at least to easing the embargo in a way that will provide more desperately needed supplies for the Iraqi people , while maintaining total opposition to the dictatorship and efforts of Saddam Hussein to build his military strength , and , secondly , to seek to help end the fratricidal struggle between the two main Iraqi Kurdish factions - the KDP , which has been cooperating with Turkish forces - and the PUK , which has been in league with Iran , which is undoubtedly playing into Saddam Hussein 's hands ?
Both those factions have sent delegations to see him , and this is a very great problem indeed .
Can we ask for actions on these issues , now that the crisis has at least lifted a little , in order to get a more permanent settlement , which will be in the interests not only of people outside but also of the Iraqi people ?
Mr President , I would like to thank those who have spoken .
Let me start by saying that hasty conclusions should be avoided at this point , in the sense that the Permanent Five have made it clear that they hope that Russia 's initiative , which was welcomed by all , will lead to Baghdad allowing Unscom to return to work in its original composition .
In other words , we will obviously have to see what the detailed response from Baghdad will be before we can feel genuine relief .
Secondly , I agree with those who have said that this is first and foremost a responsibility for the members of the Security Council .
That is undoubtedly true .
But when we talk about issues which verge on questions of war and peace then it is also obvious to the Commission that this Parliament would wish to make some comments about it ; although , having said that , the Commissions does not profess to have any specific authority on the subject , but would like to participate in this exchange of views .
I endorse what has been said , namely that , firstly , such a statement could obviously also come from the European Parliament , from ministers and from the Commission , that there must be and remain one voice , and that Security Council resolutions are there to be implemented in their entirety , and that is something which cannot be negotiated .
The five permanent members initially agreed about this message as such .
If it seemed that there was some difference between them in the assessment of what means should be employed to reach that goal , then that is correct , but I repeat that it is most satisfactory that the five permanent members have now jointly made an intitiave , and are now apparently awaiting an answer from Baghdad .
In itself this is very significant .
What the possible relationship might be between this conflict and the situation in Israel , respectively America 's interference in this , and the subsequent impact on the attitude of the Arab states - recently visited by Madeleine Albright - is extremely difficult for us to weigh up .
It is absolutely true that the situation in Iraq was and is all the more worrying as the entire situation in the Middle East is rather explosive at the moment because the entire peace process in the Middle East is stagnating .
And in any case it is worth observing that the United States , the American President , and the American Secretary of State also talk openly about it in the sense that they are very worried that Israel 's inflexibility does not contribute to the much needed progress in this process .
On the subject of humanitarian aid .
Through Echo , my colleague , Mrs Bonino , has allocated another ECU 10 million to humanitarian aid for the period up until August next year .
I agree with those who say that where there is humanitarian need , Saddam Hussein himself is primarily responsible for bringing this on , as providing for sufficient humanitarian resources is also dependent on meeting the Security Council 's resolutions ; that there is also a resolution of the Security Council which states that $ 2 billion worth of oil may exported so that food and medication can be imported in return for this .
In other words , I do not think that any responsibility should be attached to the international community for causing possible humanitarian need .
For that matter I would like to point out that in northern Iraq where there is a specific humanitarian situation for which the European Union is also attempting to bring relief , the situation with the Kurds , and in particular Turkish interference over the border in northern Iraq is causing real obstacles , making the transit of aid goods extremely difficult .
Mr President , I would like to leave it at that .
I thank Parliament for the opportunity to exchange views on this .
The debate is closed .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance , pursuant to Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0946 / 97 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the permanent International Criminal Court ; -B4-0951 / 97 by Mr Pettinari and Mr Manisco , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the permanent International Criminal Court ; -B4-0960 / 97 by Mr Dell 'Alba and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the permanent International Criminal Court ; -B4-0961 / 97 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the permanent International Criminal Court ; -B4-0974 / 97 by Mrs Cars and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the permanent International Criminal Court ; -B4-0985 / 97 by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the permanent International Criminal Tribunal .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I would first like to say how pleased I am that our resolution today has been supported by six groups in this House .
I think that is a sign of how important it is actually to establish a court of law to replace the interim courts for Ruanda and Yugoslavia .
The United Nations have realized the necessity for establishing such a court , because war crimes and internal armed conflicts do not occur just in these two countries , but in many other countries where it is necessary for this kind of court to operate .
We have seen that with our previous courts we have legally been skating on thin ice and that the room for action of these courts has been very limited .
It is also important that this resolution demands that clear definitions should be established at the talks preparatory to the conference , which thankfully takes place next year in Italy and is organized by the United Nations for the express purpose of setting up this court .
What is a war criminal ?
What is an internal armed conflict ?
And it is obviously very important also that this court - and this should if possible be clarified in the preparatory meetings - can operate independently of the United Nations and Security Council , so that matters are not constantly blocked by these institutions for professional reasons .
A great number of important things have taken place here , and I think it is not only I who thinks that this is a first step towards controlling conflict in the future .
Large problems still lie ahead of us , particularly in view of the fact that throughout the world there is so far no ethnic group law .
We have only national and constitutional law , but no law that defines and establishes what the rights of an ethnic group are , and where they can be brought before a court .
I think the creation of this sort of court of law is a first step towards this enormously important right .
If we look at conflicts over the past few years we see that most of them were in fact conflicts between various ethnic groups .
I think this will be a great step forward and that we as the European Parliament should do everything possible to see that it is successful .
I realize that certain financial obligations arise from it , in order for the project for an International Criminal Court really to become established and to flourish .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , may I first lament the absence of representatives of our Council , since , as we know , it is the Member States primarily which should be in the front line of the last battle in the United Nations to conquer this first part in the reform of the United Nations . This in fact is the first reform to merit the name since the creation of the United Nations .
Mr Habsburg-Lothringen has already outlined one of the fundamental points which the Member States of the European Union and the Commission should insist upon within the scope of their responsibilities : the independence of the Court . They should also insist upon its financial independence .
We must guarantee the Court 's ability to be able to act and act well in the long term , not just the short term .
I would like to reassure Mr Ephremidis by clarifying that we do not wish to open up the question of past conflicts , be it Cuba , North Korea or the People 's Republic of China ; the problem we face concerns future conflicts .
I would also like to invite my colleagues to start thinking about a later step we could take : the creation of a Universal Court of Civil and Political Rights on the model of the European Court of Human Rights . This would enable citizens throughout the world , at least starting with the democratic countries , to have direct recourse to a higher body through which to assert their rights which are often violated , even within the Member States of the European Union .
All experience with dictatorships and civil wars in the east , the west and the south , whether in the former Soviet Union or in Bosnia-Herzegovina , Chile or today in Algeria , teaches us one thing : war criminals and crimes against humanity must be prosecuted by the criminal law .
Immunity from prosecution is an invitation to further crimes and prosecution has a huge preventive function .
For that reason my group has for years supported the establishment of an international criminal court .
I should like to draw your attention , Commissioner van den Broek , to Figure 3 of our joint resolution , which deals with finance .
Two years ago in this House I talked myself hoarse in order to obtain ECU 3 million for the financing of the Criminal Courts in Yugoslavia and Ruanda .
This year we have been able with rather less effort to insert ECU 3 million into the budget .
I should be grateful to the Commission if it were to develop with us in future a system of financing , so as to secure the long-term finances of such an International Criminal Court .
Mr President , we all dream of an existence without war and other evils , but we must not allow ourselves to be satisfied with that .
A permanent war crimes tribunal could be a step on way to realizing our dreams .
In wartime , many people relax all of their moral scruples .
They may then perceive that they are allowed to commit crimes that in their heart they know to be wholly unacceptable .
An independent war crimes court is for those people who are struck by war & # x02BC ; s worst evil , the evil that can run riot when all constraints are set aside .
The victim should know that even then there is , somewhere on earth , a court which can administer justice and which can restore to the suffering victim his dignity and punish the guilty party .
For those who perceive that war gives them the right to carry out acts that they would otherwise never have done , the knowledge that such a court exists may have a deterrent effect .
A permanent war crimes tribunal becomes a lodestar for respect for human rights , even in the life & # x02BC ; s darkest moments .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the history of the world and of Europe this century is a story of wars and of war crimes , but only partially a story of the prosecution for war crimes .
That is why I think that with this motion we are supporting a basic idea that is absolutely essential . We cannot accept that simple murder is subject to prosecution , obviously quite rightly and necessarily , whereas mass murder frequently goes unpunished and many mass murderers can go about their daily lives as though they were respectable people .
I think the few cases where international courts have been established to deal with war crimes , complemented by one or two private initiatives - think of the Stockholm Tribunal and others - are really not up to this dramatic situation , so that we are repeatedly confronted , even in Europe unfortunately , by wars and such numbers of war crimes that our claims to civilization are completely unfounded .
For that reason I fully support this motion , as does my group , even though there are obviously several problems .
I did not understand from Mr Ephremidis whether he was for or against it , since all his points were arguments against .
I think he was called as a supporter , however .
Whatever the reason , that is a contradiction that does happen .
Naturally he is right in saying that one or the other problem will arise .
Our international political system must and will change when there is the certainty that there are independent international courts who are obliged to prosecute matters , even if perhaps political considerations weigh against it .
Clearly there is the danger that political decisions , political compromises and even some peace treaties may be blocked when the one who wants peace has to reckon on being questioned before an international court afterwards .
I should like to raise just two points . Firstly , it is naturally critical who can be called to account .
Here too the present situation is unsatisfactory .
Although underlings may be called to account , those who give the orders for war crimes by and large escape the consequences , particularly those from the political side .
I do not think that should happen , because it contradicts the spirit of justice to try the one who carries out the crime , but to ignore the one who initiates it .
Secondly , the duty of giving evidence .
I do not entirely agree either with the most recent decision that a Croat Minister is not even obliged to give evidence .
I think that when we have these international regulations it will have to be clear that anyone , regardless of his person , must be prosecuted , and anyone , regardless of his position , is duty bound to give evidence under oath before this international court .
Mr President , Commissioner van den Broek , ladies and gentlemen , on the eve of the fiftieth birthday of the universal declaration of human rights it might be appropriate to reflect on the further development of ideas on a permanent international criminal court .
All the same I have some questions .
The resolution mentions the progress which has been made with the ad-hoc tribunals on Yugoslavia and Rwanda .
Well , Mr President , I have my doubts about that , because in the absence of the will to genuinely catch those murderers , they are being very selective , and that can never have been the intention .
It is not entirely clear to me how an international independent court will relate to the decisions made by the Security Council .
Will the veto disappear ?
How does it work ?
Nor is it clear to me which nationalities with which sense of justice will occupy the office of prosecutor .
Will all the inhabitants of the planet fall under the jurisdiction of the court ?
Well , Mr President , America has already lodged a waiver on this .
Why the EU should be mentioned as the major financier , when it involves all Member States of this planet , is not clear to me either .
And then there is the question of who will arrest these murderers , and when and how ?
We are at the start of a process which needs to be developed , fine , but let it never become a court which is just a victor 's court .
Finally , Mr President , in the context of war crimes during armed conflict this permanent international criminal court would finally , finally be able to drag Surinam 's ex-dictator Bouterse to court .
Mr President , my group will vote partly in favour , partly against .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I am hopeful that the diplomatic conferences which are to take place next year , will open the way for a permanent criminal court .
It is extremely important that such a court should exist .
The experiences with the ad-hoc tribunals on Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia show on the one hand that their existence is of immense importance , but on the other hand that there is much room for improvement in the way they operate .
The establishment of a permanent court will offer the continuity and expertise which everyone needs in international criminal law .
A number of difficult decision will obviously need to be taken , and exclusions and claims to sovereignty should be out of the question .
It would be at odds with the impartial international rule of law .
If necessary , we will have to continue without the countries which are not and do not want to become part of it .
Concessions to obstructionists must be avoided at all cost .
Otherwise the court will turn out to be a blunt instrument , as happened in the case of Rwanda and Yugoslavia .
I depend on the Union and Member States working towards a strong , financial and political independent permanent tribunal , and if necessary contributing towards it , but as Mrs van Bladel says , not only from within the Union , but also from the rest of the world .
Mr President , regional wars and conflicts ravage the various continents without sparing even old Europe , which until only yesterday saw crimes and genocides in the former Yugoslavia as well as in Africa or the Middle East , where it has not been possible to intervene to avoid evil .
Now we are at least trying to rectify the situation by setting up international courts keen to recapture the role which national interests and a lack of courage of the Member States are not managing to play and to ensure the real application of a justice that transcends national boundaries , on pain of the futility of the very principle of justice decided upon , with the peace of the victims now sacrificed on the altar of state reason .
Besides obeying the principle of justice , the international courts we hope to set up should contribute towards ending the current situation of impunity and setting up the corpus iuris serving not only to finally expose the war criminals , at all events and wherever they are , but above all to draw up a legal code , an international legal system that is valid for everyone .
Alongside the creation of the courts , we also hope to set up a system of penalties that can actually be applied and , more than police coordination between the States , the formation of an international police force to ensure the persecution of crime and punishment of the offenders .
Mr President , as has already been said , next year will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , but also of the Genocide Convention ; it will also have been fifty years since the United Nations ' International Law Commission was asked in the United Nations General Assembly to come up with a draft , to prepare a draft statute for the creation of an international court for criminal cases .
So we are talking about an initiative that is almost fifty years old , and which over the years has been supported by the Member States of the European Union with a great deal of effort .
We are also expressing the hope that next year the diplomatic conference which has to prepare the convention and which has to lead to the establishment of this international court , will actually meet , and that , en route , the preparatory committees will be able to solve the remaining differences , including the kind of questions which have been raised by several of your Members .
It goes without saying , of course , that the European Commission , which will not take part in this capacity in these UN negotiations , at present wishes to refrain from making any bold statements on the scope of the legal powers or the procedural rules which might have to apply when such an international court is established .
But just as the Commission at the time wholeheartedly supported the establishment of the tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia , now we too support wholeheartedly all action which might lead to the realization of this larger international court .
This is a long-standing ambition of a great many countries , and for that matter , of a large number of nongovernmental organizations which have contributed to keeping interest alive on this issue .
We are therefore still grateful to this Parliament that in 1995 to budget ECU 300 , 000 for aid to non-governmental organizations who committed themselves to the establishment of a permanent criminal court .
The supporting activities contribute to the development of a European position on the issue , and thus information and awareness-raising campaigns for the public at large are therefore being set up , and actions are supported which are aimed at creating coordination and cooperation mechanisms between NGO 's , the governments , the ad-hoc tribunals , and the United Nations institutions , whilst work on the establishment of the court continues .
To conclude , Mr President , I think that the basic motivation behind our support for the establishment of an international court is in fact the same as the motivation behind our support for the creation of ad-hoc tribunals .
There is no better guarantee for preventing these kinds of crimes against humanity .
There is no better method of prevention than to ensure that when these crimes are committed , they will not remain unpunished .
Mr President , as far as the financing of the tribunal itself is concerned , I would like to remind you that the Commission contributed from European funds not only to the establishment , but also to the functioning of the ad-hoc tribunals , and I believe that finances should not be a barrier to shelter behind when one wants to make progress in the establishment of this extremely important international institute of law .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0937 / 97 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Togo ; -B4-0949 / 97 by Mr Chanterie and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Togo ; -B4-0952 / 97 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Togo ; -B4-0988 / 97 by Mr Scarbonchi and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Togo .
Mr President , some days ago the ACP-EU Joint Assembly sat in Lomé , Togo .
Some incidents caused the meeting to be peppered with denials of human rights violations , although these had been proven by Amnesty International .
I do not want to go back over these facts . But I would like clearly to point out that even if the government has made progress , for example in setting up a constitutional court , a magistrate council or a national electoral commission , this is still not enough .
If Togo wishes , as we do , cooperation to recommence , the elections in 1998 must be completely transparent .
All political tendencies must be represented in the democratic debates , including the opposition of course .
They must have access to the media , especially to radio and television .
The security of each individual must be guaranteed , and freedom of expression and to hold gatherings must be authorized .
Finally , the government must accept the presence at the elections of international observers and human rights representatives .
Under these conditions and these only will we be in a position to declare democracy in Togo to be on the right track .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have the impression that the process of democratization in Togo has become stuck half way .
It is advancing like the Echternach Spring Procession : two steps forwards have so far generally been followed by one or one and a half steps back .
In other words , the President of Togo and his government appear to be in a dilemma as to what course the country should take : full democratization , which would also open the door to rapid political , economic and social development of the whole region in this part of West Africa , or regression into an autocratic regime leading to political isolation and internal confrontation - which is already detectable - and also to economic and social stagnation .
A democratic opening would make the way clear , however , for cooperation with the neighbouring states of Benin , Burkina Faso , Ghana and Ivory Coast , who are all already several stages further along the road to constitutional government , recognition of human rights and education of a pluralist society .
What is to be done ?
Our business rules for cooperation with Togo are in article 5 of the Lomé Convention .
We demand the maintenance of human rights , democracy and constitutional law .
We must constantly emphasize that the resumption of development cooperation , much less its expansion , is only possible if the Government of Togo meets these requirements .
The report by the two European experts on preparations for elections has now been presented .
We should ask the Togo Government to study this report very carefully and to implement its main elements .
The Government of Togo should now at last lay out the framework for the next presidential and parliamentary elections in cooperation with the opposition , so that there is equality of opportunity for both government and opposition .
We think there should also be an opportunity within the Joint Assembly or our Committee on Development and Cooperation to start some possible mediation action , on the lines of what we did so successfully in Mali .
Mr President , I would like to express my surprise , both personally and on behalf of my group , that the situation in Togo appears among the urgent debates .
Prior to the meeting of the Joint Assembly at Lomé , our Parliament sent a mission to Togo which found that the minimal democratic conditions for holding this assembly had been met .
So we went to Lomé for a week .
As far as organization is concerned , the Joint Assembly ran perfectly .
And as regards the democratic life of the country , we all held numerous talks with the government and with the opposition .
We received a general impression that things were developing well , what with the multiparty system and the freedom of the press , even if access to television still leaves room for improvement .
All in all , in my personal opinion , if the situation in Togo is fragile , this seems to be at least as much the result of a wish for destabilization by foreign countries as it is due to the longevity of the presidential power .
In fact , at the end of its work , the Joint Assembly rejected a resolution , although very moderate , inviting the Togolese Government to reinforce its guarantees of pluralism in the 1998 elections .
In this light , it seems to me that the inclusion of this question represents a double insult both to our Togolese hosts and to the Joint Assembly which appears to be disowned here , at a time when we have many other much more pressing urgent matters to deal with .
This is why I personally intend to abstain from the vote on the compromise resolution .
Madam President , I am speaking for Lord Plumb , who feels very strongly about this resolution .
He has had to return home because his wife is unwell .
I feel sure the whole House would wish Lady Plumb a speedy recovery .
He has been to Togo twice : once , leading a delegation as Co-President of the ACP , and again , for the full session of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly , when he met the President , the Prime Minister , and representatives of all the main opposition parties .
He stresses that in Togo there exists a vocal and active political opposition which chairs some of the most important parliamentary committees .
He met leaders of NGOs , journalists and ordinary people in Togo .
An account of the mission has been published . He recommends that we read it .
Togo is emerging from a difficult political and economic situation .
While it is clear that not everything is perfect in that country , it is also clear that elections have been held , that opposition parties are active and participate vigorously in the parliamentary process and that often virulent opposition newspapers are sold freely on the streets .
One-hundred-and-seventy representatives from 85 countries have discussed this subject .
European Members have played a full part in the Assembly .
Lord Plumb feels that there is little point in this resolution before the House today .
Madam President , on 20 March in Brussels , I indicated on behalf of the Group Union for Europe that the particular features of the Lomé Convention were to be found largely in the contractual framework which it offers to the partnership and that this must be revitalized within the domain of political dialogue to ensure that our action is more effective .
In addition , I pointed out that everyone agreed that this dialogue between the European Union and the ACP had failed , when the instruments are largely in place .
In fact , I wanted to specify that for Europe the ACP group is not currently a real partner in the political dialogue , and that this dialogue lacks content and visibility .
The open debate since the Green Paper shows that our cooperation with the ACP has lost legitimacy both within and outside the European Union , this cooperation is also no longer unique when commercial preferences are subjected to continuous erosion , and the debate also shows that the ACP is no longer pre-eminent in our actions .
Faced with the growing concern of the ACP countries regarding the place we accord them in our policy of cooperation with less advanced countries , you will agree that this political coup de force on Togo is not likely to re-instil our partners ' confidence , but will create a deep unease about the consideration we have for populations to which we owe a historical debt .
The Group Union for Europe has always held that development aid is dependent on respect for human rights and democracy , but regrets that certain political groups demand that our Parliament questions the result of a vote to which we contributed .
This draft resolution which has been submitted to us was rejected effectively by the Joint Assembly at Lomé on 30 October , in line with the internal ruling of the Joint Assembly , following a vote by separate college and secret ballot .
To question this result in the absence of the ACP countries constitutes a violation of the internal ruling of the joint Assembly which we initiated , and stems from a lack of consideration for our ACP friends . We in the Group Union for Europe cannot sanction this in any way .
Madam President , under these conditions my group will not support this behaviour and will make it known to all of our ACP partners .
Madam President , let us be honest , Togo is not Equatorial Guinea , Sudan , Somalia , and that why it is important that we offer a helping hand to it .
During the ACP-EU Joint Assembly I had the opportunity as head of the liberal delegation to have a personal talk with the president and four of his ministers .
The response to the questions which were in the Amnesty International report gave me the impression that the promised free elections would not be entirely free .
We did not offer any criticism , we only asked questions .
The Togolese Government is aware of this , and knows that article 5 of the Lomé Agreement forms a part of the postponement policy from Europe , and yet they still made it clear they did not want to carry it out .
Therefore the situation will have to be followed closely , and that is why I ask the Commissioner whether an expert investigation on behalf of the Commission has been made ; and I would like to see the results of this investigation made public very soon , if only to help the Togolese Government , to help demonstrate that free elections in a democratic Togo can be genuine .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to explain why my group has not signed this resolution about Togo .
It is not that we do not support the text of the resolution .
We do : in fact , we support everything in it .
It is , rather , the process itself - the way this question is being handled politically - that is causing us a great deal of concern .
It was only a few weeks ago that a resolution with largely the same content was defeated and rejected by a unanimous ACP delegation in Lomé , Togo .
To now vote through a resolution that has virtually the same content would signal discredit of the ACP states and the ACP delegation .
This would not be conducive to the continuation of a cooperation which is at an extremely sensitive stage .
I was present in Lomé and know that there were several resolutions that were voted down , including a resolution about Nigeria , where one could certainly say that the situation with regard to human rights and democratic principles is much more serious than it is in Togo .
We believe that it would be extremely humiliating for the ACP delegation if we were to vote this resolution through at this particular juncture .
Madam President , this resolution on Togo constitutes false urgency .
In this case , what events justify urgent procedure ?
There are none .
This resolution is therefore of no use whatsoever and totally out of place .
Why do we need to go back over the situation in Togo scarcely three weeks after our Parliament reached a decision on the issue , firstly in the framework of the investigative mission , and then in the framework of the Joint Assembly of European Union-ACP countries ?
After an extremely long , frank and open debate , the Joint Assembly did not consider it appropriate to adopt the resolution on Togo , considering that it would not facilitate the current democratic process .
Do we in Strasbourg wish to question the decisions taken by our Joint Assembly in Lomé ?
Could this be an attempt to seek revenge by those who failed in their plan to prevent the Joint Assembly being held in Togo , on the basis , incidentally , of information which was not verified and was quickly shown to be erroneous when we were actually on the ground ?
Togo is learning democracy and democratic culture with perseverance at its own pace , but it is a delicate process , and we should not seek to undermine it by making irresponsible declarations .
Why are we persisting in pointing the finger at Togo and casting aspersions on the current democratic process instead of helping a country which has sought the help of the European Union in this process ?
Is it not true to say that Africa offers cause for concern on subjects which are much more serious and yet strangely enough these do not feature in the urgent debate !
Should the massacres in the Democratic Republic of Congo not have been the subject of an urgent debate , following the repeated refusal of the authorities in Kinshasa to admit the United Nations to investigate ?
Should the issue of Islamic terrorism not have been raised the day after the appalling massacre at Luxor ? And what about the new problems in southern Sudan ?
Should we not have given these our close attention ?
No , it is clear that the situation in Togo is out of place in this debate .
The only real threat to Togo is the attempts by foreign countries to destabilize it , and these have not been mentioned in the resolution .
We will therefore vote against the text which has been proposed .
Mr President , the theory of control , which spread in Asia in the 60s , is repeating itself in central Africa .
It is no longer the Marxist logic that is penetrating the countries , destabilizing them and causing them to fall , one after the other , but a gradual and not as slow a destabilization of the entire continent .
After Rwanda , Burundi , Zaire and Congo , Togo is still today in a state of crisis .
And yet that region of central Africa gave the impression of making progress in the life of real democratization , even at economic level , by maintaining the prices of raw materials .
These positive aspects were rendered even more promising by the geopolitical situation of black Africa , which only a few years ago managed to overcome the anachronisms of apartheid and contributed towards the consolidation in South Africa of an awareness of an indigenous majority with the vocation of supporting the smaller countries , encouraging them and helping them .
Despite that , a constant and progressive destabilization is taking hold of that region , destabilization caused above all by the role of the former European colonial powers which are today too undecided between domestic political issues and continuing to play the old role of a tutelary deity .
The protection of human rights , the development of the population and the protection of the regions threatened by the crisis are therefore forcing a redefinition of the entire European policy in the continent .
Madam President , fair and free elections in Togo are an important gauge for the future of this country .
The Commission has expressed its willingness to offer technical and financial aid for the preparation and follow-up of these elections in Togo .
But the Commission only wants to make this contribution if the Togolese Government meets its promises of openness and transparency , and also of security during the election process .
And if they make it clear that all political forces are given the opportunity to participate in this process and subject to the conditions which guarantees free access to the media , internal free movement and security .
This means that in the opinion of the Commission , a national elections committee should be set up forthwith , in which the government majority and the opposition must be represented equally .
The election committee must supervise and exercise control on all activities related to the election process , and must have powers over security , in particular vis a vis the safety of the candidates , as well as exercising control on access to the media .
The Togolese Government has made a verbal promise verbally to appoint the members of the election committee and to start the election process before the end of November , in other words before the end of this month .
This promise must be implemented within this period if the Commission 's support is to be applied effectively .
Mr Bertens inquired about the expert 's report which has been drafted .
It shows how , in the eyes of experts , the election process is to be given shape , if it is to be truly open and fair .
And they also go into certain specific technical and material requirements .
But the Commission believes that it is up to the Togolese Government to take the initiative to publish the report .
The Commission recommended the government to present the report to the Togolese National Assembly .
It hopes that its recommendation will be taken up .
Sending the report out contributes to a bigger consensus between the political powers and a transparent preparation of the election process , and the Commission will inform the Togolese Government of the European Parliament 's request to make the report public .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following resolutions :
( B4-0954 / 97 ) by Mrs Pailler and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on children 's rights ; - ( B4-0968 / 97 ) by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe on the protection of children 's rights ; - ( B4-0977 / 97 ) by Mr Monfils , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the protection of children and their rights ; - ( B4-0980 / 97 ) by Mrs Frutos Gama and Mrs García Arias , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on children 's rights ; - ( B4-0990 / 97 ) by Mrs Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the respect of children 's rights ; - ( B4-0947 / 97 ) by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the economic threats to the press in Slovakia ; - ( B4-0976 / 97 ) by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the proposal to increase taxes on publications in Slovakia ; - ( B4-0992 / 97 ) by Mrs Schroedter and Mrs van Dijk , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the increase in VAT on publications in Slovakia ; - ( B4-0966 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the agrarian reform in the Philippines ; - ( B4-0982 / 97 ) by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the importance of continuing the agrarian reform in the Philippines ; - ( B4-0936 / 97 ) by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on detentions without trial in Malaysia ; - ( B4-0967 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on detentions without trial in Malaysia ; - ( B4-0962 / 97 ) by Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in the Chittagong Hill Tracts ( CHT ) ; - ( B4-0989 / 97 ) by Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in the Chittagong Hill Tracts ; - ( B4-0950 / 97 ) by Mr Manisco and others , on the detention of Silvia Baraldini in the United States .
Protection of Children 's Rights
Madam President , the resolution which we are discussing is bizarre .
It asks us to celebrate Children 's Day on 20 November and to fight abuse , but the compromise resolution eliminated from this text the three passages of the resolution which I tabled on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party on the serious paedophile acts which may have occurred at the Clovis crèche which is a European Union facility .
There has been a conspiracy of silence for months .
Parents are left in the dark about what is going on and are even invited by the administration to say nothing .
They are criticized when they turn to services outside the Union .
Children who have suffered ill-treatment are not taken into care .
So what about the transparency of the European institutions ?
I am sorry to have to say it , but the Commission obviously wants to stifle the whole affair .
This is completely unacceptable !
In the reports voted on recently we condemned everything without reserve : paedophiles , those who keep pornographic pictures , Melchior Wathelet and we are not capable of putting these resolutions into practice in our own crèches .
I would clearly say that the commissioner responsible , obviously not Mr van den Broek , ought to explain himself whether he wishes to or not , in other words , either on his own initiative in front of the honourable Members , or before a parliamentary committee of inquiry with which we are filing the text .
If this does not happen , the press will take care of it and in fact has already started to do so .
It is not right to play on the anguish of parents and risks to the physical and mental health of children , and the Commission has been doing so for too long .
Mr President , today , on this day devoted to the rights of children , we must again report on the terrible violence to which they are subjected .
Two hundred and fifty million children are at work , thousands of children exploited , terrorized by war , if not dragooned , and we must also add the children in the Western world who suffer terrible abuse .
The conferences in Stockholm and Oslo gave an alarming review of the situation and its evolution .
But over and above complete and unanimous condemnation , this day should also give us pause for thought .
Firstly at an institutional level , what should we think of those countries which have forgotten to ratify the UN convention on children 's rights , which was adopted some seven years ago ?
These are sometimes the same countries that do not guarantee refugee children the security and protection which is essential .
And in this regard , we should once again deplore the fact that the European Union has not always included in its treaties the rights of children .
Secondly , we should reflect on the place we reserve for children within our society .
Democracy and development ought to have led to more education and a prolongation of the duration of schooling .
But the opposite is the case : throughout the world , children are wandering the streets , are put to work and even sexually exploited .
By the same token , now that progress in child psychology has explained to us their emotional and intellectual needs , how can we accept that there are more and more children who are abused , especially within their own families .
And in addition , children have nowadays become the privileged target of shopkeepers . They are taken hostage to sell the products destined for them , of course , but also to sell anything and everything .
We have entered the era of the child as an object .
What is required for our society to regard the child as a person in his or her own right , to whom it is our duty to convey a sense of humanity , happiness and hope ?
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , on behalf of my group may I express my pleasure in the fact that there has been such a general and clear consensus in this House about the role and rights of children .
I can say on behalf of my group that we fully support the contents of Conclusions 1-9 of the amendment motion .
As a German delegate I must unfortunately add an appeal to the Bundestag and Federal Government for them at long last to repeal the abstention pertaining in the Federal Republic from the UN Children 's Convention , and thereby to create the conditions necessary for the harsh treatment of families and children generally found in expulsion cases to lose its legal sanction .
The way it treats children and children 's rights demonstrates whether a society thinks might is right , or whether by its treatment of weaker members it shows the right of its might .
That must also apply , of course , to children in the Clovis Nursery , to which a child of one of my assistants belongs .
Mr President , a few days ago an eight-year-old child was brutally raped , then beaten and finally burnt ; his remains were scattered around .
Three people were responsible for the crime , with instincts more bestial than human ; three people who hid their baseness and perversion behind a facade of social respectability .
This is the latest in a series of episodes involving child victims , and torturers and their accomplices , whole families or isolated individuals or groups of senseless people .
What is striking is the climate of social conspiracy that surrounds these episodes and the fact that they only come to light after something irreparable happens .
Skilled psychologists , famous sociologists and eminent MPs try to convince us that this is not happening to any greater degree than in the past , but we just hear about it more through the media ; however , this is a pitiful and awful lie as so many cases of violence to minors have never taken place in other periods of history .
The ideological assumption made by the left that any message relating to sexual issues , even the most contorted , has a right to exist has proved tragically wrong because not all those who receive it have the same cultural and social defences and not everyone has the same capacity to control their own instinctive impulses .
All the falsely progressive legislators who would have liked to free sexuality from the chains of hypocrisy have not only freed absolutely nothing , but as sexuality has taken on different but fundamentally similar expressions in all eras , they have only managed to ensure that the weakest individuals with limited inhibitions consider sex to be a consumer good to be obtained at all costs , even with money and violence .
The Press in Slovakia
Mr von Habsburg , you received congratulations yesterday , but I believe it is your birthday today , and that gives me the opportunity to congratulate you once more most sincerely .
Thank you very much Madam President .
I am very pleased to be able to bring you good news on this day , for once .
We have just received a communique about our resolution concerning the Slovak Government 's measures against the Slovak press .
The Slovak Parliament has resolved largely to reject these measures or so to rephrase them , that we have the impression that a real battle for press freedom in Slovakia has been won here .
This is of great significance because it shows yet again that , if one really confronts a matter , one is successful .
That is our good fortune , because the Slovaks are one of the most likeable races in Europe .
They are good people who have suffered a great deal throughout their history , and yet still believe in their faith and their homeland .
Today they have a Prime Minister who follows a most unfortunate policy and , particularly with regard to minorities , behaves in a manner which we cannot in any way countenance .
That is why Slovakia has fallen behind in its negotiations with the European Union , although things would doubtless have gone better under a better Prime Minister .
This development at least shows that we are progressing in the right direction , and we can say that we no longer need this resolution .
As a result of our experience with Mr Meciar , however , we should restore the matter at once , were the Parliament 's resolution not to be obeyed .
Let that be sign of good faith on our part .
At the same time , it should be a signal to the Slovak people that if policies which accord with our standards are followed there , the door to European Union stands wide open for Slovakia .
As a result , at least speaking on behalf of the first signatory sitting next to me , my son , may I say that we withdraw this resolution , but with the thought that should Mr Meciar not abide by his parliament 's resolution , our resolution will be reintroduced in December .
Madam President , according to my information , the situation , unfortunately , is not as good as Mr von Habsburg has said .
Only one committee in the Slovakian Parliament has proposed modifying the suggested increase in the threshold rate of VAT to 23 % The rest of the Parliament would appear to be intent on voting tomorrow on the 23 % .
So , unfortunately , the optimism is premature .
I intend to withhold my proposal because it is important that we bring pressure to bear as the elections approach .
Journalists in the country are very anxious .
The government party could and should do something but so far we have heard nothing .
The formal decision in parliament has not changed things .
Therefore , I will withhold my resolution .
At the same time , I wish to ask the Commissioner if , in the light of the recent memorandum on the language situation , she thinks that the government 's proposal to do nothing has taken Slovakia nearer to fulfilling European Union membership criteria .
We know that there is now a very precise language law at state level but only constitutional references for the situation of the different minorities .
Madam President , I would like to agree with Mrs Thors , because , according to the information which I was given very recently by the Chair of the Slovakian delegation , it does not amount to much more than what Mrs Thors explained just now .
It is therefore by no means certain that the Slovakian Parliament will reject the proposal to increase VAT on publications .
We must point out therefore that this is a form of tax which will lead to fewer newspapers and magazines being read - as all taxes are regulatory , after all - , and this is an extremely serious situation , not only with respect to freedom of the press , but also democracy .
Now I have to say that I have some difficulty , as our own Bureau of Parliament has just decided to impose all manner of restrictions on journalists .
You might almost being to think that it is a case of the pot calling the kettle black , but still , I would like to stress that what is happening in Slovakia is unacceptable , and that what is happening here is also unacceptable .
Madam President , whilst I do not entirely share the views of Mr von Habsburg , on this his birthday , as far as all aspects of his speech are concerned , I do agree entirely with his statement that we have had good news today .
I believe this is information which , as I understand it , comes from European sources and suggests to us that we should be sending a positive response as a result of this action by Slovakia .
We should be well advised not to put this resolution to a vote today .
On behalf of my group I should like to withdraw our signature from this joint motion .
If it does come to a vote , we in the Socialist Group will act accordingly .
I am very pleased that the matter has taken this turn .
It is a sign that in a country such as Slovakia , too , there can be developments in mutual relations in the most positive sense .
I do not think we should endanger that and have a detrimental influence on events by adopting positions which we are unable to alter at a later stage .
I should ask , therefore , for us to proceed accordingly .
Madam President , I can only agree with the previous speaker .
I am almost embarrassed to face Mrs Thors , because I always thought I was the hardliner here , and now she is clearly a harder hardliner than I am .
I think it is good news which we have just received and we should bear in mind the fact that the full delegation will be meeting next week with the Slovaks .
Having had good news we now hope that it proves to be true and that the delegation will get the opportunity over the next few weeks to debate it .
I also think we should reserve our position to return even more firmly to this point next month , should the news prove not to be true .
On this occasion , however , I should like to say on behalf of my group that we shall withhold our signatures and also vote accordingly .
Agrarian reform in the Philippines
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is interesting to see what is taking place out in the Philippines .
There is a Ministry of Land Reform - the European Union has participated since 1986 in this programme to the tune of tens of millions - yet the local Minister has nothing better to do than to redistribute back to large landowners land already given to the farmers .
Simultaneously one of the farmers ' leaders , one Romeo Cortez , and Gaudencio Devaras , chairman of a community , have been kidnapped by the military .
The farmers were successful in using a hunger strike to get President Ramos to return the land to them on this occasion .
We must press the Commission to demand coherent policies in the Philippines .
I can tell you from my own experience working with landless farmers in Brazil , that a country can very quickly deteriorate in this way , or even be driven into civil war .
We can see that in Columbia . Such conflicts are very vicious and we must insist that , if we are to participate with money , an end is put to this situation .
Madam President , there is , unfortunately , a long history of struggle for the redistribution of land to the poor and landless in the Philippines but its bitterness has not diminished over recent years .
The fact that the European Union has devoted very considerable funds to enable the comprehensive land reform bill to be carried out underlines the importance which we have put upon it .
Unfortunately , however , there have been serious setbacks to its implementation and the recent strike by 20 farmers in Manilla over the return of land to a large landowner illustrates this .
This , however , is only one of the cases of land being distributed and then returned to a former owner .
Another matter of deep concern is the disappearance of leaders of the people , R. Cortez and G. de Varez , which shows that there are forces which are prepared to use violence and prevent land reform .
There are also reports of torture .
This resolution is an appeal to President Ramos and his government fully to maintain the policy of land reform against all opposition and to ensure also that these disappearances are fully investigated .
All these acts should be stopped and every effort by the government should be made to counter them and those responsible should , if possible , be brought to book .
This resolution further calls on the President and his government to take action on other issues .
We are against capital punishment and we hope that the sentences of death imposed on certain people at the present time will be commuted .
The European Parliament has been deeply concerned to support democratic development in the Philippines over the years and we very much hope that our resolution today will be taken very seriously .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Malaysia
Madam President , recently another ten political activists were arrested in Malaysia on account of their Islamic convictions , and specifically on the basis of the lnternal Security Act .
This is the umpteenth example of lack of respect for basic human rights in Malaysia .
Experiences in Algeria and Egypt show that suppression is not the answer to differing religious beliefs .
The internal security law is a law which the Malaysian government clearly uses against every form of political opposition .
This same government has made several promises to alter this rigorous law , but this never happened .
At the end of last month big demonstrations had been organized by NGOs , including Amnesty International , to call for the abolition of the law .
It goes without saying that we support this call , and I believe that a democratic state requires an independent legal system .
The Union , this Parliament and the Commission must , by mutual agreement , try to raise the recent arrests with Malaysia , perhaps in an ASEAN context , and to plead for their release or for fair trial .
Chittagong Hill Tracts
Madam President , the problem of the Chittagong Hill Tracts is not well known , however it concerns a large region which is relatively well populated ; this is a region which , we could say , has been somewhat abandoned by the world , and in which for long years , perhaps thirty or forty , in fact since the partition of India after the war , a problem has existed which has never been confronted with the desired strength and will .
The first use of this resolution is , in my opinion , to address a friendly invitation to the government of Bangladesh to resolutely confront the problem in this region , to " get rid of it ' to a certain extent by according real autonomy - autonomy and not independence - to the population in this part of its territory .
These people have their own specific identity and traditions , and in resolving this issue , the government could perhaps devote itself more resolutely to other problems which affect its large country .
The conflict in the Chittagong Hill Tracts arose from the attempts of past governments to settle part of their expanding populations in the area in total disregard of the rights of the indigenous people , without respect for the autonomy which they once enjoyed .
The resistance of these peoples and the brutal attempts of past Bangladeshi governments to crush this led to gross violations of human rights of which the non-combatants were frequently victims .
Large numbers of the original population lost their lives and many of the survivors were forced to flee .
Thousands still languish in camps .
The present government of Bangladesh , the Awami League Government , has , to its great credit , sought to achieve a peace agreement and the seventh round of the talks on this is set for 26 November .
It is sad that the opposition parties in Bangladesh are opposing this because it offers the only real hope of bringing this terrible conflict to an end .
The basic cause of the problem is overpopulation in Bangladesh and the settlers often come from very poor families who hope for a better life .
We recognize this problem .
It is , however , totally unacceptable that the land rights of the indigenous population should not be fully recognized .
Refugees must be allowed to return on terms which enable them to resettle , preferably those of the 20-point economic package .
It is in the interest , not only of the indigenous peoples of this region , but all the peoples of Bangladesh that this conflict , costly in both resources and lives , should be settled and peace should be restored .
I appeal to this House to support the resolution and for the European Union and the Commission to do everything possible to monitor and to assist in the process .
Madam President , I should naturally like to thank the author , Mr Dupuis , and also Mr Newens , for the fact that they particularly mentioned settlement policy in this region .
I think there is a big problem here , which is manifest not just in this area but in many .
This is that the original inhabitants have a real right to their land ; that is their culture , their life , the whole core of their existence , and just because they have no piece of paper to certify this current Bangladeshi law says that only those possessing such a piece of paper has a right to own land . In most cases those will be settlers who arrive later .
In 1947 there were about 10 , 000 settlers there who had not originated directly from the Chittagong Hills Tracts .
In 1977 there were about 100 , 000 , and today the number already runs into seven figures .
It is clear from this that a huge policy is being pursued in this direction , such that we actually have to say that it conflicts with basic human rights and that we as the European Parliament , which invests a great deal in Bangladesh , have got to make a clear statement in support of the Jumma people ' s rights .
Silvia Baraldini
Madam President , it is with heavy hearts that we again raise our voices in defence of the human rights of a political prisoner in the United States : the Italian and European citizen Silvia Baraldini , ailing in the penitentiary of Danbury , Connecticut , after having served fourteen and a half years of a 43-year sentence for a youthful association with a revolutionary Afro-American movement .
Her incrimination and sentencing did not indicate personal involvement in acts of violence leading to bloodshed . We read in the rejection of her appeal four months ago by the local Parole Board that she is supposed to have had foreseeable knowledge of the crimes being committed by her associations .
Note , not ' knowledge ' but ' foreseeable knowledge ' - a very peculiar notion indeed of guilt by our standards of justice .
It is not our intention here to criticize or interfere with the judicial system of the United States .
The purpose of this resolution - the third in three years - is to ask our American friends to abide by the terms of an international treaty - the Strasbourg Convention on transfer of foreign detainees to their country of origin - a treaty that has been signed and ratified by Italy and the United States .
We do not ask for the freedom of Mrs Baraldini but for her transfer to an Italian jail where she could at least be visited by her 80-year-old mother .
We ask for an act of compassion on humanitarian grounds .
During her long detention she has been operated on twice for cancer of the uterus .
Seven years ago she lost in tragic circumstances her sister , Marina - a highly-esteemed official in the European Communities in Brussels .
Since last July her physical and psychological state has been deteriorating rapidly , while the rules and conditions regarding her incarceration are becoming stricter and more unbearable .
We ask the American authorities not to ignore , as they have done until now , the appeals and resolutions of this House , the mood and the emotions of Italian and European public opinion .
The transfer of Mrs Baraldini to Italy would not only be an act of justice and humanity but also a great contribution to that transatlantic dialogue that has dominated our debates in this session of the European Parliament .
Madam President , Silvia Baraldini 's case has now become a symbol in the fight for the assertion , at international level , of the most elementary principles of justice and freedom and respect for human rights .
With every day that passes , Silvia Baraldini 's life is in greater danger owing to an absurd verdict and an absurdly long sentence and owing to terrible conditions of imprisonment and psychological pressure .
With every day that passes without the problem of Silvia Baraldini 's transfer to an Italian prison being resolved , the internal and international credibility of the United States and its legal system become more compromised .
The European Parliament is still drawing up the resolution that we are preparing to vote on the same request made in the past , a very simple request : that the Strasbourg Convention at least be applied so that Silvia Baraldini can return , even in prison , to her own country .
We hope that the US political and judicial authorities respond to a request for justice that is receiving unanimous consent in Europe .
Madam President , everything has been said .
It is not the first time we are dealing with the case of Silvia Baraldini in the Chamber of this Parliament .
It is to be hoped that this time our position will have greater success than in the past .
The new aspect is the extension of the prison sentence and the worsening of Silvia Baraldini 's health : these are the aspects which , from the point of view of gravity , add to the arguments already recalled by Mr Manisco and Mr Vecchi .
For these reasons , on behalf of my group as well , I support the proposed resolution submitted by Mr Manisco .
Madam President , may I start by responding to the speeches on the rights of children , and by expressing how much the Commission agrees with this Parliament that abusing defenceless children is one of the most loathsome and reprehensible crimes , and that it needs to be combatted with all possible means .
The Commission is also involved in the fight against this evil , and in particular in the fight against child trafficking and child abuse in accordance with the aide-mémoire which Mrs Gradin sent in September 1996 .
At the level of the Member States , the Council of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs had as far back as 24 February 1994 given its approval to a joint action to fight human trafficking and the sexual exploitation of children .
In addition the Commission is presently investigating the possibilities of an European approach to the problem of missing children .
Furthermore , the Commission is managing the so-called Stop programme , the joint action by the Ministers of Justice and Homel Affairs from 1996 , for which over five years , ECU 6.5 million was made available to support people who are professionally responsible for , amongst other things , the fight against human trafficking and the sexual exploitation of children .
This includes support programmes for judges , law enforcement offices , and social workers .
Then there is the Daphne initiative , on the basis of which ECU 3 million a year has been made available to assist nongovernmental and voluntary organizations in amongst combatting violence against children .
The Commission is also implementing the policy against child sex tourism .
It is about to approve a statement concerning an action plan for the promotion of safe use of the Internet .
This action plan will stimulate measures such as those proposing action against illegal material such as child pornography .
In its external policy , the European Commission will make an active contribution towards the more general problem of child labour .
This is on the agenda of the 86th Session of the International Labour Conference in Geneva in June next year .
According to the International Labour Organization , included in extreme forms of child labour or the use , entrapment , or supplying of children for prostitution or pornographic display .
Finally , the external policy of the European Union includes programmes for the protection of human rights ; in this context resources will also be made available to fight the sexual exploitation of children .
Before closing the issue of child abuse , Madam President , I would like to give a quick response to several remarks which have been made this afternoon about the events in the Clovis crèche , where , as everyone knows , children of European Commission officials attend .
I would like to emphasize first of all , that this case is undoubtedly regrettable , but that it is being investigated by the Belgian judicial authorities , and that a judicial inquiry was set up by the Public Prosecutor in Brussels in the middle of June this year , and the inquiry is still taking place .
Secondly I can report that on 14 November the Public Prosecutor made a statement to the press , in which he said that cooperation with the European Union on this inquiry is progressing well , and in which he pointed to the need for discretion whilst the inquiry is still being conducted , and that such discretion and reticence had been expressly sought by the parents of the children in question .
To conclude , the Commissioner responsible for personnel and administration has had a talk with the parents in question .
I would like to correct the incorrect impression that the Commission would in any way be concealing a responsibility , which is not in the first instance the Commission 's , particularly as it concerns such a delicate issue in which the Commission naturally feels most definitely involved .
Then the next topic discussed was press freedom in Slovakia .
But let me first of all join this House in the warmest wishes to Mr von Habsburg on his 85th birthday , whom I also congratulate on behalf of the Commission , and I would like to add the wish that he be preserved for many more years for the European electorate ; if I may put it like this .
Madam President , on the issue of the press in Slovakia different reports are clearly spreading at present concerning the fate of the Slovakian government 's proposal to increase VAT on newspapers , amongst other things , from the low rate of 6 % to 23 % .
I do not know the definite outcome , other than that it is presently being discussed in the Slovakian Parliament .
I would like to agree wholeheartedly with the remarks made in this Parliament , and at this stage I would like limit myself to saying that there is nothing we can do other than tell the Slovakian Parliament and government that we would like to do everything possible to prevent doubt from emerging about the Slovakian government 's efforts to protect fundamental human rights , such as freedom of speech and press freedom , that doubt might be sown about the Slovakian government 's efforts to in any way ignore these principles which are highly represented in the European Union .
With this we express the hope that the Slovakian Parliament will want to be in touch with the Slovakian association of publishers and with the Slovakian press before a definite decision is taken on this proposal .
I would also like to say toward Mr von Habsburg that in Agenda 2000 the Commission took a critical view of the political situation in Slovakia , but it did conclude that Slovakia should not form part of Europe , that Slovakia will not be assisted and supported as the Slovakian government is prepared to be serious about the principles of democracy .
As far as this is concerned , Bratislava can count on our efforts and support .
The Commission will continue to devote considerable attention to this issue , also in the context of the partner nariate agreements with Slovakia .
I would finally like to express the hope that soon , Slovakia , too , will be included amongst those to whom , politically speaking , no criticism is due , when its the application for entry to the European Union is judged .
With regards to the situation in Malaysia - I believe Mr Bertens spoke about this - we would like to see the issues concerning the internal security law remain negotiable with the Malaysian government .
But I should say this .
As part of the discussion about Malaysia and the ASEAN countries , a question has been asked in this House about the extent to which our relationship with these countries is governed by human rights clauses , such as those we include in all our external agreements with third countries .
Mr Bertens will know that the cooperation with ASEAN has been institutionalized around an agreement signed in 1980 ; it has been argued on numerous occasions that it should be updated , and should be adapted to present circumstances and relations with the ASEAN countries .
This implies at the same time that a new agreement of this kind should contain such a human rights clause .
Up until now it has not only been a problem to come to such an agreement from the ASEAN side , but also from the side of the European Council , as the problems in East Timor are still playing a part in this .
Madam President , I hope to be able to say that in the long term these obstacles can be removed , and that the problems will be solved .
And I should add that until now we have not encountered any resistance from Malaysia when discussing these issues , nor when it concerned sensitive human rights issues .
Then there is the issue of Chittagong Hill Tracts in Bangladesh , Mr President . It seems that the present peace negotiations - there have been 6 rounds of talks since October last year - currently held under the presidency of the National Commission for the Chittagong Hill Tracts , have succeeded in bridging the gap between government 's and the rebel leaders ' positions .
The European Commission is following the peace process in Dhaka very closely .
Once the agreement has been signed , the Commission will consider supporting the implementation of the peace process , in consultation of course with all those closely involved .
The government of Bangladesh appreciates the Union and other development partners ' interest in supporting the peace process , and of course the offer of financial assistance for rehabilitation of repatriated refugees , and the reintegration of Bangladesh in Chittagong .
Even so the government of Bangladesh has , in view of the sensitive nature of situation , asked the international donors to wait until the peace agreement is operational , and the situation has been stabilized .
A minimum amount of political stability and sufficient security are of course necessary before we can see how reintegration and development can be stabilized and implemented .
Finally , Madam President , Silvia Baraldini 's fate .
It has been discussed a number of times in this House .
We know that in fact we only say it is primarily a bilateral affair between the United States and Italy .
On behalf of the Commission I agree with those who pointed out the fact that this seems to be a clear case where the Convention of Strasbourg should apply ; this was also ratified by the United States and Italy .
We would therefore appreciate its letter being complied with .
Madam President , I believe the Commissioner has forgotten to make a statement on the Philippines .
At any rate , I heard nothing .
I should like very much to have some information on the situation .
My apologies , Madam President , but having read the resolution I had understood that it was directed primarily at President Ramos and not at the European Commission in its request for support .
That is why I had not prepared a response to this .
But I would be quite happy to read through the resolution while the next matter is discussed to see if there is anything which gives good reason for the Commission to respond .
But I dare not do so without preparing myself and being able to seek justification .
Thank you very much Mr Commissioner .
I assume Mr Kreissl-Dörfler is in agreement with that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following resolution motions :
( B4-0932 / 97 ) by Mrs Frutos Gama and Mrs García Arias , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the flood disaster in the Autonomous Community of Extremadura autonomous region ; - ( B4-0957 / 97 ) by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the serious effects of the storm in Spain ; - ( B4-0991 / 97 ) by Mr Novo Belenguer and Mr González Triviño , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the flooding in Badajoz ; - ( B4-0933 / 97 ) by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the serious effects of the storm in the Azores ; - ( B4-0981 / 97 ) by Mr Marinho and Mr Correia , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the storms in the Azores ; - ( B4-0939 / 97 ) by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on the serious consequences of the storm in Portugal ; - ( B4-0969 / 97 ) by Mr Azzolini and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the storms in Portugal ; - ( B4-0983 / 97 ) by Mr Marinho and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the storms and floods in southern Portugal ; - ( B4-0956 / 97 ) by Mr Capucho and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the recent floods in the regions of Extremadura ( Spain ) , Alentejo ( Portugal ) and the Azores .
Spain
Madam President , once again , devastation caused by floods is the subject of a motion for a resolution in Parliament 's topical and urgent debate .
Storms in Spain and Portugal have again left a trail of deaths , injuries and missing persons in their wake .
Whilst it is true that this type of disaster is in general difficult to avoid , it is no less true that the effects of these floods could have been less serious if certain measures had been taken in time .
It is no coincidence that disasters of this kind vent their fury on the most depressed areas of the European continent .
Nevertheless , what happened in Melilla on Monday - when a 20 , 000 cubic metre reservoir burst its banks - was the chronicle of a tragedy foretold .
Nine deaths and 41 injured persons , as well as incalculable material losses , is the provisional toll of this disaster , which , far from being the product of fate is the result of pure negligence .
At present , I do not wish to apportion blame , which in any case must be established by the Spanish authorities , but to use this opportunity , as both a Member of the European Parliament and a citizen of Melilla , to call on the European Commission to provide urgent aid for the families of the victims , for those who have totally or partially lost their homes or businesses , and - in short - for all those who in one form or another have suffered material losses .
Furthermore , I wish to urge the Commission to establish , in collaboration with the Spanish authorities , a rehabilitation plan for the areas affected by these disasters , and to make available the necessary funds for the reconstruction of infrastructure , housing and , in the case of Estremadura , the farming , stockbreeding and tourist facilities affected .
Finally , I wish to take advantage of this opportunity to call on the Commission to examine the possibility of revising Community environmental legislation with a view to ensuring that the obligatory environmental impact assessments are accompanied by an appraisal of the risks to the local population posed by operations affecting the environment .
Disasters like the flooding in Estremadura and the flood in Melilla could undoubtedly be avoided if the Member States ' authorities and the Commission put more effort into fulfilling one of their most important duties : guaranteeing the safety of all citizens .
The Azores
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since our request at the partsession in Brussels on 4 November that Parliament send a message of sympathy to the people of Ribeira Quente , and our subsequent submission to the President of this House of an urgent draft resolution to take measures to alleviate the effects of the storms which have devastated the Azores ; since that date , huge mainland areas of my country - the Alentejo , the Algarve , metropolitan Lisbon , Setubal and the Tagus Valley - have also been laid waste by devastating storms .
I regret that there are further deaths to be recorded .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the storms have left 41 people dead or unaccounted for in Portugal , apart from many injured .
According to relatively modest estimates , the losses suffered by private individuals , public bodies and businesses amount to over 10 billion escudos .
The tremendous human chain of solidarity between the people that immediately formed from one end of Portugal to the other , is something that deserves to be recorded and commended , and I would like to mention it in this House .
I would also like to express similar sentiments to the local authorities and their services and to the fire brigade .
We are today applying to the Commission for financial support in addition to the existing instruments , with the object of mitigating the effects of the disaster and providing support to the people caught up in these human dramas .
We are also requesting the Commission , and in my view this is the most important thing , to set up a system with the authorities in my country to provide financial and technical support and cooperation in technology and research to enable us to predict and prevent the recurrence of the devastating effects of storms which it is unfortunately beyond our powers to avoid .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , once again , and within a relatively short space of time , the autonomous region of the Azores has been lashed by hurricane-force winds and torrential rain , which struck the region at dawn on 31 October , causing particular devastation in the parish of Ribeira Quente , in the district of Povoação .
I regret to say that , apart from massive material damage , which according to our information represents a cost of over five billion escudos , we have to mourn 29 dead .
It is against the background of this sad fact that we wish to state the importance of introducing an article into the Amsterdam Treaty providing for the individual and specific treatment of the ultra-peripheral regions . The Commission should recognize the disadvantages and risks to which these citizens of the European Union are subject .
In that context , we appeal to the Commission to turn its attention to re-scheduling and reinforcing the financial resources already allocated to the recovery of the infrastructures which have been destroyed in the autonomous region of the Azores .
The fact that these situations have repeated themselves leads us to state that , in future , the Regis initiative should contain an element designed to make it possible to deal with natural disasters .
Portugal
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think the facts of these disasters have been related either by the press or by my colleagues who have spoken before me .
Naturally , I do not propose to go over them again . I would merely like to put together three thoughts on the matter .
As we have already heard , these disasters happen in the most depressed areas of Europe , whether it be in the ultraperipheral region of the Azores , Estremadura in Spain or the Alentejo in Portugal .
This shows that the European Union must go on supporting those areas .
Certainly there may have been negligence , certainly there may have been errors in the planning and development of the areas , but the truth is that there are infrastructural deficiencies which we must make good .
Secondly , it is important that the Commission should provide material support , because that is another way of showing solidarity with the people involved .
Solidarity on the part of the Commission will naturally strengthen the sense of being European and will make people feel there are other Europeans who stand with them in times of difficulty .
This therefore is a matter not only of material but also of political importance , and if we may say so , of solidarity .
One final note . We consider - and my group has already pleaded this case here - that the Commission ought to have a response mechanism for these situations .
This type of aid should be institutionalized , since it would make it possible to inspect the consequences of such disasters in situand also to take immediate measures to deal with them in conjunction with national governments .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , the serious and dramatic situation caused by the floods to a greater or lesser extent all over Portugal justifies the use of Community funds .
We now need to know whether those funds will be coming out of monies already allocated to Portugal by rescheduling the present Community aid programme , or with new , additional sums provided by way of emergency relief , or again by increasing the budget and , for example amending the framework letter of the INTERREG II-C Community initiative , as has been requested in the Resolution of the European Parliament .
The question here is whether , in the light of the efforts expended by the Fire Brigade , Autonomous Authorities , municipal councils , police and military authorities in their response to the disaster , and prompt action by the Governments of the Republic and the Region , the Commission can make no better response than a restricted and academic view of the Community rules .
People - and people are the reason why the Community project exists - will not accept it .
The Commission cannot afford to forget this !
In a disaster situation we cannot respond with technical rigidity , POs , QCAs , deflectors , PMs and other Community jargon initials .
Common sense and goodwill are VITAL !
Spain / Portugal / The Azores
Madam President , I wish to express my sorrow at all the human and material losses caused by the disasters referred to in the motion .
But I should like to refer especially to the floods that occurred in the Badajoz region on 6 November , causing 25 deaths and considerable material losses in the form of goods and equipment , housing and businesses .
At the same time , however , I should like to underline the admirable solidarity that not only the authorities but the people of Estremadura , and the Spanish population as a whole , have shown in the face of this tragedy .
It is therefore only natural that the European Parliament should take part in this solidarity by calling for concrete action to rectify this terrible situation .
There will be time later to draw up measures to ensure that disasters of this type do not reoccur , such as requiring all urban projects to be accompanied by impact assessments that take account of the possibility of flooding .
Madam President , the floods which have recently brought disaster to some regions , particularly in Portugal , are a cause for struggle and also food for thought on the policies we should follow .
When 41 people have died in Portugal and 25 in Spain , our first words must be of distress at their loss , and of condolence with their families in their grief .
After that we must , out of respect for the survivors , restore their living and working conditions .
It is to be hoped that the responsible national and Community organizations will provide the essential resources . We plead , as some of our colleagues have already pleaded , for immediate action and additional aid .
Finally , the grief we feel obliges us to reflect on the conditions that caused , or at any rate aggravated , the consequences of the storms .
It has become clear that means of relief in times of disaster are insufficient , because they largely depend on voluntary action by citizens themselves .
Apart from that , it is important that due attention should at last start being given to forms of territorial planning and development that recognize that you cannot fight against nature .
On the contrary , nature should be preserved and made to serve mankind in a proper way .
Madam President , Commissioner , it is not possible to put a price on the human lives lost in disasters .
And it is not simply a question of calling for economic aid to alleviate the effects of the disasters that are the subject of this motion for a resolution .
It is also a question of fulfilling our duty of solidarity as citizens of Europe .
In Melilla , as in Estremadura and in Portugal , considerable human and material losses have been caused .
The European Commission and the local and national authorities cannot remain deaf to the appeals of Parliament - the voice of this disaster 's victims , who are demanding solutions to their immediate problems . And words of condolence and solidarity will not suffice .
A large number of people in Melilla have not only lost members of their families , but have been left without a home , or have seen their businesses and livelihoods destroyed .
What can be more important than that ?
Let us - at least , the Members of this Parliament - avoid entering into legal or political battles which do not fall within our area of competence . And let us avoid increasing , with our hesitancy , the despair of those who are calling on the public authorities - including the European authorities - for the material and technical aid with which , in all justice , they should immediately be provided .
Madam President , I am sure that this was an oversight , but the Commissioner neglected to express his condolences to the victims of a disaster in another Spanish and European city : Melilla . Nor he did refer to the recent floods there .
Madam President , echoing what my colleague , Mr Hernández Mollar , just said , I should also like to hear what the Commissioner has to say about Melilla , which has also recently been the victim of a disaster that has hit the headlines throughout the media .
Madam President , I would be extremely glad to rectify that .
It was an involuntary omission .
That surely makes the matter clear .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m. , which is in two minutes .
Votes
Mr President , the Commission 's action plan for the single market , backed by the von Wogau report , presents an extreme vision of an internal market with largely unified laws and taxation , without any internal borders , and a single currency , in other words a market in which the independence of nations has largely disappeared .
Furthermore , this unified market would have relatively vague external limits , since it would have to respect the EU 's commitment to a free world market .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties had misgivings about the relentlessness of the European Commission in organizing mobility of the work-force between Member States , and in its opinion it wisely specifies that , of course , even if mobility can be encouraged , it is far from certain that people can be invited or forced to leave one Member State to go to another in order to find a job .
But this nuance must have been held to endanger universal unification and was not included in the final report of Parliament .
The Amsterdam Council on 16 and 17 June welcomed this action plan .
Of course it also suggested that priority measures must be selected , but did not say which ones , and approved the general objective which , it said , would require political support so as to hasten the adoption of legislative measures for implementation .
Yet this position is surprising when we know that the action plan includes measures as radical as the installation within five years from now of a new system of VAT , based on the country of origin principle .
There is even a staggering passage in the plan , where we discover that the Commission should be able to implement urgent measures against countries which do not meet their obligations by adopting sanctions if need be . The strengthening of the executive powers of the Commission will contribute to the reduction of delays in solving problems .
This action plan provides for both the obliteration of nations in the face of the internal market , and then the obliteration of the internal market in the face of the world market , and all of this is accompanied with the discretionary power of the Commission to make countries yield .
In France and elsewhere there may be those in power who will subscribe to this , but I think that their people will one day ask them for an explanation .
The report contains a series of points that we absolutely cannot support .
First of all , we do not believe that the Member States & # x02BC ; value-added taxes have anything whatsoever to do with the European Union .
Nor can we back general formulations aimed at reducing the taxation of work in order to promote employment or adjust the excise duties .
The report requires the establishment of three new European agencies and regulatory authorities for air safety , telecommunications and the approval of food additives and agricultural chemicals .
Setting up centralistic authorities of this kind simply results in the production of more documents without leading to any appreciable change in the actual situation .
Furthermore , we definitely cannot back the proposal made in point 12 of the report .
Creating a common currency for the European Union would also create permanent unemployment .
One thing leads to the other .
When the internal market was about to be introduced , it was stated in the debate that the area of taxation would not under any circumstances be affected .
Now it transpires that this area too is to become part of the EU & # x02BC ; s regulatory framework , which according to the report is to include such things as harmonized rates of taxation and a standard rate of VAT .
I cannot back this .
The nation states must have the freedom to determine for themselves at what level the rates of taxation are to be set ; this is necessary in part in order to ensure that the public sector can apply the level that the citizens consider is appropriate in the state in question .
Nor can I agree to the content of point 12 , which unilaterally embraces the single currency , since I do not believe that EMU is to the advantage of the EU & # x02BC ; s citizens .
The internal market should have come into effect fully on 1 January 1993 .
This was not the case .
I agree with many of the criticisms made by the Commission , but note at the same time that this report clearly shows that the Member States are neither willing nor able to proceed so quickly .
The report is a clear example that the proposals about the internal market are not keeping in step with the wishes of the Member States .
The committee goes far beyond a mere free internal market by proposing harmonization of VAT legislation , common regulations for the taxation of capital and uniform regulations for the area of company law , introduction of the common currency and a common economic policy .
This I cannot accept , and I have therefore voted no to the report .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for the von Wogau report , which deals with the effect and the effectiveness of theiInternal market .
The report is in accordance with the thrust of the Commission & # x02BC ; s report .
The Danish Social Democrats views the report & # x02BC ; s recommendations regarding lower tax on labour in order to promote employment as positive .
This is in accordance with the tax reform that the Danish government was able to introduce in 1993 , which subsequently created more jobs .
The report mentions a reduction in the VAT rates for small and medium-sized companies .
The Danish Social Democrats do not agree with this position .
The Danish Social Democrats believe that the route to a better employment situation must be through further investments and training of the European workforce .
The trans-European network is cited in the report as an important element in the creation of an efficient infrastructure in the EC .
The Danish Social Democrats regards this view as a positive one .
Langen report ( A4-0350 / 97 )
The implementing regulations governing the EU & # x02BC ; s construction products directive are essential in order to allow for the application of the Directive & # x02BC ; s regulations on labelling and standards for construction products .
The Commission acknowledged in its report that it is a time-consuming task to draw up implementing regulations for the exceptionally large area in which construction products are used .
The technical specifications that the materials need to satisfy are complex and vary considerably from one Member State to another .
The report acknowledged these problems , but nevertheless invites the Commission to reduce the time-frame for implementation as much as possible .
I am absolutely in agreement with the committee and the rapporteur on this point .
Construction products account for a very considerable part of the EU & # x02BC ; s Internal Market , which is not yet free from barriers to trade .
Faster implementation of the directive also requires flexibility and goodwill on the part of the Member States .
This fact is underlined in the report , and I am pleased to be able to give it my full support .
That concludes the votes .
Asylum , immigration and external border crossing ( Odysseus programme )
The next item is the report ( A4-0366 / 97 ) by Mrs Zimmermann , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Decision on a joint action adopted by the Council introducing a programme of training , exchanges and cooperation in the fields of asylum , immigration and crossing of external borders ( Odysseus programme ) ( COM ( 97 ) 364-9980 / 97 - C4-0427 / 97-97 / 0909 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the granting of asylum to political refugees , the acceptance of citizens from former colonies and the reception of people on telling humanitarian grounds are among the tasks which the European Union has undertaken since the Second World War .
Since 1989 this range of tasks has received a new dimension , because large numbers of people have been arriving in western Europe from central and eastern european countries and the states of the former Soviet Union for economic reasons .
Political action is urgently required .
The governments of Member States of the European Union have raised asylum , immigration and border trespass to the status of subjects of special common interest .
Member States are convinced that requirements in this field can only be met effectively and sensibly by joint action .
Although there is consensus on this , Member States are hesitant about relinquishing authority to the European Union , despite the many statements about it .
Previous agreements , particularly the Dublin Agreement , can only be looked on as a first , small step .
Major effort and the will to find a common solution are necessary in order to fulfill the ambitious aims of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which provides in the medium term for the so-called communalization of the subjects involved .
This common measure which lies before us can be viewed , therefore , as a sign that the Council and Commission are prepared to undertake further efforts in this direction .
For this they can be sure of the support of the European Parliament , which , despite the late consultation and short time for processing the matter , has been able to produce a complete and comprehensive report on the Odysseus programme .
It is important to us that Parliament 's opinion is particularly represented at the Luxembourg summit and can be included in it .
It has based its views on the relevant Maastricht Treaty decisions concerning the European Union , but has always born the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam in mind .
The European Parliament , therefore , would value being kept informed in detail on the progress of Odysseus , particularly where one year plans are concerned .
It should also be possible for a list of priorities to be circulated , so that its items can be included in the one year plan .
The Odysseus programme sets new standards of cooperation between Member States regarding asylum , immigration and exterior border trespass .
The laws and procedures continue to be very varied .
The aim of Odysseus is to bring them closer together .
It is not the intention , however , for Member States to be brought closer by means of unified legislation , but by learning from one another by example .
That will take place at the level of the officials who have to implement the regulations .
They will not just become better informed by means of the projects sponsored by Odysseus , but will also learn how other Member States solve certain problems .
It is valuable , for instance , to learn about the laws in different countries on uniting families .
This can make clear that there are many valid solutions to one particular problem .
I am assuming , therefore , that acceptance of the European Union 's existing legislation in these fields will spread after the training of supporters within the Odysseus programme .
Participants in the projects will then have knowledge available for use during the communication phase .
I would expressly ask Member States to use this opportunity .
It is much to be welcomed that countries applying for EU membership can also participate in the programme .
In this way they will be given specific programme information about the institutional systems as well as the legal and administrative systems of participating Member States .
This will , on the one hand , lead them closer to the standards of the Union , and , on the other , make cooperation with them in these areas much easier .
The regulations in Member States for data protection must be safeguarded in the practical application of the programme .
Only anonymous case histories taken from routine experience should be used in training exercises .
Officials taking part in exchange visits who come into contact with original documents must be bound to secrecy about their contents .
The Odysseus programme is based on experience gained from pilot projects in the Sherlock programme , which is now to be integrated into it .
During its five year duration further useful experience will be gained , and this is to find constant reflection in the one year planning .
Not only will Odysseus gain special value from this , but Odysseus and the common measure for protection of refugees also show that policies in these fields do not have to mean the destruction of Fortress Europe .
On the contrary , these projects mean there is a chance for officials to see once again that there is a human element to their decisions .
They bear just as much responsibility as any politician for seeing that people entering the European Union for political , economic or other motives are treated in a manner worthy of human beings .
In the one year planning , therefore , the Commission should ensure provision for training , exchanges , research - not just in technical matters - and the checking of forged papers .
Theoretical subjects , such as the rights of persons affected by administrative acts to information , legal advice and family unification , as well as , most especially , the rights of minors , must be covered .
Certain NGOs have gained special expertise in this , and that should also be utilized as part of Odysseus .
It is important , therefore , for ONACR and other inter-state institutions such as the International Organization for Migration to be encouraged to participate in these projects .
Europe sees itself as the cradle of human rights .
It also bears great international responsibility for refugees ' rights .
Odysseus is a programme that can play apart in allowing Europe to live up to these responsibilities .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Zimmermann on this excellent report , which was enriched by the collaboration of all the political groups , and whose subject , moreover , is an excellent programme : the Odysseus programme of training , exchanges and cooperation in the field of asylum , immigration and crossing of external borders .
For someone like me , who lives in a border area - to be precise , the city of Melilla , which we have just been talking about , and which is on Spain and Europe 's border with Morocco - and who witnesses daily the problems caused by immigration from the countries of North and Sub-Saharan Africa , the Odysseus programme is undoubtedly of particular interest .
However , the first thing that I should like to say to Mrs Zimmermann is that immigrants are not criminals .
I therefore believe that it is wrong to talk about " combatting ' immigration , and " combatting ' the entry and residence of immigrants .
It would be better , in my view , to refer to legal or administrative measures , and leave talk of " combatting ' for those members of criminal organizations who use and abuse human beings , charging them money to transport them to our borders and advising them to destroy their identity documents in order to put themselves in an illegal situation and thereby prevent or hinder their expulsion from Community territory .
It is therefore highly important to train officials in this field .

In my view , this training should encompass three things : firstly , technical and professional training to enhance their knowledge of all the regulations governing immigration ; secondly , provision of the necessary material resources to enable them to perform their functions in border areas with total assurance and effectiveness ; and , thirdly , ensuring the ability to settle cases with sufficient flexibility to avoid delaying the resolution of waiting situations , which can give rise to breakdowns in reception centres , or require humanitarian assistance - which , with the resources of local or national authorities alone , it is not possible to provide with the dignity that everyone deserves - and which can also give rise to undesirable racist or xenophobic attitudes if they are prolonged .
For example , human tragedies are being produced on an almost daily basis in the South of Spain , in which the victims are North African migrants trying to enter Europe who sadly die in the attempt .
This programme must facilitate cooperation between not only officials , but also private organizations operating in this field .
Borders are not desirable , but they are necessary .
There is therefore also a need to avoid adopting a populist stance towards this urgent problem .
I therefore believe that the proposed exchange of experience between officials , which have the difficult job of working in a field in which it is necessary to know how to combine humanitarian considerations with the application of the frigid regulations governing the different aspects of immigration , is very important .
And I shall not conclude , Mr President , without underlining the responsibilities of third countries that a share a border with the Union , which must abide by the agreements on this subject that they have signed with the Member States .
Mr President , first of all I would like to make it clear that our group will support this proposal .
It is good , given improved cooperation .
We also believe that the emphasis made by the committee is important , i.e. that the cooperation must expand and reinforce , and not merely maintain , what is already in place .
At the same time , cooperation is to be developed with respect for the individuals & # x02BC ; integrity .
We must ensure that things do not occur for experimental purposes that we would not accept in other circumstances , e.g. the transfer of data in connection with Europol .
I would like this programme to be able to lend weight to the cooperation with the applicant states .
I am therefore pleased that Commissioner van den Broek is in place .
We have a huge amount to gain - that is to say mankind has a huge amount to gain - from a reduction in the suffering that currently exists in the refugee camps in these countries .
I am thinking especially of one camp in Lithuania which has been noted by numerous humanitarian organizations .
There are a thousand refugees there waiting to be dealt with in some way .
I hope that this programme will quickly be able to support the cooperation between EU countries and Lithuania in order to expedite their handling of the refugee issue .
People who would like to return to their countries of origin are not being permitted to do so because the administration does not even sort this out .
I therefore hope that Lithuania will be given priority , and appeal to the Commission to arrange this .
I am also hoping for major participation from those Nordic countries that are outside the EU but participate in the Nordic customs union .
It is my understanding that article 10 of the proposal makes this possible .
The improved cooperation must also include them .
Otherwise , perhaps we are forfeiting our Nordic customs union .
At the same time , I would like to address a question to us all .
This week we have discussed several programmes of this type , e.g. Fiscalis , Karolus , etc .
Do we always need an exchange programme in order to bring about the improved cooperation to which we have committed ourselves politically and judicially ?
I also want us to revise the question of administrative effectiveness , so that we have more horizontal rules for those provisions that are needed for financial control .
But we do not always need to have them in detail in every single programme , as is currently the case , in order actually to comply with the Commission & # x02BC ; s catchphrase less but better .
In conclusion , I would like to point out that there is , therefore , a need for further horizontal regulations for financial control .
Mr President , the Odysseus programme aims to promote unequivocal implementation of the European asylum and immigration policy by training and better cooperation between national public services .
More expertise , cooperation and uniformity are fine in principle , but unfortunately the treaties , resolutions and other instruments which have given shape to European asylum law over the past few years , not infrequently constitute a violation of the Geneva refugee treaty and of the European Treaty on Human Rights - international treaties the Member States are bound by .
Better implementation of this substandard asylum policy is not by definition in the interest of refugees . And that is why my group has mixed feelings about Odysseus .
Still it has to be said that the amendments in Mrs Zimmerman 's report are generally aimed in the right direction .
I hope that the Odysseus training schemes which will inform the civil servants in the Member States on the rights and responsibilities of the asylum seeker , will not ignore the contents of the asylum agreement or the relevant EVRM decrees , and that not only the restrictive interpretation of this by the European Union and its Member States will be an opportunity , but also the interpretation itself .
The European Union shows shamefully little interest in this guardian of the refugee policy ; the Treaty of Amsterdam protocol was ample proof of this .
The Odysseus programme includes training in recognizing false documents , and I have a question about this for Commissioner van de Broek .
IS Odysseus going to tell the civil servants concerned that if asylum seekers have false papers , this will not mean that they cannot be genuine refugees ?
And is Odysseus also going to make this clear to the civil servants which Member States are increasingly posting at the airports of the countries of origin of asylum seekers , as extended forward border posts of fortress Europe ?
Then there is the cooperation with the candidate Member States .
It is fine that the candidate Member States are also able to participate in the Odysseus programme .
But there is a big risk that the EU partners will merely teach them how to act better as a cordon sanitaire for us .
My fellow group member Claudia Roth visited three Polish detention centres last year , and spoke to 122 detainees refugees some of whom had been returned by Germany .
All 122 assumed that they were awaiting a decision about their application for asylum .
But in reality only six applications were being considered .
The Polish document which the others had signed , was not as they thought , an application for asylum .
And we think of this country as a safe third country .
If Odysseus will contribute to improved knowledge of the refugee treaty in Poland , I will be in favour of it .
But something tells me that this is not the principal aim of Odysseus .
Mr President , some surprises first of all .
Firstly , in a text which deals with border crossing - external borders are understood , because in this situation internal borders should already have completely disappeared - the word Schengen is never mentioned .
We should recognize that what is bothering us is not directly linked with this agreement , but the agreement is however the point of reference at the moment in Europe , especially as regards the movement of people .
The second element which worries me and annoys me even more is the fact that in the great freedom of movement for capital , goods and individuals , it is human beings who seem to be paying most dearly .
It only takes a few seconds , even a couple of milli-seconds for a million dollars to pass from the bank in Stockholm to Sydney .
To go from Algiers to Paris , it will be necessary to go to the consulate a number of times , queue up and quite probably have your request refused after several weeks of fruitless effort .
It is this which should remain at the forefront of our minds , and the main merit of this report , at least for me , is to force us to reflect on and debate basic freedoms again .
If only here in the Parliament a large majority would mobilize to help ensure that these freedoms are protected , and if only the action of countries and governments were better coordinated , it will happen , and we will vote on it , of course we will be happy to vote on it , and , by the way I would also like to congratulate Mrs Zimmermann .
But it is here at home in our own countries where the battle will be hard .
Everyone knows the long road down which we will need to steer our own very sensitive administrations , which are prisoners to routine , and our civil servants who are often badly informed and constantly under pressure from their hierarchy to be the ones to prevent entry .
This is true for the Member States and may be even more so for those now seeking entry , whose administrations for decades have used the vast majority of their time mainly to prevent their citizens from moving .
As far as this report goes , with the exception of some clawed dragons with poisonous tongues - that was lucky , they are not here - of course a large majority will mobilize to ensure that these elements become properly coordinated and that we can do our work properly , but we must be aware that this is a long term undertaking .
This is the very beginning of a battle which we will have to lead in our own countries .
Mr President , before I go into Mrs Zimmerman 's report I would like to say that I am pleased to be able to speak to her in our mother tongue , Dutch .
Her report deals with an interesting and necessary programme .
The ultimate aim of the programme is multi annual cooperation between the Member States ' government services on asylum and immigration .
To this end , training , exchange of civil servants and studies , and investigation are proposed .
This is something we can fully support .
Cooperation in these areas between Member States has become necessary since the single market without internal borders has come into being .
In addition it is desirable for people working in this field to have a better understanding of each other 's and the European Union 's regulations .
Only too often problems arise out of mutual misunderstanding of each other 's legislation , or because national civil servants do not understand the Commission officials .
By stimulating training and exchanges of this kind through this programme , the Union is investing sensibly in its future .
As far as the future is concerned : I am very pleased that the aspiring members of Union will also be involved in this programme .
This strikes me as extremely important .
The report contains a lack of clarity which I would like to point out to Commissioner van den Broek and the rapporteur .
In Amendment No 31 the European Parliament , without having been asked , augments the autonomy of the Commission in relation to the Council by increasing the said sum .
At the same time the European Parliament restricts the autonomy of the Commission with Amendment Nos 15 and 17 .
Whereas the Commission has phrased the substantive elements on which action is to be based , fairly loosely , this Parliament has curtailed these with its additions .
What is the Commission 's position on this ?
Finally , I would like to say that I think it is rather indelicate that the European Parliament in Amendment No 9 on article 1 is already referring to the decrees from the Treaty of Amsterdam , and is asking the Council to take these into consideration , whilst this treaty has not even been ratified by the various national parliaments in the Member States .
It strikes me as an undemocratic attitude , and that we are running a bit ahead of ourselves , it seems to me .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Zimmermann has very profoundly explained the position o f Parliament on this common measure , so that I have no need to detail the views of the European Parliament on the Odysseus programme .
I shall concentrate , therefore , on looking at the question of asylum , immigration and security of external borders from a different point of view .
The European Union is a citizens ' rights union .
That is how we always describe it in the insider circle which meets here tonight .
And so it should be .
The European Union should also , therefore , guarantee the right to asylum , unified at the highest possible level for validity in all Member States .
That means , though , that asylum law in the European Union has to be unified , i.e. , it has to be communized .
The Amsterdam treaty provided for this over a five year period .
A unanimous Council decision blocked this , however , in the form of the so-called permanent national reservation , Mr President of the Council , but nevertheless , one is on the way to communizing the laws on asylum .
The same applies to immigration policy .
You may ask what asylum and immigration have to do with one another .
If civil rights are to be guaranteed , and if victims of political persecution are to be guaranteed asylum , so that applications for asylum can be made in the European Union , then the European Union must declare what differentiates the politically persecuted applying for asylum from the immigrant who is not politically persecuted and must not be given the opportunity , or forced , to use asylum as a key to gaining entrance .
If we want to avoid undermining asylum rights because of a lack of acceptance , with citizens of the European Union thinking that asylum seekers actually do not want asylum , but just the chance to immigrate , then we must have an immigration law to protect asylum law , and it should if possible not be split down into fifteen parts , but unified .
Finally , if this is to function within the European Union , we need qualified security of the European Union 's external borders , whose internal borders have already disappeared .
I have had an opportunity of observing the Italian External Border Security Service , which is very keen and highly qualified .
I looked at the Border Security element of the Italian Coastguard in the Bay of Naples .
They are all excellent officers and I asked them what they saw as their status there . They stared at me , not having understood my question .
I then asked if they were Italian or European officials - of course they are Italian : green , white and red .
Their reply was that they had nothing to do with Europe .
But that is not true .
Since Italy became a full Schengen Member , and the borders between Austria , Italy , and Germany were thrown open , we have been aware that well organized gangs of human smugglers - this happened only yesterday - land ships on the Italian coast - yesterday it seems to have been with 800 Kurds on board whose objective was not Italy , but other European Union states .
What is the significance of this for the other countries in the European Union ?
It means that the Italian external border has become the German border , that it is also the Swedish border , and the French border , or that the border between Finland and Russia is now Italy 's border , because anyone entering the European Union has freedom of movement , once he has been accepted by any Member State .
We have a varying structure for external border defence in each of the States , however .
In the long term that cannot function .
We need unification of the external border defences .
Mrs Zimmermann made mention of this in her report .
The Odysseus programme for the training of individual national state officials is one important point , because the individual official , such as a Fin , must understand the significance of his job to his Italian colleague , and vice versa .
In the final event , however , it will be of no avail if we do not take communizing steps in those areas where the European Union does not need increasing cooperation between states , but its own European laws .
It is at this point that essential national interests are touched on .
This is why Mrs Zimmermann 's point , about harmonization being unavoidable as a sort of follow-up to training , is one of the central messages that Parliament must communicate in this declaration .
Mr Schulz , I did not interrupt you in a speech which was distinguished by its brilliance and I allowed you to exceed your time . But I did not interrupt you for another reason also : you must be aware that I particularly appreciate the fact that almost all the colleagues in the Chamber at this time are among those I see regularly whenever I am in the chair .
These are things we should appreciate and I must say that , personally , I appreciate them very much .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report talks first about amalgamating the Odysseus and Sherlock programmes .
Amalgamating Odysseus with Sherlock is certainly extremely difficult , even with the help of gene technology , which is why I - though a fan of English detective novels - must talk about Odysseus . For we are actually on an odyssey as far as asylum law in the European Union is concerned .
I think , however , that Mrs Zimmermann has pointed out the right path , not just in her speech , but in her excellent report .
I think it really is necessary to ensure that asylum law is maintained by the training of officers .
This asylum law can only be kept alive when its massive abuse and when illegal immigration are reduced and ended .
For that reason it is very important - and this does occur to some extent on our external borders - that we take measures to lay down security criteria for internal security , just as currency criteria are laid down for currency policy .
Austria is an example of where the mistake was made of joining first , and then undertaking the harmonization procedures which are now in hand .
For that reason we should , with the future membership of central and eastern European states in mind , lay particular emphasis on including these states right from the beginning in the training programmes .
These states are in the process of picking up Community standards with great effort , particularly in the field of internal and legislative policy , but obviously they have some catching up to do .
That is why it should be our priority in this long-term project .
We must see to it that within the European Union we come to look upon ourselves as a single unit - Mr Schulz expressed that very well .
Spain really does border on Russia .
Looked at in this way it is typical that a member from the southernmost country , Spain , spoke on behalf of our group , and I am a representative of the current eastern border .
We should ponder on whether we can in the long term leave the security of our external borders to the most Southerly or the most Easterly states , or if we should not arrive here at communal measures such as , for example , a European Border Protection Service , which would take on and Europeanize the positive experience of perhaps the German Federal Border Guard .
And so I believe that Odysseus could be a first step in the right direction , and I should like to join in the proposal by Mr Schulz that we must come to the next phase of European , Community measures .
Thank you very much , Commissioner van den Broek .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Future of the ESF
The next item is the report ( A4-0327 / 97 ) by Mrs Jöns , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , concerning the future of the European Social Fund .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although the social fund legislation does not expire until 1991 , preparations for the new regulations are already running at full speed .
The Commission has declared that it will present proposals in January , perhaps even December .
If we want the Commission to know at the outset of their deliberations what this House expects from a new regulation , then we must say so now , and not only in December or January .
This is why the Committee on Social Affairs and my group have been urging a debate on this initiative report today , and I must say I am really happy that we have achieved this together , despite all the technical difficulties we have encountered .
Here and now we are concerned not with the existence or otherwise of the European social fund .
The fund is not available for allocation , but we are concerned with altering the fund to meet changes in the employment market , and also to create procedural simplifications .
This is not a matter of basic reform , but rather of a revision of the social fund .
The most important points are , first , we want to maintain horizontal support by the social fund .
That is very important .
But we also want to give more financial support than previously to those regions where unemployment is particularly high .
Secondly , we are also appealing for a common horizontal objective in place of objectives 3 and 4 , i.e. , in order to simplify planning and administration we want to amalgamate measures for combatting unemployment and measures for a preventive employment policy , in other words to amalgamate measures on behalf of people threatened with unemployment .
Thirdly , we want above all to hold onto the twin aims of the Social fund , that is , we want in future by means of market-oriented qualifications to improve at short notice the employment opportunities for the unemployed and those threatened by unemployment .
But we also want to give precise aid to those people - and this is very important - who are faced with becoming social outcasts .
They too must have the opportunity in the long term of finding work .
We want here to maintain specific measures for women and young people without jobs , for handicapped people and for the long term unemployed .
Fourthly , we want the social fund to pose a completely new challenge .
It should do more for the unemployed and those threatened by unemployment who are 45 years of age and older .
Their qualifications are usually out of date , and above all most national schemes no longer offer them any new professional opportunities .
Here our aim really is to fill a new gap with social fund measures .
We are also concerned with technical points .
Criticism of the value for money of the social fund , of delayed payments and of high administrative costs is well known , and the Court of Audit raises it repeatedly .
We propose first of all to improve the payments .
That will be achieved by paying Member States from the social fund in a single annual slice , not three instalments as previously .
That will significantly simplify the administration .
But in addition Member States will have for their part to ensure that they really shorten the payment channels and payment deadlines for passing the funds to the final recipient .
Secondly , we propose a distribution mechanism which will finally put an end to our accumulating unused social payments from year to year .
That means that , should we find at the end of the third and sixth years of the support period that funds are not fully allocated , the distribution system will operate .
Thus , unused moneys will first be allocated to other regions within the same Member State , but then to other Member States . The requirement to become recipients of these moneys will obviously be that they must have exhausted their own social funds , and that they must have carried out high quality projects .
So that these extra funds can be quickly allocated , because only that makes sense of this distribution mechanism , the most badly affected regions - our Objective 1 regions - will be able to get up to 90 % of the measures funded . Other regions will receive a maximum of 70 % .
In plain words that means that anyone who does not secure the funds as planned with their own complimentary funds must reckon in future with financial sanctions .
Those who put the funds to good use , however , will be rewarded .
We think that as a result there will be no further place for ideas about national rights .
Thirdly , a funding period of seven years is very long .
We propose initially to place 5 % of the Social fund into reserves .
The reserves would only come into use during the last three years , when they would be used to smooth out requirements .
For this , however , the medium term use of funds by Member States would also be taken into consideration .
Finally , we ask for better evaluation at all stages of planning and operation , so that projects can be more accurately assessed .
All that only has any point , however , if Member States pass the necessary structural funds laws , including the social fund laws , in good time .
The past has really taught us that Member States require one year to adjust their planning to new support criteria .
If in the worst case the necessary passage of regulations should not be achieved , then we propose to introduce an interim year .
Madam President , Karin Jöns has done this House a great service .
It was a very illuminating report , which goes into considerable depth and detail on various problems , and puts forward some very interesting , concrete and , in some cases , novel proposals for the future of the Fund .
For example , her last comment about a reserve and keeping money back from those who do not execute it well and giving it to those who implement Community policy well , is a measure which the Commission should give serious consideration to adopting .
One of the problems in many of the debates in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs concerns the management and administration of the Fund .
Sometimes it is the Commission 's fault but , more often than not , it is what happens in the Member States , particularly in states like Italy where there does not appear to be a proper regional structure and where there are all sorts of problems with funds not being allocated properly .
Indeed , in this week 's report by the Court of Auditors - it is very timely that we should be debating it the same week - various areas of the social fund are singled out again for poor implementation .
Italy , Spain and Portugal are three Member States which are given a dishonourable mention by the Auditors .
So it is very important that we tighten up our act .
We must improve our administration of Community taxpayers ' money .
The social fund is investment in people .
Many of the other funds - infrastructure and so on - are going to industrialists or large companies .
In these cases the individual has very little tangible experience of a fund , whereas a young person who gets some training and , as a result of that training gets a job , can see that some benefit has resulted from the European social fund .
So it really is a people 's Fund - it is human resources .
It is not just young people : there are also many older Community citizens and , given the current demographic trends , there are going to be more and more of them .
For example , in 1992 32 % of the Union 's population were over 45 ; by 1996 that had risen to 36 % and by 2015 it will be over 50 % .
Thus it is important that we consider the training of older workers , particularly when we have a flexible labour market and people will be going in and out of different occupations .
In the report Karin Jöns also touched on this problem of additionality .
This again was mentioned this week in the Auditors ' report which stated that there had not been a proper definition by the Member States of additionality or cofinancing .
Obviously , this is another area which the Commission must address .
We in the United Kingdom have had considerable problems with this .
The former Commissioner Millan was very anxious to do something about this and started an investigation into the regional fund and other funds but it was dropped .
The Commission should take additionality up again and look at it very seriously .
We have this recurring problem of administration , which we must get to grips with .
Karin Jöns is putting forward in this report some very concrete and well-thought-out proposals .
I commend them to the House and I am quite sure we will vote them through tomorrow .
It is a tribute to the rapporteur that we are coming to the plenary with a report on something like the social fund and there are only about ten or eleven amendments to the whole report .
It shows that she has convinced most of her colleagues in the committee .
Many of the amendments are just tidying-up amendments and I think she will be able to accept many of them .
Madam President , it 's such a shame that a report that involved such a great deal of analysis and summary for the rapporteur , has been somewhat sacrificed in the debate . However , we are not underestimating the effect our contribution might have at this time .
Our thanks to Mr Jöns are inversely proportional to the moment and time of discussion granted us and so we are deeply grateful , giving a favourable opinion both on the report and on the readiness to accept several amendments .
Firstly , I would like to state and confirm that , for us too , this strategic role exists for the European social fund , a role that holds and will continue to hold respect for the new objectives laid down by the Treaty of Amsterdam , respect also for the forthcoming Conference on Employment , and respect above all for the drama of unemployment .
The rapporteur clearly states that changes are needed ; but this cannot prevent us from seeing the favourable impact this European social fund has had on integration , particularly between the training and education system and the in-service training system ; it has had a significant impact on the overall system of governing training policies that have been reinforced in our countries .
What the rapporteur is saying is this : the future lies in the changes , and these changes are those required by the economic , social and employment situation , but also in the management of the Fund itself which should be simplified and stricter .
The social fund is the only fund that is directly beneficial to people and against social exclusion and it is the only direct line , the only incentive we have to exploit the human capital that may enable us to incorporate both competitiveness and social guarantees .
For this reason , the social fund has to make innovations .
It cannot be degraded to a simple financial channel incorporating other funds and has to maintain its characteristic as a place of experimentation and innovation . It has to be used , as has already partly happened , to initiate new offers and to support new methods of training .
I believe that paragraph 10 of her report answers this objective and assumes responsibility for these new aspects . It should be read , in my opinion , in the sense that , to support the policies on employment , it cannot be limited to professional courses , but should encourage and finance ways of intervention in which different means have to be used to achieve a specific objective .
The rapporteur very realistically dealt with the limited financial resources and their desired commitment , and the need to use them better ; she also dealt with the subject of bureaucratic streamlining , cofinancing and , in particular , the reallocation of budgets ; a gradual , rigorous procedure was provided for ; aware that this paragraph might create problems in some countries , including my own .
We would certainly have preferred reprogramming within the State itself ; I have to say , however , that we approve that paragraph as an incentive , because , although we can assume responsibility for the difficulties of decentralized programming that is sometimes laborious in some countries and should therefore be assessed for what it is it , it is no longer permitted to take responsibility for bureaucratic incompetence or for incompetent planning .
Madam President , maintaining the European social fund is of extreme importance for the social face of the European Union .
Be that as it may , a fundamental reform of the structural funds is needed .
A number of aims and initiatives in particular need to be simplified , with similar procedures for the new aims .
Mr Commissioner , I am delighted to be able to speak to you in Dutch , even though your are wearing your headphones , and am glad that as Foreign Affairs Commissioner you have to listen to a contribution from home .
I completely agree with the Jöns report and it is extraordinary really that this Parliament is so unanimous .
But it is a well-considered and expert report with good proposals on the simplification and efficiency of the ESF .
Reports from the Court of Auditors still show that a large part of the available money is not being used .
And in 1995 that amounted to approximately 15 billion guilders .
In addition there are many complaints about the slow handing-over of the European social fund monies to the eventual recipient .
This is not only the fault of the European Union , colleagues , Madam President , Mr Commissioner .
In any case not in this case .
It is often to do with Member States not passing on the money .
I think it is excellent , therefore that this report suggest that the completion of payment procedures should be simplified , for example , by carrying out it once a year , and thus the red tape can be pushed back .
In addition , the involvement of local and regional authorities must increase .
This fund must be applied - and I ask you Commissioner , to pass this on to your colleague Flynn - to the new challenges of which we have so many in Europe , such as the effects of the information society , industrial changes , flexible working patterns , and so on .
Only too often Member States reach for the till , and the Netherlands is no exception ; I myself haven been involved as Chair of a regional employment policy board , and then you see that national financial problems are solved through this fund , that money goes to regular education projects , and that money is used to compensate for cuts to an organization like the regional employment policy board .
I mention these examples , as they are the ones I am most familiar with , but the same happens in the United Kingdom , Germany , and I should think it also occurs in France .
So I believe that the fund should be used for what it is set up for .
I hope this report will be passed unanimously tomorrow , that it will have a big impact on the reform of the Fund , and that you will give it your full attention .
Madam President . First let me thank Mrs Jöns most sincerely for her report .
The Group of the European People 's Party voted against this report in committee . These points were , however , removed or at least blunted by compromise solutions .
As a result I am not entirely happy , but at least the report now seems to be capable of receiving my vote .
One point worries me . We now have different percentages , Mrs Jöns , for the reserves , for the payment rates , for the ESF as opposed to the ERDF .
That will make the Commission 's work more difficult in future .
I think that it is inadvisable for Parliament to use different data for two funds .
I believe the expenditure of the ESF will in future be more important and have greater coverage .
Up to now the ESF has been partly successful , but there was a part which was less so .
I must admit , however , that assessment of the various measures was difficult .
Nevertheless , the results must in future be better balanced and be presented more quickly , in my opinion , so that conclusions can be drawn without delay .
The ESF will certainly become more important because of increasing globalization .
That is why I accept cofinancing so that the funds , which are essentially too small for 15 countries , can be increased .
Subsidies of 70 % or even 90 % must remain the exception , or we shall be unable to increase the funds substantially .
Finally I should draw urgent attention to the fact that the ESF must look more to rural areas and their populations , rather than conurbations . In my view , rural areas will otherwise become yet more depopulated , and we know the result of that .
Conurbations increase in size , and we must avoid the results of that - increased costs , more problems - by use of the ESF .
Madam President , may I , partly on behalf of my colleague Flynn , congratulate Mrs Jöns on her extremely well-considered and far-sighted report .
I can say on behalf of the Commission that the Commission largely agrees with the opinions of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment on the fund , and we expect to have a constructive dialogue within Parliament as the reform of the structural funds progresses .
The European social fund has been working for about 40 years towards a healthy , modern labour market in Europe , and generally speaking I would like to highlight the three main functions of the fund .
First of all , within the less developed regions it is an important motor for the improvement of systems , education , training and retraining .
Elsewhere in the Union , it helps Member States to better tailor their labour supply to the ever changing requirements of the economy .
And thirdly , and by no means least , it is tangible proof of the large amount of attention the Union devotes to issues concerning participation in society , and equal opportunities for all .
Points which are emphasized in the draft resolution .
It is beyond doubt that the fund will have to engage in these aims in the future , but within a different context .
In Agenda 2000 the new challenges it will be confronted with are laid out , and I do not want go into that today .
When we place Mrs Jöns 's report in the perspective the Commission has outlined , we see four fundamental points of agreement .
Firstly , there is our mutual recognition that there is an essential role is for guaranteeing vitality and fairness in our labour market , or in other words , promoting both economic and social cohesion .
The importance of these efforts is underlined by the work that the Commission has done for the summit conference which is taking place in Luxembourg at the moment ; but also for the implementation of the European employment strategy and for the guidelines for employment which will be a result of that process .
This will have far-reaching results on the European social fund in the coming period .
Then a second point of communality . There is the recognition that the challenges agreed by the Fund have both a horizontal and a regional dimension .
Mrs Jöns also pointed this out in her verbal explanation .
The European social fund is the most important form of support the European Union extends to the labour market policy of the Member States .
And in that sense it functions independently from all exclusive regional contexts .
Integrated regional approaches are necessary but that does not mean that the European social fund should be separated from its most important task : supporting the reform of labour market measures and practices in accordance with European employment strategy , and in accordance with yearly guidelines for employment .
Mechanisms which will guarantee this horizontal role in the next programming period , will form an essential part of the progress under which the reforms will be arranged .
A third common point is our mutual assessment that a strong , innovative and transnational component of our activities should be maintained , in particular via the new generation of Community initiatives .
We look forward to specific support for the new initiative concerning equal opportunities and for the measures against discrimination in the labour market .
And the fourth point of common recognition is that the way in which the fund operates must be streamlined and modernized .
Streamlining and modernization must go hand in hand .
There is a double challenge .
Firstly , finding the right balance between granting scarce public resources to the relevant authorities in a quick , flexible , approachable , but also responsible fashion .
And then secondly , introducing a partnership system with the Member States which brings with it the advantages of subsidiarity and democracy on a national , regional and European level , but also via the European partnership lead to a distinct extra value .
In our opinion the aspects of the new partnership must be as follows .
First of all , more emphasis on policy development whereby the Commission and the Member States together are better able to benefit from the lessons from the past about improvement of the policy .
And secondly , a new definition of management and financial responsibilities , whereby the Commission will concentrate on cooperation with the Member States towards the strategic aims and to concur with them in an agreement which binds both parties .
This means more operational and financial responsibility will be left to the Member States , and for that it is necessary , as a guarantee of the interest of the Union in its entirety that a wide spectrum of interested groups takes part in the decision-making process .
Finally , on behalf of the European Commission I would like to thank the Social Affairs Committee and in particular Mrs Jöns for their support of the main points of the Commission 's own proposals .
As I said , there are a few small detailed points on which the Commission would be delighted to exchange ideas once we have entered the phase during which our detailed proposals will be prepared .
But generally speaking , I believe that this report is an important step on the road to the development of a new vision for the European social fund during the first years of the new millennium .
Thank you very much Commissioner van den Broek .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , just a brief statement .
It is about the Minutes from the day before yesterday .
I apologize , but so as not to trouble our colleagues , Mr Pirker and I handed in a written note at the front during the vote to the effect that our voting machines were not working during the vote on the climate conference .
I reported this at the front .
I was told it would be recorded but it has not been recorded .
I would ask for clarification as otherwise I will not be able to sort these things out in writing but will have to rise to speak as some other colleagues have , but that takes up a lot of time .
Very well , Mr Posselt .
The correction will be made .
Madam President , it is with some sadness that I rise this morning to comment on yesterday 's Minutes .
Yesterday I rose to refer to an inaccuracy which had seemingly occurred with my colleague , Mr Macartney , regarding an error , he claims , in translation .
Yesterday he claimed that in the original version of an amendment he had put down the words ' English beef ' which had been translated in to ' British beef ' .
This side of the House has now seen the original transcript which was submitted by his group .
It quite clearly said ' British beef ' .
I do not know whether Mr Macartney is a closet vegetarian and is trying to ban all British beef , but I suspect in this case he has been rumbled .
Really , he should be apologizing to this House for misleading it and being economical with the truth .
Madam President , it gives me no pleasure either , to have to respond to that kind of comment .
I am not a closet vegetarian but I am a bit of a linguist .
I am also very careful when I sign amendments that I know what I am signing .
Sessional services can confirm that the original amendment deposited by our group used the phrase ' viande anglaise ' .
What happened subsequently I am not responsible for , but we have confirmed it with Mr David Martin , who was in the chair at the time .
Sessional services can confirm that .
I hope we can put an end to this matter which is quite ridiculous .
Anyway , Mr Macartney , we are now on the adoption of the Minutes .
I am speaking both to you and to Mr Miller .
So we will make sure that the points made by each speaker have been correctly set down .
( The Minutes were approved )
Votes
Madam President , I should like to make a short statement concerning my report .
Those who were present during the debate last night will have heard why the Commission is not prepared to accept the draft amendments relating to the Treaty of Amsterdam which have now been adopted by the Christian Democrats .
I should like to state again quite clearly that my group has not given its assent to these draft amendments because the treaty has not yet been ratified and we cannot refer back to it .
It is a pity that they have now been included in the report because that is what the majority wanted .
But we have to go along with it .
It has happened .
However I should again like to stress that my group cannot accept a situation where we are referring back to something that is not yet in force .
Madam President , I heard you give some names out of people who are going to make explanations of vote , but they are not here .
Can you check that all the Members whose names you read out for explanations of vote are present ?
Otherwise , it has to be an explanation of non-vote .
Yes , you are quite right .
Mr Vanhecke is here , and has just informed us that he will make his explanation of vote in writing .
Mr Lindqvist has also just informed us that it will be in writing .
Mr Holm and Mr Wibe are here .
Everybody is here .
That 's excellent !
Congratulations everyone - especially since you are making your explanations of vote in writing .
I think that next time you should do it orally , so that everyone will know that you are here .
It is a good thing that refugee problems are being solved worldwide and that refugees can be dispersed among several countries .
I am concerned that a common EU policy on refugees , asylum and visas may mean a tougher refugee policy and higher walls being built against the outside world .
I am extremely concerned that the requirement made in Amendment No 3 to the report - that the Member States should gradually establish a uniform and concerted procedure with regard to asylum , immigration and the crossing of Member States & # x02BC ; external frontiers - will result in the European Union building even higher walls against the outside world and make it even harder for political refugees to find sanctuary with us .
I do not support the requirement that the EU should , through a process of supranationality , be responsible for the areas of asylum and immigration .
I believe this is a question that it is most appropriate to settle at national level .
However , I am , of course , in favour of intergovernmental cooperation within this area .
The aim of this programme - to promote the cooperation between the competent authorities in the Member States - is therefore laudable .
It is also a good thing that cooperation with the central and eastern european countries is being extended .
Wheeled vehicles
The next item is the recommendation ( A4-0342 / 97 ) by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the draft Council Decision with a view to accession by the European Community to the Agreement of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe concerning the adoption of uniform technical prescriptions for wheeled vehicles , equipment and parts which can be fitted to and / or be used on wheeled vehicles and the conditions for reciprocal recognition of approvals granted on the basis of these prescriptions ( Revised 1958 Agreement ) ( 9868 / 97 - C4-0467 / 97-96 / 0006 ( AVC ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the agreement has a long title but it is also a radically altered agreement that we will hopefully be adopting today .
The Committee on External Economic Relations recommends that you accept the recommendation .
We accepted the report as long ago as November of last year .
However , in early January the Council informed us that it wished to withdraw its request for assent to enable the Commission 's proposal to be revised and presented again .
The plan was successful .
The report that is now before us has been much improved .
What is the 1958 Agreement of the United Nations Economic Committee for Europe about ?
In 1958 some of the countries represented in the United Nations Economic Committee for Europe concluded an agreement on the adoption of uniform conditions for the approval of motor vehicle parts and equipment .
I know that Mr Mombaur and Mr Malangré welcome this enthusiastically .
To be more precise , it is about the mutual recognition between the contracting parties of type-approvals for automobiles which have been manufactured in accordance with these standards .
The Commission 's proposal provides that the European Community as well as its individual Member States should now accede to this UN agreement .
I am very pleased about this as it makes clear that the European Union is also acceding to international agreements to a much greater extent and is entitled to vote as a legal entity .
However , for legal reasons it is the European Community and not the European Union which is to be the party to the agreement as the EU , unlike the EC , does not have an international legal personality .
The economic significance of such an agreement to the European motor industry is self-evident .
Since the agreement came into being , about 100 specific provisions have been adopted , encompassing all items of equipment and parts used in motor vehicles .
A revised version has been made necessary , among other things , by the completion of the European single market .
It has also become clear that a set of internationally recognized legal structures is required as a result of the speed of technological advances in the motor industry and increasing international trade links .
The present proposal differs from the first one in three respects .
First , the role of the members after the EC 's accession to the agreement is described in detail .
Second , article 100a is being added as a further legal principle to the European Community 's accession to the amended agreement .
Third , an appendix , Appendix 3 , which provides the practical details of the Community 's and Member States ' participation in the agreement is being added to the resolution on contributions .
In particular this motion makes it easier for us to give our assent today than a year ago as this appendix contains the request which we made jointly with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy to the Commission , to the effect that the latter should inform Parliament in good time before the formal tabling of proposals for enacting the new arrangements .
In this way Parliament can make its wishes known at this early stage .
This procedure for the provision of information has been promised by Commissioner Bangemann and confirmed in writing .
Mr Bangemann keeps his promises !
This promise is now a part of the formal legal document and its quality has therefore appreciated .
To enshrine the arrangements in Community law the codecision procedure must be applied , in other words Parliament has to give its assent .
This guarantees our consultation rights , especially if we take into account the information procedure already mentioned .
Strengthening this agreement by means of a streamlined decision-making process and the participation of the EC as a member will significantly enhance its international significance .
Other major vehicle manufacturers will accede to the agreement sooner or later .
This will further improve the sales opportunities for the European industry and the world market .
We are giving our assent to an agreement which is necessary and worthwhile for Europe .
Madam President , I am grateful to the rapporteur for giving us the technical explanation behind this report .
The recommendation stems from one acknowledgment : that a widely recognized body of international rules was required in the field of motor-vehicle type-approval .
We believe that if our aim is to globalize not only the market in all kinds of goods , we should encourage international work-sharing to the profit of poorer economies and ourselves .
But we also want the globalization of human rights , social standards and respect for the environment .
Therefore , we have an interest in keeping this process working through internationally binding legal structures in order to build up confidence , reliability and transparency in economic factors and mutual respect worldwide .
That is why we support this report .
I have to say that after some initial reservations , I am persuaded by the rapporteur that Parliament 's place in the scheme of things is ensured , and I am grateful for the work Mr Kittelmann has done on that .
I only hope that his confidence bears fruit in the months and years to come .
Madam President , this agreement , which dates back to 1958 , might seem a little out-of-date , but with the amendments made by our rapporteur and the Commission , we can certainly accept it and say that it still applies .
This is also proved by the application made over this period of time : over 100 specific regulations have been applied without any major problems .
I wish to point out the importance of this revised agreement to the European motor industry and employment .
In the global competition between car manufacturers , particularly between European and American manufacturers , owing to the commercial penetration of the emerging new markets , the adoption of common , uniform technical standards for cars is all the more necessary , particularly as it allows us to define the parameters for a healthy and balanced competition ; we also know how much this discipline is needed in many other fields .
However , we should take into account the fact that the European Union 's acceptance of the revised 1958 Agreement could lead some countries , such as Japan , Korea , China , South Africa and India , and emergent countries which will be competing in the future , which have shown an interest or even the intention of accepting the agreement , to take the final step , but to do so in the direction we want .
Finally , in this scenario , the EU 's acceptance of the revised agreement is vitally important to the European motor industry , which has started a series of joint ventures in many emergent countries .
Acceptance would permit a faster adoption of the entire subject , but above all would allow the European motor industry to withstand the invasion of American industry , which has not been the case other fields .
Madam President , Mr Kittelmann , imagine that you are a car manufacturer and are endeavouring to obtain approval for a new model of car .
Let us also assume that in your view it is a very economical model even though it does not quite pass the elk test in some safety aspects .
The EC 's accession to the ECE Agreement would be like manna from heaven for you !
The Committee on Industrial Policy is of the opinion that accession by the EU would substantially reduce the scope of the codecision procedure in such sensitive areas as safety and environmental legislation and that the EU would be allowing its legislative powers to be exercised by an organization whose standards are less stringent . The rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs said that the Treaty of Rome provided for the highest possible level of environmental and consumer protection , whereas such standards were lacking from the ECE Agreement .
It is a bad joke to believe the EP could prevent a sub-standard car , which is on the home straight having gone through the whole process , from being approved by withholding its assent , in other words a mere yes or no , as it lacks the necessary leverage to maintain a meaningful position , in other words codecision powers .
In order to take account of the reservations expressed by the committees that were asked for an opinion , the Commission has undertaken to provide the EP with advance information in confidence .
I have to admit , that is a nice gesture .
But why should an emergency happen in any case , particularly with regard to safety and the environment ?
The EC 's accession obeys the logic of finding faster and better ways of penetrating world markets and forcing other countries to accede to the ECE Agreement .
So why should we make the entrance fee more expensive ?
And I suggest that we do not go rushing in first and then hope things get better .
Instead we should be calling upon the responsible authorities to reform the ECE procedure first to benefit the environment , society and safety and then we could talk about acceding to the ECE vehicle type-approval system .
In that case we would certainly drop our objections , quite definitely .
I just hope we do not get an elephant test sometime !
Madam President , before I start I would like to get something off my chest about the procedure in the Committee on External Economic Relations , which voted hastily on this report on 21 October .
The fact that six out of the fourteen members present abstained shows their great unhappiness about the state of affairs .
The report was put on the agenda one working day before the meeting , and the Members did not receive the amended agenda until the day of the meeting .
The report was not available until the meeting itself .
An in-depth debate , let alone a wellconsidered opinion on this report , was therefore impossible .
This procedure should certainly not be repeated in the future .
All this does not detract from our appreciation of the rapporteur 's work .
We agree with him that , for various reasons , it is important that the EC enters the ECE agreement .
Growing international trade and increased competition from the Japanese and Korean car industry means the European industry needs to be given a fair chance .
By removing technical obstacles , exports from EC countries can be increased .
Worldwide participation in this agreement is extremely desirable , and the USA in particular should take part .
Despite US self certification , I hope that the European Commission will continue to work for that country and others to sign up .
Now that the internal market is complete , it is all the more important that community regulation and ECE regulations are geared to each other .
We would like to insist that the EC makes every effort to incorporate the approved community protection level into ECE regulation .
We are pleased that the risk that entry to the ECE would lower this protection level seems to have been averted .
Now that the Council has added article 100A to the legal foundation , we trust that health , security and environmental protection will continue to be guaranteed .
The EC can take care of this , because it will be given an absolute majority in ECE decision-making , and after further enlargement will retain a minority veto .
We hope that entry will lead to a more balanced protection of interest .
The interests of the environment , of consumers and of traffic safety , as well the interests of car manufactures in the Member States should be considered .
A Community approach has the added advantage that the interests of the national car industry will not lead to unilateral lowering of the protection level .
As far as internal aspects are concerned , the position of the European Parliament is interesting .
While as yet Parliament has no right of consultation with respect to manufacturing requirements and the approval of vehicles , after entry this will be replaced by the approval procedure for new ECE regulations .
As far as we are concerned this means that parliamentary control has been guaranteed .
Furthermore , now that we have been promised that the European Parliament will be kept completely informed by means of the modus vivendi procedure , we agree with the conclusion of the rapporteur that involvement of the European Parliament after entry to the ECE agreement has been guaranteed .
I am less convinced about the involvement of the Member States .
We share the Council 's criticism on the European Commission 's claim to intervene at every stage of the ECE negotiations .
Is it true that under the Council 's decision the European Commission will act on behalf of the EC , while Member States will be able to speak in the specialist groups ?
Entry into this agreement shows that the powers of the EC stretch a long way in the international arena .
The rapporteur has rightly tested this against the subsidiarity principle , giving a great deal of weight to the increasing globalization of trade and investments .
We agree with him that joint action by the Member States in the ECE framework has clear added value .
Madam President , the Commission first wishes to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Kittelmann , on the excellent report on this proposed decision .
The report provides a detailed analysis of the content and internal procedure to be followed , from the time the European Community becomes a contracting party to this agreement .
From a political and economic point of view , I would simply like to point out the growing importance of the development in international harmonization , not only with regard to industry but also from the consumers ' point of view .
I think that , from this point of view , those who have expressed concern in this House will find this instrument provides a further guarantee , because I think that multilateral harmonization alone can provide a further guarantee in a global market .
The point the Commission wishes to make , but which has already been presented in detail by the rapporteur , Mr Kittelmann , relates to the procedure , and is a point that has raised doubts in this House .
To be more precise , the Commission wishes to confirm that , before voting in favour of the adoption of a draft regulation or a draft amendment , the Community should ask the European Parliament for its favourable opinion in the event of new regulations or in the event of existing regulations that are adapted to technical progress , and submit draft amendments to the European Parliament in good time for the current procedure to be adopted at committee level .
The Commission will also inform the European Parliament of all the stages in the procedure , particularly with regard to drawing up the work programme and the progress in work done .
In the sensitive sectors , such as that of polluting agents and noise emissions , the Council and the Commission have agreed , in the context of a declaration set out in the Council documents , that the adoption of measures in these sectors should take place , at Community level , in accordance with the provisions of articles 100a and 189b and that the procedure for the adoption of an amendment to a regulation will only take place after completing that process .
In this sense , the Commission has agreed to ensure that the European Parliament is involved in all stages of the procedure and in the provision of full and correct information .
All participants should make their contribution so that this procedure can be carried out effectively .
From this point of view , in the clear legal transition from joint decisions to other forms of cooperation , as required by this type of treaty , I think the Commission has paid attention to the involvement of the European Parliament , particularly with regard to the sensitive issues which , in my own sphere , relate to consumers ' rights , pollution and noise .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the recommendation by Mr Kittelmann .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Like Peter Kittelmann , I think that we should sign this agreement .
The function of these agreements is to ensure fair competition in a market that is becoming more and more internationalized .
To do that , we must ensure that commitments made by third countries are respected .
I could not accept - and the industry could not stand - unilateral implementation by the European Union of the various agreements that have been signed .
The creation of the WTO , in 1994 , will only have been worthwhile if it is able to ensure that the rules enacted are implemented .
In order to do so effectively , it now appears necessary to reinforce the legal instruments .
There are many examples proving unfair competition by some of our partners .
These irregularities , Europe 's reactions to which often seem timid , have had serious consequences in every industrial sector .
Everyone can think of examples .
The European Union can sign any number of agreements , but must remain vigilant as to their actual implementation by all . Europe must fulfil its commitments .
However , it would be prejudicial to anticipate their implementation and put them into practice before our competitors .
Cinema and audiovisual productions
The next item is the joint debate on the following six oral questions :
B4-0902 / 97 , by Mrs Guinebertière , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the Guarantee Fund to encourage cinema and audiovisual productions ; -B4-0903 / 97 , by Mr Monfils and Mrs Ryynanen , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the Guarantee Fund to encourage cinema and audiovisual productions ; -B4-0904 / 97 , by Mrs Pailler , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the Guarantee Fund to encourage cinema and audiovisual productions ; -B4-0905 / 97 , by Mrs Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the Guarantee Fund to encourage cinema and audiovisual productions ; -B4-0906 / 97 , by Mr Ripa di Meana , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the Guarantee Fund to encourage cinema and audiovisual productions ; -B4-0907 / 97 , by Mrs Pack , Mr Pex and Mr Perry , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the Guarantee Fund to encourage cinema and audiovisual productions .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , you will recall that on 22 October 1996 , the European Parliament decided in favour of the creation of a guarantee fund to encourage cinema and audiovisual productions .
This financial instrument was intended to encourage the banks and financial institutions which provide financing in the sector to increase their activities to promote cinema production , in particular by providing a partial guarantee for loans offered to producers .
Under the Irish Presidency , the Council meeting of 16 December did not accept the proposal , but adopted the idea of a 5-year experimental phase , basing its credibility on a study provided by the EIF , which provided guarantees with regard to the management of the fund .
Under the Luxembourg Presidency , the Council of Ministers for Cultural Affairs is due to reconsider a compromise proposal .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on this subject , I have been able to gauge the expectations of professionals , both in the audiovisual industry and in the financial sector .
The catalyst effect of the guarantee fund would not only make it possible to develop more productions , it would also make it possible to produce catalogues , the consumption of which is increasing because of the development of the market for new services .
All the data that we analyze in this field highlights two situations .
The first is that the development of numerous channels and the use of digital image transmission are continually increasing , and more in Europe than elsewhere , according to forecasts for 1995 / 2005 .
The growth of the overall income of the sector is estimated at an average of over 69 % .
And films form an integral part of an industrial sector that is expanding daily , in particular with regard to training , education , information , trade , etc .
The growth in the consumption of these productions is therefore extremely high .
The second situation is the financial deficit with regard to audiovisual cultural exchanges between the European Union and the United States , which now amounts to 6 billion dollars to the detriment of the European Union , and unfortunately , represents 250 , 000 jobs .
At the time of the Luxembourg Employment Summit , at a time when every Member State is ashamed of its unemployment level , we politicians , in a position of responsibility , must do everything we can to give the sector the means to let those new jobs , which are often high-tech , come into existence .
I am sure that the Commission , like the European Parliament , is very receptive to this argument , and aware of this potential source of jobs .
I am therefore asking the Commission to help us to confront the Council , as I believe that together we can go quite a long way ; the instrument would complement the tools of European audiovisual policy which , together with the Television without Frontiers Directive and the Media programme , have already enabled the profession to become more structured , and can be measured against the continual increase in demand for cinema productions .
I should therefore like to thank the Commission for any support it can give us with regard to this matter .
Madam President , as Mrs Guinebertière said , the guarantee fund is nothing new to the European Parliament ; its creation was indeed proposed more than a year ago , and the system is both simple and inexpensive , yet extremely useful to the development of audiovisual production .
So much is said about the link between culture and economics , that now is the time to show that actions speak louder than words .
Cultural industries create jobs , which was proved long ago , so it is sensible to encourage the private sector to invest in them .
But , as every audiovisual product is a prototype , the public authorities must accept responsibility for their share of the risk in subsidizing the cinema .
The cinema is not only a source of jobs it is also the artistic expression of our similarities and differences and is a powerful lever of cultural policy .
Increasing the subsidies given to the cinema means enabling European people to see , in the cinema or on the television , a reflection of their own identity , instead of being continually alienated by a foreign culture .
For all these reasons , the guarantee fund seems to me to be a particularly appropriate additional tool for the development of European cinema production .
Madam President , in Amsterdam , the Member States did not want culture to gain importance , and many Members of the House consider article 128 to be very inadequate .
The Culture Ministers now have an opportunity , in part , to correct that mistake , by finally giving the go-ahead for the creation of the guarantee fund .
Madam President , in 1988 the European Union 's deficit on cultural trade in cinema , television and video productions with the United States amounted to $ 2.1 billion .
By 1995 , that deficit had more than tripled , to $ 6.8 billion .
Indeed , the high growth in the audiovisual sector in Europe , with the creation of new channels , is mainly benefitting the United States .
The percentage of American films shown in European cinemas is still increasing and has reached 80 % .
These figures clearly show that the United States has taken the measure of the issues at stake in the cinema and the audiovisual industry , which are commercial and political issues .
The European Union needs to fight against American domination in order , on the one hand , to stop the influx of American productions , and on the other , to defend and develop its own cinema and television productions .
This is a real issue of civilization .
By mobilizing professionals from the cultural world , and relaying their words in this House , we managed to impose the acceptance of the cultural exception principle , in the GATT negotiations , which recognizes the fact that cultural works are not commodities .
It is even more necessary for this principle to be defended today .
It must be defended during the present negotiations on the multilateral agreement on investments , within the framework of the OECD , from which the cinema , television and intellectual property should be excluded , but also by introducing and promoting suitable , effective , legal and financial instruments .
The guarantee fund , which would complement the Media programme , despite its mandatory limits and financial inadequacies , would effectively help to encourage the production and distribution of cultural productions originating in the Member States .
On 22 October 1996 , the European Parliament adopted the Commission 's proposal and reinforced it with numerous amendments .
I consider it unfortunate that the Council has not yet reached an agreement , because of the opposition of some Member States .
The main aim of this debate and the resolution tabled by my group is to suggest to the Council of Culture Ministers that its meeting on 24 November should end in an agreement .
If the recent proposals of the European Federation of Audiovisual Film Makers are taken into consideration , it may be possible unlock the situation .
By adopting the guarantee fund , the Council would show its determination to protect the cultures of European countries and to stand up to the economic and cultural domination of the United States .
Madam President , in a few days ' time , the Culture Council will decide whether to create a guarantee fund to promote audiovisual production .
This question is not entirely new , as the Council has blocked this decision , which is however fundamental , since 1996 .
We are now starting to hope that the Council will finally let actions speak louder than words .
Let me explain .
Now that , for the first time , the Member States of the European Union are going to meet to define a common strategy with regard to employment , we should remember that the audiovisual market is expanding rapidly .
It represents a potential source of two million jobs .
Furthermore , it is a high-tech sector , at the centre of very important technological changes : the change-over to the digital system , the 16 / 9th , necessitate the development of a dynamic programme industry , if we do not want yet again to trail behind the United States and to put our cultural identity in danger .
In this respect , we can see that the Americans , whose cultural invasion we rightly dread , have developed an audiovisual industry which in export terms , is larger than their car and pharmaceutical industries put together .
We can but dream of a similar situation in Europe .
The guarantee fund would act as a booster , and would stimulate investment in this sector , where the risks are high , but without however - and this should be emphasized - placing a long-term burden on the European Union 's budget .
It is even more discouraging to see the guarantee fund blocked , because the reduction in the budgetary envelope of Media II was to have been compensated by its creation .
Yet again , it is the European audiovisual industry , which will be the loser , and it is even possible to say today that it has once again been sacrificed to the Council 's unanimity rule .
Madam President , one request and two questions .
We are asking for a guarantee that the fund will not privilege mass production but will favour , in particular , joint production for producers in countries with a small linguistic area , thereby disseminating it to citizens of the European Union .
We have two questions for the Commission .
Is it familiar with the text of the commitment assumed by the Luxembourgian Presidency and , if so , what is its position in that connection ?
Finally , do you think the Culture Council of 24 November could finally reach an agreement on the establishment of the fund ?
Madam President , while writing my speech for today 's debate , I reread Mrs Guinebertière 's remarkable report , written almost a year ago today , together with a lecture by Commissioner Ortega , recently given in Munich .
When thinking about this problem , one cannot help being struck by a number of figures , which indicate the scale of the problem .
Several speakers have mentioned them .
We , in Europe , have the luck to have an audiovisual market which is expanding more quickly than anywhere else in the world , and its prospects for expansion will double over the next ten years .
However , although we are busy creating a large single market , and four of the ten largest multinational communications companies in the world are European , for the time being , the European companies ' share of their own market does not even amount to one third of the total income of the audiovisual sector .
This means that foreign companies are earning two thirds of the income in our own market .
With regard to employment , the situation is unfortunately more serious that Mrs Guinebertière said , because she only mentioned the annual impact of the commercial deficit .
If we compare employment in the United States for the whole of the audiovisual sector , which amounts to over 2.6 million workers , and in the European Community , where it only reaches 1.8 million , we have a shortfall of nearly one million jobs in the cultural sector .
That is why I think the appeal we are making today to the Council has very great significance .
I am not amongst those who believe , like the previous speaker , that the cultural exception is the be-all and end-all .
I have also been pleased to see several non-French speakers take the floor , because I do not want culture to be assimilated with the French language .
I am not one of those people who think that a system of quotas and productions , replacing some American productions with European productions , is the be-all and end-all .
I believe that the future of the European audiovisual industry lies in quality , because that represents investment and investment must be stimulated .
The guarantee fund mechanism is an extraordinarily simple and effective mechanism .
A modest basic grant , a system of loans or security under market conditions - which is certainly not a convoluted bureaucratic mechanism - can have a significant leverage effect .
The guarantee fund which professionals in the industry want has been proposed by the European Commission and is supported by the European Parliament , following Mrs Guinebertière 's lead .
Nothing remains but for the Council , or within the Council , one Member State in particular , to reach a decision .
Could that Member State , the champion of liberalism , listen to those in favour of the development of Europe today , and say " yes ' on 24 November ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I used to be the rapporteur for the Green Paper on support for the audio-visual production industry in Europe and that was a long time ago .
We set to work on three major instruments which were to provide this support , the Television Directive which has since been abandoned , the Media II programme which is going well and the European guarantee fund with which we are unable to make any progress as it has been blocked by the Council .
But this would be an essential requirement for achieving competitiveness and marketability to take on foreign competition .
We can no longer accept the promotion of small but beautifully formed arts productions , most of which are never seen in any cinema or broadcast on any television channel .
In Germany only every second cinema film reaches a cinema in any case .
They do not even make it to small arts cinemas .
This is the disadvantage of flawed promotion and it is therefore extremely regrettable that as far as I am aware it is actually Germany that is doing the blocking in the Council .
I very much hope that we can make use of the technical knowledge of film-makers , producers , bankers , media institutes and last but not least the film foundations and reach a different decision than previously .
Only in this way will it be possible to exploit the opportunities which have been described here and promote great cinema , mainly in the form of coproductions , of course , which is now the norm in any case .
We shall only have film in coproduction with television , if it is to be competitive .
It is a major growth market .
In the USA it is usual to provide venture capital , but unfortunately not in Europe .
We wanted to use this guarantee fund to make up for this deficiency and if we want fine words to become reality it will depend on this guarantee fund also becoming reality .
I hope the Commission will be able to exert sufficient pressure to achieve this goal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we really have to get down to brass tacks here .
In fact , what it is all about is the development of an industry which is of great significance for the future and constitutes in its variety and diversity what distinguishes the European Union from the other large blocks that exist in the world : its diversity , its variety and its creativity .
It is therefore important that the Guarantee Fund should take account of the minority languages and small-scale productions .
Small productions , Mrs Junker , do not necessarily have to be an unmarketable investment . That is an issue which has to be addressed at the same time .
Of course we need coproduction , of course we need promotion and of course we need the guarantee fund , because that is the instrument which is potentially viable and effective now , while many other decisions have fallen by the wayside .
In my opinion we also have to address the Member States like Germany which are keeping their feet on the brakes in this respect .
It is not right for a country to maintain that it leads the way in European development and then put a block on all the major portfolios .
Employment policy , audiovisual policy , the list is endless .
This has to be tackled .

Madam President , like Mr Deprez , I too have reread the report written by Mrs Guinebertière last year , and I should like to quote from it , because I could not express it better myself . " There must be an alternative to a purely American view of the world . '
I am in complete agreement with this way of describing the problem and support all the requests which have been made by various speakers , to unlock the guarantee fund project , but if you do not mind , I should like to speak in terms of general policy , because it is too often forgotten that the cultural sector is perhaps the most privileged area in which political opinions can be expressed .
We are in the habit of saying to ourselves that , as far as the past is concerned , our European project is based on a common history and traditions . That is true .
As far as the present is concerned , it is true that it is based on a foundation of common values forged by our history , but as far as the future is concerned , it has to be said that literary , cinema , artistic and audiovisual creation will surely be our most important tools for the exploration of that future horizon , which we call " European humanism ' .
I believe that the problem is much more extensive , and is perhaps related to the crisis in the values of universalism , which are progressively becoming corrupted .
For I do not believe that democracy can be reduced to a vague ideology of human rights .
I do not believe that political liberalism is simply materialism without principles .
I do not believe that international exchanges can be reduced to globalization which has no respect for people , and I do not believe that universalism can be reduced to uniformity .
The loss of a sense of values in universalism is the direct cause of the increase in what must be called - for lack of a better word - ' identity-ism ' , ethnicism , tribalism and the most medieval of religiosity .
When we have surrendered completely to an international wave of pseudo-culture , supported by unprecedented financial capabilities , reproduced by communications tools which have become imperative , and sapped by its own success , when , finally , the most extreme form of liberalism has given us the freedom to choose between Pepsi and Coca-Cola , we must not be surprised to see millions of human beings seek a different future by violently affirming their own identities .
Mrs Ainardi mentioned issues of civilization .
I do believe in the main , that in order to defend European individuality and diversity , the fight we must fight is the modern equivalent of civilization 's struggle against barbarity .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
Madam President , I will not go down the road of religiosity followed by the last speaker .
I would simply say to Mrs Guinebertière , on my part also - coming from the Anglo-Saxon world and declaring my interest as someone who has worked in the audiovisual sector now for 35 years - ' stick it out , Mrs Guinebertière ' .
You must never , never give up on this one .
I want to say why .
It is not because I believe this proposal is without dangers and difficulties .
The reluctance some countries have expressed in Council - and certainly my country is one of them - lie in the fact that there is a fear of waste .
There is a fear that a self-regarding circle of cultural elites would appropriate this money and make films which no-one would see .
I reject that entirely .
I think that if you have a guarantee fund effectively put together it should be a partnership between the private and the public sector , it should be on the basis of loans , not gifts , and it should be on the basis of a process whereby it can be audited and accounted for over a five-year period .
Let us see after that whether it works or not .
In my opinion it will work and I say that on the basis of my own experience of the television and film industry .
Many small films , and not so much in the English-speaking world but certainly in the smaller countries of Europe , simply do not get off the ground in spite of the immense cultural impact they would have because of the difficulty of financing .
They cannot attract the investment that is needed .
Banks , with a long history behind them of reluctance and scepticism in this field , simply will not go with this type of investment .
The only way they can be encouraged is if they themselves have some sort of secondary guarantee .
The whole purpose of the guarantee fund was intended to do that .
Any of us who have a passion for quality in this field ought to accept that with the enormous proliferation of television in the future the staple diet there ought to be the secondary market for films which will be made in increasing numbers .
Otherwise you will have trash television seeping back like the backflow in a sewage system to affect the cinema industry as well .
I would like to hear from the Commission if it is with us emphatically express the view that Parliament has expressed and the Committee on Culture has expressed in this matter , not just over the past months , but over years , whatever the temporary blockage in the Council may be .
Madam President , as Parliament knows , throughout this period , the Commission has played a part in the process which followed the proposal .
A budget of ECU 90 million was initially allocated to the guarantee fund referred to in the proposal .
Then , the proposal met with the strongest possible resistance from the other Community institution .
To such an extent that the compromise proposed by the Irish Presidency , amounting to ECU 60 million , did not even have a chance to be unanimously approved .
To answer Mr Ripa Di Meana 's question , the Luxembourg Presidency has now proposed ECU 30 million as another compromise , which is in fact , the lowest common denominator and , according to the Commission , at least has the merit of coherence , inasmuch as this quite large reduction in the total allocation , is the result of the limitation of the action to the cinema industry , and to small and medium budget productions .
That is , in fact , the incentive we wish to provide , as it is in fact small and medium budget productions or coproductions which do not have access to private market loans , except at a very high cost .
Furthermore , as Parliament knows , the European Investment Bank cannot finance such small and medium budget productions , as the minimum size of the loans it provides is ECU 25 million .
That is therefore something completely different .
Having said that , the Commission agrees with Parliament 's concern , not only with regard to the cultural aspect and the importance of the diversification of cultures , but also with regard to employment .
Furthermore , it may not be a coincidence , and it may be fortunate , that we are discussing this report at a time when a big summit meeting is in fact taking place in Luxembourg on employment .
Amongst all the information which has been provided here by other speakers , there is one fact I should like to emphasize . During the 1990s , the American audiovisual sector has generated more jobs than the car , hotel and pharmaceutical industries put together .
For the above reasons , together with all the other very interesting information that Members of Parliament have provided , the Commission is therefore going to exert as much pressure as possible at the Council meeting next Monday , so that the common minimum can finally be approved .
Mr Elchlepp has a question for the Commission .
Madam President , I wanted to ask the Commissioner another question .
If the improved quality of the European film market is supposed to win back market share for the Europeans - and we have heard about the order of magnitude involved today - will ECU 20 million bring about a reversal of the trend ?
How would you assess the situation ?
From a financial point of view , does the order of magnitude involved not make this a token gesture ?
What can you actually do with 30 million to bring about the reversal of the trend in film production ?
Can you tell me what your experience is in this regard , your assessment of the situation ?
I understand Mr Elchlepp 's concern .
The Commission 's initial proposal was indeed ECU 90 million .
Nevertheless , we are now in a situation in which , with ECU 30 million , that is , with the scope restricted to small and medium budget productions , in the Commission 's opinion we can take the opportunity of giving it some value as a lever , the value of at least starting the procedure .
In that respect , the question is whether or not half a loaf is better than no bread , and in some ways , you might think that it is not worth it .
The Commission , on the other hand , considers that even if the budget is small , the fact that it exists is important , because it will open the door to the procedure and will at least provide some leverage for , let us hope , a more adequate initiative in the future in the field of audiovisual production .
We note the enthusiastic support of the Commission and Mrs Bonino , and thank her for it .
The joint debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote and I put to the vote a joint motion for a resolution on behalf of seven political groups .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Antarctic fisheries
The next item is the report ( A4-0315 / 97 ) by Ms McKenna , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation laying down certain conservation and control measures applicable to fishing activities in the Antarctic and replacing Regulation ( EC ) No 2113 / 96 of 25 October 1996 ( COM ( 97 ) 0213 - C4-0285 / 97-97 / 0135 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources ( CCAMLR ) is the management body responsible for fisheries in the Antarctic Ocean , excluding marine mammals .
The Commission , which includes seven Member States of the European Union , met on 21 October and continued its work until 2 November in Hobart , Australia . The decisions taken at that meeting form the basis of for the present Commission proposal .
The measures are generally applicable within the scope of the CCAMLR and have been the object of several amendments including , in particular , quota changes to existing and new fisheries .
Several other relatively minor changes were made , such as to the internal EU procedure for authorizing a fishery , increased observer coverage , restrictions on the method of disposal of plastic wastes from fishing vessels and to the technical description of required longline fishing equipment to avoid seabird bycatch .
Many of the decisions taken during the course of the meeting relate to the opening of nine new fisheries and mainlyinvolve the toothfish .
The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources is proud of its conservation ethics and its support for a precautionary approach , and provides for a procedure to be completed prior to issuing the authorization for a new fishery .
Only after the CCAMLR has given its approval and the total allowable catches ( TACs ) have been adopted is it possible for the fishery to open .
During the year , however , the simultaneous opening of many fisheries was proposed in different regions close to the Antarctic continent .
In view of the considerable amount of illegal fishing and its gradual increase , several members of the CCAMLR recommended adopting an attitude of greater precaution when examining applications .
During the course of the year , the Scientific Committee recommended the adoption of significant TACs for these new fisheries , for volumes of 1 , 980 or 2 , 000 tonnes depending on the regions .
A further significant amendment related to the tooth fish TAC around the Heard and McDonald islands , which has increased to 12 times the amount , from 297 to 3 , 800 tonnes .
With regard to the fixing of TACs , the approach adopted by the CCAMLR in 1996 does not seem to be inspired by principles of precaution , in our opinion . It would appear that the organization is now subject to increasing pressures to authorize fishing before making rigorous scientific analyses and implementing adequate control measures .
Illegal fishing is without doubt the main problem faced by the CCAMLR .
It is a serious threat both to the fish stocks , currently and in particular the toothfish , and to the credibility of the Committee .
Illegal fishing takes various forms : fishing vessels authorized to fish , but committing violations ; fishing vessels flying the flag of a member country of the CCAMLR conducting their business with no fishing licence , thus committing a serious violation ; and , finally , fishing vessels flying the flag of non-member countries of the CCAMLR fishing without any restrictions .
The European Union is interested both in the actions of vessels of its Member States and in those of vessels flying the flag of other countries , but owned by EU companies .
The situation is so serious that , according to reliable estimates , the total illegal catches equal or even exceed the permitted catches .
Since in the rest of the world the stocks are the object of ever greater impoverishment and the fishing capacity is constantly increasing , it is quite likely that an ever increasing part of the fishing effort is concentrated on the Antarctic Ocean .
The situation is further exacerbated by the high price offered for the toothfish .
For many years , the CCAMLR was able to put its principles into practice .
However , to resolve the current crisis in the fishing sector recorded in other regions , characterized by depleted stocks , the CCAMLR will need a spirit of cooperation and determination , as the situation makes the adoption of far harder decisions than those approved during the 1996 meeting inevitable in the near future .
Madam President , I would like to thank my old friend Mr Ripa di Meana for his presentation this morning .
It raises an interesting point about parliamentary procedure .
The rapporteur is meant to represent the committee responsible for the report and here we have Mr Ripa di Meana representing a rapporteur who has not asked the committee itself to find a substitute .
It is wrong for a political group to present a report on behalf of a committee when it should be another representative of the committee itself .
Could this rule be clarified at some point by the presidency ?
Mr Provan , I think that there have been many precedents .
We can , of course , in future , consider how things should be done formally .
And if the procedure has not been observed , we can take steps to ensure that it is observed in future .
Having said that , I am sure you know that there have been many precedents , particularly with regard to reports submitted on Friday mornings , which cause problems when the rapporteur has other commitments .
Madam President , I am very sorry that Ms McKenna is not here today because I would have liked to have congratulated her personally on her very clear report on conservation and control measures for fishing in the Antarctic and the role played by the Commission for the conservation of Atlantic marine living resources .
She highlights this body 's role in managing fish stocks in the Antarctic and setting itself an ecological mandate .
She also underlines the problems of enforcement of its regulations in these very remote waters , with few resources for monitoring or policing .
The changes proposed by the CCAMLR include increased quotas of a number of species in different locations and new fisheries in a number of locations , most particularly for Patagonian toothfish in a number of places and a near doubling for krill in the southeast Indian Ocean .
The UK is to benefit from increased squid quota around South Georgia .
These very large increases in total allowable catches raise questions as to how far CCAMLR has just responded to requests from fishing nations for increased quotas and how far it has observed its own criteria for rigorous scientific analysis and control measures before opening up new fisheries .
European Union-owned vessels are involved , sailing both under their own flags and under the flags of third countries .
As fish stocks closer to Europe are depleted , Community fishermen are increasingly looking further afield for new fishing areas , like the Antarctic , to exploit .
High prices for toothfish encourage still further this trend to fish in areas where controls are difficult .
Some countries are more prepared to cooperate with CCAMLR than others as far as surveillance and monitoring are concerned .
The Party of European Socialists welcomes and supports the amendments from the committee which underline the need for an ecological basis for fish stock management in the Antarctic Sea and for all nations fishing in the area to take responsibility for control of their vessels and their catches .
Madam President , the fishing that goes on in a continent that feels so far away from where we are is unfortunately a good example of how easily we can forget the ecological effects of fishing .
Ms McKenna 's report describes the dangers to marine birds from fishing tackle .
Species are being threatened partly as a result of being trapped in fishing nets .
There are detailed codes of practice for trawlers to protect the welfare of marine birds , but whether or not these rules are being observed is another thing .
There is no legal enforcement in the region .
There are scientific reports on the situation but they very likely cannot be used in law against vessels which have violated the rules .
Methods of countering illegal fishing seem just as ineffective .
With general reference to the fisheries agreements , the means whereby the Council and the Commission have again reviewed the agreements are not acceptable .
The Council gives its support for , and the Commission implements , using its influence , economic decisions without lending an ear to any other budgetary authority .
The Committee on Budgets and the European Parliament have often opposed this kind of approach .
Negotiations to review the procedures should commence right away so that the European Parliament can be properly heard .
Could I go on to say that while the EU spends hundreds of millions a year on different fisheries agreements , though just a few southern Member States make use of them , I think it is legitimate to wonder why there is such a high cost-gain ratio relating to fishing opportunities achieved and the cost of economic assistance to be paid out of Community funds .
Madam President , earlier this year in February I was privileged enough to go to New Zealand to look at some of the fisheries management that takes place very successfully down there .
While I was there I was introduced indirectly to the Patagonian toothfish in that , at that time on South Island , there was a landing worth several million New Zealand dollars , which was the most valuable catch ever landed in those islands .
It was being sold at something like ECU 2 , 000 per tonne .
It was part of a process that has started over the last year of a large influx of major fishing fleets into the southern and the Antarctic area particularly targeting this species , which has become a fashionable food in the Far East , Japan in particular .
This is a species that has a very long life cycle and whose resources , once they have been depleted , will not recover , if at all , for many years .
The result is the destruction of another species in Antarctica and its waters , which has a very fragile environment and , ironically , where the world has decided to preserve the resources on land but has yet to make similar decisions in its oceans .
CCAMLR is an organization with an excellent remit in all sorts of ways , particularly environmentally .
However , as speakers have already said , there are huge difficulties in that area .
Firstly , it is a very large area of sea and ocean .
The CCAMLR effectively has no real power outside the EEZs of these scattered islands , many of which are under the sovereignty of European Union nations .
There are few controls even inside .
It is very difficult for South Africa , France , Britain or other nations to control fisheries within their own EEZs .
There is also the recurring difficulty on the oceans of the world of flags of convenience - vessels that are fishing very much for their own convenience and their own economic gain under the flag of some nation that has little control in terms of the fishing that takes place .
I believe there are a number of solutions which can start to be applied here .
It is not going to be easy but there are some that could be taken now .
Firstly , we need to ensure that CCAMLR increases its powers of enforcement and observation .
Although the NAFO organization in the North Atlantic is far from perfect , at least it has powers outside EEZs : powers of observation , enforcement and inspection that could be used similarly in the Southern Ocean .
It should also insist that we have observers on all these vessels to ensure that TACs are observed .
In fact , we need to move not just from TACs but to quotas so that we do not have the classic race-to-fish problem that we have here in our own waters .
There needs to be satellite control .
There needs to be tough action again on these flags of convenience .
I should like to ask the Commissioner , as many of the signatories of CCAMLR , together with the EU itself , are European nations , whether we could take a radical stance here to ensure that not only is the land-mass of Antarctica protected but that we take very tough measures to protect the Southern Ocean in terms of its own marine environment .
Only in this way will we save not just the Patagonian toothfish but whatever other species becomes the next fashion at the dinner tables of Tokyo and North America - and even Brussels as well .
This is a very serious question .
I thank the rapporteur for an excellent report and I would ask the Commissioner to ensure her own officials at future meetings of CCAMLR have this as a very high priority .
Madam President , first allow me to say a few words to Mr Ripa di Meana who has told us that he takes a very environmentally-sound position in response to this type of question .
I was therefore rather disappointed when he approached this report from a purely statistical point of view and only talked about quotas .
I believe this report deals with an extremely emotive subject because we simply must not forget that both the Arctic and the Antarctic , just like the rain forests to which Mr Kreissl-Dörfler is constantly referring , are fundamental elements for maintaining the overall ecological balance on this planet .
Thank God the Commission has slowly begun , to a certain extent , to regulate fishing in the Arctic from an environmental starting point in order to conserve living marine resources .
For one thing we should not forget that the further north and south we go from the equator , the slower is nature 's ability to regenerate .
Anyone who has been in the Arctic or Antarctic and seen the way dead fish and other dead animals can lie around for years before they rot away , anyone who has seen vehicle tracks there or an oil drum lying around and how many years , how many decades they remain there , will know that we are discussing a highly emotive issue , an issue which we cannot simply sweep under the carpet .
The themes addressed here , in particular illegal fishing , are of vital concern to us .
We must make an all-out effort right from the start to put a stop to this even though we know it is very difficult .
For this reason I am actually delighted that the report and the Commission 's proposals are going at a relatively tough pace .
I would hope that these words will be followed by actual deeds .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the current debate , on which I would like to raise a few points , deserves to be updated a little .
The report in question refers to the measures adopted in 1996 ; as recalled , a further meeting has since been held , as the CCAMLR procedure is reviewed every year and it is therefore of interest not only to report the conclusions of the meeting held in 1996 , but perhaps to update MEPs on the decisions taken in 1997 , which seem to me to be positive with regard to the concerns expressed here .
I will go through the points in order . With regard to illegal fishing , for the first time this year the CCAMLR accepted a proposal made by the Commission relating to vessels of non-contracting countries , consisting of the obligation for vessels engaged in fishing in the region to be subjected to inspection in the ports of the contracting parties of the CCAMLR , if they were trying to unload their catches .
This is one of the possible measures , also to establish the amount of illegal fishing of which we obviously have no basic proof .
This new compulsory measure can therefore serve not only as a deterrent but also to help us assess the extent of illegal fishing , which we all recognize exists .
If the vessels are not able to prove that their catches have not come from the CCAMLR region , they will be prohibited from unloading and transferring their catches in all the ports of the contracting parties .
A Commission proposal on satellite monitoring has also been accepted as a CCAMLR resolution .
This may present a technical problem , but it has been accepted with a resolution as a Commission proposal .
In addition , two more Commission proposals on procedural initiatives already adopted by the NAFO have been accepted , as Mr Teverson recalled , particularly with regard to the plan for observers and the plan for inspectors on board .
One problem remains , however : the number of inspectors is very small , owing to meteorological reasons as well as various kinds of technical reasons , but a possible plan for observers and inspectors has been introduced and exists in the CCAMLR .
It is now a question of encouraging the contracting parties to implement this plan that has now become possible .
With regard to one point raised by Mr Ripa di Meana , the Commission would like to point out that the measures adopted by the CCAMLR at the meeting this year comply fully and totally with the opinion held by the Scientific Committee .
This has been a major problem we have all faced before the Commission meeting but , at all events , the opinions of the Scientific Committees have been fully taken into consideration and reflect , better than we hoped , the precautionary approach supported by the Community which was only partially implemented at the meeting last year .
For all these reasons , we believe that , certainly in the fisheries as we know them , the best is always possible and even to be hoped for .
The Commission has to confirm that the last meeting held by the CCAMLR presented positive aspects for countries with a great interest in fishing in that region which obviously had a more resistant attitude .
Thank you for your speech , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Fishing off Guinea-Bissau , Ivory Coast , Equatorial Guinea and Cape Verde
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0300 / 97 by Mr Imaz San Miguel , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing possibilities and the financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau on fishing off the coast of Guinea-Bissau for the period 16 June 1997 to 15 June 2001 ( COM ( 97 ) 0395 - C4-0448 / 97-97 / 0205 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0365 / 97 by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing rights and financial contribution provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Ivory Coast on fishing off the coast of Ivory Coast for the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 2000 ( COM ( 97 ) 0520 - C4-0565 / 97-97 / 0269 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0364 / 97 by Mr Kindermann , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing , for the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 2000 , the fishing rights and financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea on fishing off the coast of Equatorial Guinea ( COM ( 97 ) 0522 - C4-0567 / 97-97 / 0268 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0363 / 97 by Mr Novo , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol defining , for the period 6 September 1997 to 5 September 2000 , the fishing rights and financial compensation provided for by the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Cape Verde on fishing off the coast of Cape Verde ( COM ( 97 ) 0521 - C4-0566 / 97-97 / 0270 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I shall be referring to the report on the agreement between the European Union and Guinea Bissau for the period June 1997 to June 2000 .
I should like begin with an appraisal of that agreement .
This is a positive agreement , which is in line with the philosophy of the Union 's fisheries agreements .
There is a shortfall of fish in the Community market , and fisheries agreements therefore help to balance supply and demand .
Furthermore , they provide the Community fleet - whose capacity is greater than the stocks available in Community waters - with fishing opportunities .
In this sense , they provide the Community fleet with economic alternatives and thereby contribute considerably to maintaining direct and indirect jobs - something which is important when an Employment Summit is being held in Luxembourg , and when we are all endeavouring to gear Community policies to job creation .
And they also provide local and regional communities which have genuine difficulties diversifying their economic fabric with an economic alternative , thereby ensuring their survival .
And fisheries agreements achieve all this at a relatively low cost to Community coffers , when compared with allocations from the Community budget to other areas of economic activity . It should not be forgotten , moreover , that these agreements frequently contribute to development cooperation operations in the local communities in which fisheries resources are exploited .
And they do so , of course , in keeping with an approach to exploitation geared to the conservation of those resources .
The agreement that we shall be approving today is in line with these requirements .
Turning now to the detail of the agreement , four aspects should be stressed .
Firstly , the fishing possibilities correspond to the real rates of use of those negotiated under the previous protocol .
Thus , for shrimp trawlers , a gross registered tonnage of 9000 GRT per year is provided for , in place of the 8800 GRT per year provided for previously .
For cephalopod trawlers , the gross registered tonnage has been reduced from 4000 to 3000 GRT per year .
All this is in line with the percentages of fishing possibilities used previously .
Moreover , the agreement stipulates that the fishing possibilities in the abovementioned sectors may be increased if fishing resources permit , with - of course - a proportional increase in the financial compensation .
As far as tuna vessels are concerned , the number of licences that may be granted has been substantially increased : from 26 to 37 for seiners ; and from 16 to 52 for pole-and-line vessels and longliners . This is appropriate given the large extent to which the fishing possibilities in this sector were utilized under the previous protocol .
This is therefore a good agreement , which is adjusted to the degree of compliance with the previous agreement and protocol , and which , moreover , increases the fishing possibilities for the Community fleet .
The financial compensation provided for has also been markedly increased : from ECU 6.35 million per year to ECU 8.5 million per year , in line with the increase in fishing possibilities .
The cost to shipowners will also be similar to that under the previous protocol , with their licence fees being slightly increased as from the fourth year of application .
I wish to point out , moreover , that the total cost of the agreement includes budget items earmarked for funding a scientific programme to improve information on fisheries resources , study grants for scientific , technical and economic training in the field of fisheries , as well as small-scale fishing and marine surveillance programmes .
All in all , the agreement represents support for the effective control of resources and cooperation in the development of local communities devoted to small-scale fishing .
To complete this summary description of the agreement , I would mention the requirement for Community shipowners to employ a certain proportion of local seamen and to take on board observers from Guinea-Bissau to check compliance with fisheries regulations .
In short , this agreement will also serve as an instrument of development cooperation , and it is geared to the monitoring , control and conservation of resources .
I therefore urge Parliament to approve this agreement , and I congratulate the Commission on its negotiations .
I wish to end with a comment concerning the procedure .
Parliament must defend and make good use of all its powers and responsibilities , including those relating to the budget .
However , this should not in practice prevent the Commission from initiating negotiations on the renewal or implementation of agreements .
This is quite another matter from requesting that our assent be required for the adoption of an agreement , and Parliament 's actions must not undermine the flexibility that the multiannual implementation of these agreements demands .
I would therefore ask Members to bear this in mind when voting on the amendments to the legislative proposal , and I would urge them to vote in favour of the report as a whole .
Mr President , I should like to begin my presentation by pointing out that Parliament 's services have unfortunately made an error - and not a minor error , moreover , since it appears in the title of my report . Indeed , the Spanish version refers to the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing rights and financial contribution provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Côte d 'Ivoire .
Now , Côte d 'Ivoire may well be the French name for that country , but in Spanish it has been called " Costa de Marfil ' for a very long time ; and , although there is a certain amount of linguistic tolerance with regard to geographical names in my country , this is not usual in the international sphere . So I should simply like to ask Parliament 's services to correct this material error , since , moreover , the corresponding Commission document also uses the name Costa de Marfil , not Côte d 'Ivoire , in its title .
Secondly , as always with this type of subject , there are questions of a procedural nature .
This agreement was signed on 30 June , but , although Parliament was informed unofficially by the Commission , it was only formally consulted at the end of October , and then by urgent procedure - with the unusual circumstance that the first payment must be made before 31 December of this year .
In other words , we have been consulted in time to give our approval , but the agreement has been in force since July , so that if Parliament now delivers an unfavourable opinion , it will put the Community institutions in a difficult position .
I recognize that the Commission has greatly improved its procedures ; and Commissioner Bonino , who is partly responsible for this , is currently in the Chamber .
However , one of the elements accompanying this report is the opinion of the Committee on Budgets drawn up by Mrs Jöns ; and that committee would naturally like the procedures to be further tightened up . That is , as far as possible , before agreements are signed , before definitive commitments are undertaken , and especially before those agreements enter into force , it would like Parliament to have the opportunity to deliver an opinion on the subject concerned .
Moving on to the protocol itself , this is not an agreement of overwhelming importance , but a modest agreement which concerns just sixty tuna vessels and three trawlers .
While there has been a small increase in the number of vessels , there has actually been no increase in the total capacity allowed , so I do not believe that this agreement will have a great impact on the number of fish caught .
Two species are concerned : yellowfin and skipjack tuna .
While catch levels for the first are already high , and it would be very difficult to increase their capacity , it seems that there is greater scope for exploiting skipjack tuna ; and the small increase in catches that may result from this agreement will therefore not substantially affect stocks .
I should like to take this opportunity to point out that my report is accompanied by the positive opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation . Indeed , the Committee on Development and Cooperation considers that fisheries agreements are also an instrument of development aid .
Naturally , the Committee on Development and Cooperation would have liked greater amounts of money to be earmarked for specifically development objectives . However , of the total budget of this modest agreement - which consists of an annual Community contribution of ECU 1 million for three years ; i.e a total of ECU 3 million - ECU 2.4 million has been allocated to compensation for fishing rights , whilst ECU 600 , 000 has been earmarked for scientific programmes , training , and aid for public administration , marine surveillance and contributions to international organizations .
In other words , a significant proportion of the agreement 's budget has been allocated essentially to development objectives .
In the end , I do not believe that it makes any difference to a country if we say " OK , we will pay you this much for fishing rights and give you the rest in development aid ' .
I believe that we should view the whole of Community compensation to developing countries - those that are prepared to give us fishing opportunities in their waters , thereby helping us to solve a problem mainly of employment but also of supply - as development aid .
This is normal , and a better way to help them than simply giving them money .
In my view , there is nothing worse than charity .
If the Community were to replace these agreements - in which the countries concerned have to give something in exchange - with simple charity , it would probably not assist the economic development of those countries .
Among other reasons , this is because - as you are well aware , Mr President , coming from a coastal town - fishing , both that of local fishermen and that of fishermen from other places , generates economic activity in fishing towns .
I myself come from a small fishing village which has lived off fishing for a very long time , and not only that of local fisherman , but that of fishermen from other regions and countries who use our port , sign supply contracts , and so on .
Consequently , I believe that Parliament must encourage the use of fisheries agreements as instruments of development aid , and I would particularly urge the Commission to continue along those lines - staying within the limits of the rational use of fisheries stocks , of course .
Neither the developing countries nor the Community wishes to see the destruction of those stocks .
To repeat something that I said to the Commissioner in the last part-session , I believe that the European Community is currently providing a good example with the way it conducts its fishing activity - although it could do so even more - inasmuch as it displays concern for the conservation of stocks and subjects European fishermen to Community supervision - which I hope will be reinforced in the future , so that those stocks are not depleted . On the other hand , we observe that in our own coastal waters , with which we are familiar , the fleets of other countries are not providing the same good example - and the Community will probably have to take action in this regard .
The other day , I referred to educational action , but it will also have to take action at the level of international agreements , in order to ensure that the total fishing effort in the waters of the developing countries does not lead to the destruction of fisheries stocks .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as I had an opportunity to see for myself last August , the government authorities and the various economic sectors of Cape Verde with whose representatives I had a chance to talk , are very much interested in the renewal of the fishing agreement with the European Union .
Obviously the renewal of that agreement also greatly benefits the Community fishing fleet , because it will make it possible for Spanish , French and Portuguese vessels to continue to catch certain highly migratory species , especially tuna .
The agreement provides for a significant increase in the number of licences . This is how they are distributed : 37 for tuna seiners ( an extra 14 units ) , 36 for pole-and-line tuna vessels and surface long-liners ( an extra 19 units ) and also providing the same three licences for bottom long-liners .
Nevertheless , this increase in the number of licences does not provide for a corresponding increase in proposed catch levels , which are kept at around 5 , 000 tonnes per year .
This fact , which apparently conflicts with the increase in licences , is explained by the need of fishing vessels to follow concentrations and movements of stocks , which result in their frequently moving in and out of Cape Verde 's territorial waters .
The overall costs of this are agreement are also subject to negligible or minimal increases : financial compensation of ECU 1 , 086 million ( 2.1 % up on the previous agreement ) , ECU 267 , 400 allocated to technical and scientific programmes ( 2.1 % up ) , and ECU 178 thousand to finance study and training grants , that is to say an additional 0.5 % .
In my report I have expressed my unequivocal support for the renewal of the fishing agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Cape Verde .
That position and that recommendation of mine are , therefore , the reason why I have today emphasized certain issues which may improve the framework for the implementation of the Agreement Protocol , whether it be in the short or medium term .
Firstly , I must emphasize that the Community fleet must without exception , and I repeat without exception , accede to all requests by the Cape Verdean authorities to put local observers on board its vessels . Unfortunately , although we all know why , there are not enough of them to cover all the Community vessels in operation .
Secondly , it is essential to remind masters and owners of their obligation to send statements of their catches to the Cape Verdean authorities within the proper time . This procedure should be observed at the same time as statements are sent to other competent national authorities .
Thirdly , we must ensure that Community owners help to support the canning plants recently set up in Cape Verde .
This is a moral duty which must be converted into a formal obligation , the more so inasmuch as such supplies of raw materials can be processed at fixed prices for the international market .
Fourthly , it would be desirable to develop increased coordination with other sectors of the Commission , particularly those concerned with development aid , to make it possible to set up automatic fleet monitoring systems which could be made available not only to Cape Verde but also other countries in that sub-region of Africa .
This area of investment is all the more important inasmuch as it is a fact that Parliament especially emphasizes the importance of responsible fisheries measures , and also that the Cape Verdean authorities have used the specific financial resources allotted to technical and scientific programmes under the agreement very correctly - I was able to check that on the spot .
Finally , the purpose of the legislative amendments I presented in my report , which were approved by the Fisheries Committee , is to try to improve coordination between the Commission and the Parliament as regards fisheries agreements .
It is important , Madam Commissioner , that the Commission should once and for all present its reports on the implementation of agreements and the situation with regard to local fish stocks , well before the terms of the relevant protocols expire , to enable the European Parliament to make a decision on their renewal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is part of a joint debate on a number of proposals relating to fishing .
This applies to the renewal of fisheries agreements with Guinea-Bissau for four years , and with Equatorial Guinea and the Ivory Coast for three years each .
I am naturally going express a few brief thoughts on these .
I am seriously concerned about the proposed terms of the protocol with Equatorial Guinea , which , as you know , is mainly about tuna , but those terms increase fishing possibilities by almost 50 % , the permissible number of licences is raised from 53 to 68 , even though it has become very clear that the supervision and control measures are pretty toothless , the amount of finance allocated to scientific programmes is being substantially reduced and also that the territorial waters beyond the fourmile line are allowed to be used as a fishing zone .
In my view that is unacceptable !
This does not appear to apply to the agreement with the Ivory Coast , which is also mainly concerned with tuna-fishing . In this agreement there is only a relative increase in fishing permits and licences , and a corresponding increase in the overall sums allocated to training and grants , supervision and technical and scientific programmes .
The fishing agreement with Guinea-Bissau , which is the longest-established , fullest and most diversified of those we are discussing today , allows Spain , Italy and Portugal to take up to 9600 tonnes gross of shrimps per year , suggests a figure of three thousand tonnes gross of shellfish per year , to be used by Spain and Italy , and also establishes the possibility of granting 89 tuna-fishing licences .
With the exception of the agreement with Equatorial Guinea , the draft terms of which , as I have mentioned , seem to us to conflict with the fundamental principles of conservation of resources adopted long ago by this Parliament , and allows operations in waters which ought to be exclusively reserved for local fishermen , our group will vote in favour of the texts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the code of conduct all three institutions undertook to do everything in their power to ensure speedy negotiation of the fisheries agreement .
But paper is patient .
Anyway , that still seems to be the Commission 's motto almost a year after the code of conduct was signed as it is really consulting us with great regularity only several months after the agreement was initialled .
This also applies to the agreements we are debating today .
To be fair , the fact that we can now conclude the parliamentary procedures in less than a month is due to the Council 's rapid consultation process by the Council and our rapid committee procedures .
If the Commission would adhere to the code of conduct and conclude negotiations on time , this would prevent another evil .
By that I mean the Commission 's promise to third countries about fixed payment terms and sums which was made without any legal basis .
With regard to the present agreements , too , the Commission has again gone ahead without waiting for Parliament 's opinion .
All this means is that the Commission is consistently circumventing Parliament in its role as the budgetary authority .
I am beginning to find this really intolerable !
It is certainly also unacceptable to expect us yet again to accept the provisional application of four agreements just because the Commission 's negotiations are behind schedule .
All the agreements have already been running for six months .
I therefore note that up to now the code of conduct has not improved the Commission 's appalling management in the matter of fisheries agreements .
Although we now receive the texts of the agreements immediately after signature in the original language , we do not receive details of the financial repercussions on the obligatory financial statement .
And that , dear members of the Committee on Fisheries , is really not on !
To us members of the Committee on Budgets the financial statement is essential , and the fact that it is impossible to work with drafts is proved time and time again .
In the case of Cape Verde the financial statement is still not right as of today !
Please let me restate this clearly , to my own colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries as well , as far as we budget people are concerned it is , as always , essential that international fisheries agreements are understood to be nonobligatory instruments .
Mr President , I am going to state my opinion solely from the point of view of the Committee on Fisheries .
I consider that the interventions we have heard , which put questions on procedural matters , have raised issues that ought to be dealt with .
In my opinion , the powers of this Parliament to monitor the fisheries agreements are powers of the whole Parliament , and not just of one parliamentary committee or another , but in any case I would like to emphasize here that I am going to give an opinion on fisheries agreements and more particularly on the fisheries agreements with Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau .
But I would also like to emphasize how difficult it is for us to maintain our position on the fisheries agreements when the Commission systematically violates the so-called code of conduct and when we are systematically placed in a situation where we have to give opinions on reports after the protocols have already been signed and when the process is already being rapidly adopted .
In spite of all this , the whole thing can be seen from another viewpoint .
It is obvious that we are more sensitive to this situation because the vessels that fish under the agreements come from Portugal , Spain and France .
Those Members who do not have , shall we say , citizens to whom they are answerable , may perhaps speak in more radical terms .
With regard to the agreement with Cape Verde , I would like to stress the following points .
Between 1990 and 2000 - and thus between the first and this , the third protocol - financial compensation to Cape Verde was reduced by 40 % .
At the same time , the number of fishing permits , especially for tuna , rose by 40 % from about 50 vessels under the first protocol to 73 vessels under the current one .
That is to say , we are dealing with a country in financial and economic difficulties , which is fundamentally suffering from a strategy that has come to consist of a gradual reduction in financial compensation under fisheries agreements .
I would nevertheless point out that the owners ' share , especially as regards bottom longliners , increases by 30 % between the second protocol and the one now before us for approval .
But I would like to stress once more that so far as Cape Verde is concerned there has been a 40 % reduction in financial compensation between the first protocol and the one we are now asked to approve .
Finally , with regard to Guinea-Bissau , I should like to emphasize that since 1993 the amounts of the financial compensation have not been increased , and this calls for adjustment .
We must not forget , where these countries are concerned - Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau - that they are heavily dependent on these fisheries agreements for their own economic sustainability , and it should also be said - as our colleague Mr Honório Novo has said - that , so far as investigative measures and technical grants are concerned , both these countries have tried to do their very best to see that the money is well used .
Mr President , today we have before us five reports on which we have to rule .
Four concern the international agreements and , as we have already heard , one concerns conservation and control measures in the Antarctic .
The aspect of the international agreements which is relevant to fisheries policy is expressed in the decision of the European Parliament taken on Wednesday of this week concerning the Treaty of Amsterdam , which was also prompted by pressure from the Committee on Fisheries .
What is required is for the assent procedure to be applied to all major international agreements once and for all .
The fact that previously we were only listened to made it difficult , and in many cases impossible , for us - Mrs Bonino and others - to work efficiently .
I am pleased to admit that , mainly thanks to the force of her personality , Mrs Bonino has improved the situation in the past , especially with regard to information which now reaches us much more quickly .
However , it continues to be the case that the only way the European Parliament can exert any real influence on fisheries agreements with third countries is if the assent procedure is regarded as a general legal basis .
Only then will we be able to use the proper means to implement the guidelines on third country agreements which were jointly worked out and recently adopted by the European Parliament .
Before , sooner or later , another Intergovernmental Conference is held and we hopefully gain greater influence here in this House , we can hope for a positive outcome at the European Court of Justice because of international agreements - in this case the international agreement with Mauritania .
This would really be a big step forward if a judgement was given in our favour .
The result will hopefully be known soon and we look forward to it in eager anticipation .
In the meantime we have to work with the options that are available to us .
They are restricted , at least formally , to amendments from the Committee on Fisheries which the European People 's Party group is pleased to support .
However , we are unable to support the amendments proposed by the Committee on Budgets .
The requirement to inform and consult Parliament on time is right on principle and in future blocking measures by us are no longer out of the question either .
However , this raises the legal question whether we are entitled to encroach upon a current agreement and therefore the legal mandate of the Commission .
But something has to happen !
I would therefore ask you not to climb down on the outstanding key policy issues .
Otherwise other people will be treading on our toes and our budget will be threatened with cuts .
That will hurt !
We have to avoid it at all costs !
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of Mr Tajani .
We approve of the fisheries agreement between the European Union and Guinea-Bissau because it is of particular interest to Italy . In fact it is one of the very few agreements which benefit Italian fishing vessels .
The protocol offers Italy possibilities of 4 , 000 tonnes gross tonnage prawn fishing and 1 , 000 tonnes gross tonnage for cephalopods and demersal fish .
There are five Italian fishing vessels operating in Guinea-Bissau waters with a Community licence and a further three will be added as from January 1998 .
This agreement has been praised for years ; it has no controversial aspects but offers the flexibility of being drawn up on the basis of requests made by the Member States .
The renewal of the protocol brings several changes based on the current rate of use of fishing possibilities ; thus cephalopod and demersal fishing , which has fallen by 1 , 000 tonnes gross tonnage , has been adapted to the smaller catch volume of previous years , which only amounts to 20 % of the possibilities negotiated by the Community .
With regard to prawn fishing , the Community fleet had used around 93 % and this justifies the increase of 800 tonnes gross tonnage agreed by this protocol .
This adaptation establishes an improvement in the cost / benefit ratio between the quantity of fish made available for Community fishing vessels and the financial compensation paid to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau , which amounts to ECU 34 million in three years .
In addition to the financial return , at the request of the Guinean government , the European Community also participates , among other things , in the financing of research grants and scientific and technical programmes intended to improve the knowledge of the state of fisheries resources and the support of home fishing programmes .
I will make one last comment on the amendments presented in connection with the fisheries reports examined today .
This question , which relates to the classification as non-oligatory and the costs relating to the fisheries agreements , will be re-examined by the Council , the Parliament and the Commission and ad hoc budget procedures will then be applied .
That is why our group will not support this type of amendment .
Mr President , as I cannot go into the substance , I will restrict myself to saying that the Committee on Fisheries and Parliament as a whole constantly deplore various aspects of the agreements submitted to us , and these aspects have been pointed out today by Mr Kindermann and Mr Jöns : the costs , the fact that Parliament is only involved in the consultation procedure , apart from the agreements with Morocco , and the impact of these agreements on fish stocks and the local fishing community .
Whenever these agreements are examined , Parliament ends up accepting them .
If Parliament seriously wants the Commission and Council to take this critical state of mind into account , it should reject them today , without criticizing , but supporting the policy of the Commissioner for Fisheries , Mrs Bonino , and sending the Commission and Council a clear signal that such consultation is unacceptable .
That is why the Green Group will vote against these agreements .
Thank you , Mr Ripa di Meana , for endeavouring to keep your speech short .
Indeed , as you well know , when in the Chair , I am strict with the gavel but lax with the clock .
Thank you , Mr President , and thank you , Madam Commissioner , for being here today .
Firstly , of course , I should like to congratulate the four rapporteurs - Mr Novo , Mr Kindermann , Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Imaz San Miguel - on their excellent reports , drawn up extremely quickly , but without loss of quality .
I believe that , taken as a whole , these four protocols will be highly advantageous to both the European Union and the third countries concerned , both because of the general increase in fishing possibilities and the contributions from the Community budget to initiatives such as the development of small-scale fishing - especially in the protocols with GuineaBissau and Equatorial Guinea - and because of the monitoring mechanisms established for those third countries .
Nevertheless , and for the benefit of all those who still think that Community fishing in the waters of third countries is carried out with disregard for the state of stocks and the future of fishing in the region concerned , I should like to draw attention - with reference to the report by Mr Kindermann , who , I believe , did not emphasize this enough - to the celebrated regulation plan to protect Atlantic tuna , which was launched on the initiative of the three main Community producers of frozen tuna .
I believe that we , who frequently criticize this sector , should , on the contrary , increasingly support initiatives of this kind , because they demonstrate that this sector also knows its job and , despite the mistakes that it has made in the past , is working to protect resources in the waters of third countries as well as in those of the Community .
I wish to make clear that this plan is designed to monitor tuna stocks by means of voluntarily taking on board observers who will carry out the surveillance of a vast area encompassing the waters of Cameroon , Sao Tomé , Principe , Gabon and part of Nigeria , as well as those of Equatorial Guinea .
In conclusion , I also wish to refer to the Council of Ministers .
I should like to address Mrs Jöns . Mrs Jöns , I thank you for your advice , but I wish to tell you that a large number of Members of this Parliament do not share the views of the Committee on Budgets , and if your committee , which always bases its arguments regarding the celebrated question of non-obligatory expenditure on the Interinstitutional Agreement of October 1993 , does not agree with the classification made by both the Commission and the Council , it should condemn the Commission and the Council for failure to comply with the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Otherwise , some Members will continue to believe that this should be obligatory expenditure .
Mr President , this has been a good debate and it is important for certain Member States .
I am delighted that the procedures seem to be improving although most colleagues would agree that they are not yet at a satisfactory state as regards the proposals that come from the Commission and their treatment by us and the Council .
My main concern is that as a parliament we try to make sure that we get our development policies for some of these developing countries and our fishing policies and opportunities correctly stated .
I believe in making sure that we do not over-exploit some of those fish stocks .
In the long term we have to make sure that those countries develop their own local fishing industries .
That means we have to make certain that the considerable funds we make available are properly utilized .
As far as I can see from these reports we are talking about a total of ECU 41 million which is a lot of money scattered around the number of vessels that are participating in this local fisheries we are having the agreements with .
The future of the European fisheries fleet is closely tied to these agreements .
The Member States concerned who are utilizing those funds should recognize that they may at some time in the future have to be diverted to compensate for fishing opportunities that will no longer be available .
That is why it is important that these agreements be seen in the light of future opportunities which may not always exist in the future .
We have to recognize the fact that while we are great consumers of fish , it may not always be European vessels which will have the opportunity of exploiting those resources .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Report ( A4-0300 / 97 ) by Mr Imaz San Miguel , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing possibilities and the financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau on fishing off the coast of Guinea-Bissau for the period 16 June 1997 to 15 June 2001 ( COM ( 97 ) 0395 - C4-0448 / 97-97 / 0205 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I know my way around Guinea-Bissau quite well and am very impressed by my friend Mr Imaz San Miguel 's report .
I am sorry to have to say that I had some reservations when I read it .
Although I voted for it I am not completely happy with it as fishing is the mainstay of life for the people of Guinea-Bissau .
The way in which the quotas have been determined creates the risk that in fact overfishing will result .
Although it is a good thing that quotas have been established , there were none before .
At that time the people lived mostly from fishing .
I remember people telling me that you could catch enough fish in two minutes to feed a whole family .
Today that is no longer the case and I should very much like to ask people to be very careful after two years , now that everything is to run for four years .
We were unable to support the report in the vote .
This position is based on a matter of principle and must not be regarded as a rejection of the rapporteur & # x02BC ; s work .
We believe that the European Union should abandon costly fisheries agreements of this type and switch over to providing support above all to the developing countries & # x02BC ; own fisheries activities .
Such a solution would make a better contribution to the task of developing the importance of fisheries for worldwide food supplies , boost these countries & # x02BC ; economic development and also remove the risks that may be involved in the fisheries agreements , e.g. that certain Member States & # x02BC ; fisheries activities might receive indirect support to continue operating in a situation where the entire European fishing industry is in need of substantial restrictions .
We would therefore like to see the situation developing in such a way that the Community neither enters into new agreements of this type nor extends previous agreements .
We would also like to emphasize the need for this type of agreement with third countries to be subject to improved scrutiny with regard to the budget .
Medina Ortega report ( A4-0365 / 97 )
We were unable to support the report in the vote .
This position must not be regarded as a rejection of the rapporteur & # x02BC ; s work .
We believe that the European Union should abandon costly fisheries agreements of this type and switch over to providing support above all to the developing countries & # x02BC ; own fisheries activities .
Such a solution would make a better contribution to the task of developing the importance of fisheries for worldwide food supplies , boost these nations & # x02BC ; economic development and also remove the risks that may be involved in the fisheries agreements , e.g. that certain Member States & # x02BC ; fisheries activities might receive indirect support to continue operating in a situation where the entire European fishing industry is in need of substantial restrictions .
We would therefore like to see the situation developing in such a way that the Community neither enters into new agreements of this type nor extends previous agreements .
We would also like to emphasize the need for this type of agreement with third countries to be subject to improved scrutiny with regard to the budget .
Kindermann report ( A4-0364 / 97 )
We would like to thank the rapporteur for his accomplished work on the report .
However , we were unable to support the report in the final vote .
This position must not be regarded as a rejection of the rapporteur & # x02BC ; s work , but is based on a matter of principle .
We believe that the European Union should abandon costly fisheries agreements of this type and switch over to providing support above all to the developing countries & # x02BC ; own fisheries activities .
Such a solution would make a better contribution to the task of developing the importance of fisheries for worldwide food supplies , boost these nations & # x02BC ; economic development and also remove the risks that may be involved in the fisheries agreements , e.g. that certain Member States & # x02BC ; fisheries activities might receive indirect support to continue operating in a situation where the entire European fishing industry is in need of substantial restrictions .
We would therefore like to see the situation developing in such a way that the Community neither enters into new agreements of this type nor extends previous agreements .
We would also like to emphasize the need for this type of agreement with third countries to be subject to improved scrutiny with regard to the budget .
Novo report ( A4-0363 / 97 )
We did not support the report .
This position is based on a matter of principle .
We believe that the European Union should abandon costly fisheries agreements of this type and switch over to providing support above all to the developing countries & # x02BC ; own fisheries activities .
Such a solution would make a better contribution to the task of developing the importance of fisheries for worldwide food supplies , boost these nations & # x02BC ; economic development and also remove the risks that may be involved in the fisheries agreements , e.g. that certain Member States & # x02BC ; fisheries activities might receive indirect support to continue operating in a situation where the entire European fishing industry is in need of substantial restrictions .
We would therefore like to see the situation developing in such a way that the Community neither enters into new agreements of this type nor extends previous agreements .
We would also like to emphasize the need for this type of agreement with third countries to be subject to improved scrutiny with regard to the budget .
Adjournment of the session
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my agreeable duty to thank Parliament 's services , the interpreters , the ushers , and everyone else , for their assistance .
Today , however , I have a gentle rebuke for the Bureau 's officials , since , recently , as you will have observed , I have not had the opportunity of chairing this cosy end to the Friday sitting .
The Bureau 's officials have not appointed me to that task .
Firstly , this has diminished the appropriateness of the affectionate name of " Man Friday ' given to me by Mr Kellett-Bowman , recalling the native who was Robinson Crusoe 's companion on his island .
This is , of course , a nickname , but it also demonstrates that Parliament is not racist , since even a native - albeit with some retraining - can rise to be a Vice-