Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 6 June 1996 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , in particular from the region concerned , have asked me to make a short statement on the bombing in Manchester last Saturday .
The IRA bomb injured over two hundred people , many of them seriously ; it caused vast material damage to the centre of Manchester .
It is almost a miracle that hundreds of people were not killed .
There is no possible or conceivable justification for the IRA bomb .
The targets were ordinary men , women and children shopping , on Saturday morning , in a busy city .
What possible cause could justify such barbarism ?
The aim of the bombers is clear : to destroy peace ; to shatter peace talks , which have just begun in Belfast , following the courageous efforts of the two governments , the democratic political parties and the community of Northern Ireland .
The European Parliament expresses its sympathy for those injured by the bomb in Manchester last Saturday , and our hopes for their speedy and full recovery .
I am writing to the Lord Mayor of Manchester to pass on this message to the injured and to their families .
I am sure that I speak for the whole House when I say that the cause of peace must not be abandoned because of intimidation by terrorists .
( Applause ) Terrorism can be defeated by the courage and steadfastness of communities and their leaders , to keep the peace process moving forward .
( Applause )
Mr President , as the Member who represents the constituency where this terrible atrocity took place , I want to thank you for the comments you have made on behalf of all the House .
I know that my constituents , as all the colleagues here , share those views .
I simply wish to add a tribute to the members of the emergency services whose prompt and professional actions saved many lives .
Without those actions there would indeed have been a terrible mass murder .
This was the largest explosion of its kind on mainland Britain since the Second World War .
We should be very thankful that , despite the efforts of the bombers , at least no-one died .
But terrible damage has been caused and we all share your condemnation of this atrocious act .
Mr President , I should like to speak on behalf of the Fianna Fáil Members of the European Parliament , all our constituents and indeed the 99.9 % of the Irish people who would like to be associated with your remarks on the atrocity committed by the Irish Republican Army in Manchester .
In the circumstances of the peace process there is no justification for this , or in any other circumstances for that matter .
I endorse your view that this House must support in every possible way the peace process .
I want to thank you for your statement and I want to extend sympathy on behalf of the Fianna Fáil Irish Members to all those injured and to the people of Manchester and to wish them well in the future .
I appeal to the men of violence to lay down their arms , to stop their murderous acts of violence in Ireland and elsewhere .
Again , Mr President , thank you for your statement .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of Parliament , I wish to welcome 40 honorary consuls who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
They are members of the Federation of Consuls in Europe , which is holding its annual meeting here at the European Parliament .
You are very welcome !
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 13 June 1996 pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Mr President , I should like to give an account of something that happened recently and ask the presidency about it .
Last Friday a demonstration was held in Brussels by a trade union representing metal workers and its route passed close to the European Parliament buildings in rue Belliard .
When the demonstrators marched below the pedestrian walkways joining the Belliard building to Van Maerlant ( at about 1 p.m. on 14 June 1996 ) , various European Parliament staff members and / or members of different political groups noticed that certain individuals dressed in civilian clothing and armed with walkie-talkies were filming demonstrators from these walkways .
According to the huissiers they were not members of the European Parliament 's internal security forces nor could they have been , given what they were doing .
Nor were they visitors .
Who were these people filming the demonstrators ?
Were they police officers ?
If so , who authorised their activity ?
Can you give me any information on this matter , Mr President ?
Could you please just put your headphones on , Mr Novo .
Firstly , you may have heard me announce that the next item was the order of business .
I could not see that what you were saying had anything to do with the order of business .
Secondly , you can send your comments to me in writing , and I shall look into the matter .
You will also then receive a reply .
For this week , there are no amendments .
On the July part-session in Brussels :
For Wednesday , 3 July 1996 , I have a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists for the report by Mr Pelttari on the bioethics convention to be postponed .
The PSE Group is asking for this report to be postponed to the second part-session in July .
The exact date will have to be fixed by the group chairmen , since we cannot decide that here , but we can of course decide on the postponement .
Since no one wishes to speak in favour of or against the request , I put it to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request ) The order of business is thus established .
Deadline for tabling amendments and motions for resolutions
Mr President , as you know , we have a discussion and a resolution on the summit meeting on Florence .
Part of that , according to most groups I imagine , will be to make some sort of statement from this House on the British Government 's policy of non-cooperation in Europe .
As you know , the Foreign Affairs Ministers are meeting today to discuss that issue and I wonder , therefore , whether on just that single issue we could shift the deadline so that we can take into account in our resolution what is decided or not decided tonight by the Foreign Affairs Ministers .
Perhaps we could hold the deadline on just that single issue until 11 a.m. or noon tomorrow to enable our resolution to be up-to-date and to make sense .
I assume it is the general view of the House that we should have the opportunity of tabling such a resolution , which means having to set a deadline of 12 noon for this item .
The services responsible are signalling to me that this is technically feasible .
If the House has no objections , we shall proceed accordingly .
Thank you , Mr McMahon .
We too are glad to hear good news .
Framework programmes for R & D
The next item is the report ( A4-0183 / 96 ) by Mr Linkohr , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on :
I. the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision ( COM ( 96 ) 0012 - C4-0092 / 96-96 / 0034 ( COD ) ) adapting for the second time Decision No 1110 / 94 / EC concerning the fourth framework programme of activities in the field of research , technological development and demonstration ( 19941998 ) ; II.the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 96 ) 0012 - C4-0157 / 96-96 / 0035 ( CNS ) ) adapting for the second time Decision 94 / 268 / Euratom concerning the framework programme of activities in the field of research and training for the European Atomic Energy Community ( 1994-1998 ) .

Mr President , I am presenting this opinion on behalf of my colleague , Mr van Velzen .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy can agree with the setting-up of task forces as a mechanism that might bring research closer to the market , if it is on an experimental basis that will inform the methodology for the fifth framework programme without prejudgement .
The committee is calling on the Commission to set up intersectoral and interdisciplinary task forces , and to involve European industry as closely as possible in drawing up research topics , so as to avoid a top-down approach .
The criteria and data for selecting task forces must be made transparent ; in particular , a comparative assessment of the benefits of the task forces should be presented after a certain period of experience .
The committee is asking that , when preparing the fifth framework programme , the Commission should draw not only on existing experience with the task forces , but also on the ' best practice ' criteria contained in the Green Paper on innovation .
Further , the committee calls on the Commission to consider cooperating with other European partners and with small and medium-sized firms , as desired by the business world , as a means of increasing the task forces ' prospects of success .
In short , we regard the task forces as a positive initiative , but above all as an experiment which will only succeed if , at the same time , the lead time for application assessment is shortened , small and medium-sized firms are more closely involved , and the selection of topics is made more transparent .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposals regarding the establishment of these task forces were originally of great appeal to the Committee on Transport and Tourism , not least because the transport sector was given considerable prominence : task forces on aeronautics , automobile RTD-activities , transport intermodality and interoperability , maritime systems , and the train of the future .
According to the Commission 's proposals , as much as 55 % of the ECU 700 million - in other words , ECU 385 million - was to be assigned to transport issues .
We in the Committee on Transport and Tourism were therefore all the more taken aback by the outcome of the voting in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , because all that remains of these various transport projects is aeronautics .
The Committee on Transport has consequently tabled an amendment of its own , Amendment No 60 , which reinstates at least the intermodality task force , and with a suitable appropriation .
We must in fact recognize that interoperability is an inherently European topic .
For example , we have five different railway gauges in Europe , and we wonder why many hours are wasted changing engines .
Time is not wasted in this way with lorries .
It is also a matter here of increasing competitiveness in the European Union , whereas the car sector , for example , can readily be tackled at national level .
To my mind , interoperability is the European topic par excellence .
The two largest political groups have tabled a compromise proposal with a somewhat reduced appropriation ; the Committee on Transport and Tourism hopes that this compromise will meet with the approval of the House .
I know that we are to discuss the funding separately , but our inclusion of this title shows clearly the direction in which European transport policy needs to move .
Mr President , it is a great pity that Rolf Linkohr is not with us this evening for the presentation of this report .
I would like to congratulate him on the quality of the work he has done .
The explanatory statement is a very valuable document and I hope colleagues will take the trouble to study it .
We have had a lot of difficulties with this report , on the whole question of how much money we should go for and over what period of time , and what the role of the taskforces should be .
Although when we agreed the original fourth framework programme it was not our idea that it would serve as a forerunner for the fifth framework programme , this has , in a sense , been one of the strands that has been emerging in our discussions .
We have to learn some lessons in Parliament with regard to the Commission : when trying to decide how much money should go into research and how we should spend it and the role of taskforces , there is a great deal more work that has to be done amongst ourselves .
I should like to say on behalf of the Socialist Group that this is the path that we wish to follow .
The report is subject to the co-decision procedure and we must have a majority in Parliament .
I hope that , although most of us have reservations about the report as it emerged from committee , we will support it .
We have the task ahead of making sure that we can put a convincing case to the Council for increased research activity at European level .
Perhaps the most telling phrase in the whole of Mr Linkohr 's report is that , even if we approve the ECU 700m , it will not be sufficient to catch up with the work that is going ahead in the United States and in Japan .
We are still falling behind and I hope we will take this lesson , if no other , to heart this evening and make sure we argue this case very strongly with the Council of Ministers .
I just want to mention a couple of items .
One , the increased funding for BSE research .
This is very topical and , if nothing else , it shows the importance of having a bit more flexibility in our programmes .
It would be a real tragedy if we had to wait three , four or five years before we can change the direction of some of our research , simply because we are locked into a rigid five-year programme .
That lesson is one we need to learn .
We need to look also at the question of the safety of nuclear reactors .
We are all agreed that we need to do more work in these areas : the decontamination of affected areas and the radiation protection programme .
I hope these matters will have strong support in the House tomorrow .
Mr President , I wish to add my voice to that of Mr Adam in thanking Mr Linkohr for his very good work and all honourable Members who have worked to find a point of basic agreement on this issue which is extraordinarily important not only as regards , clearly , the refinancing of the Fourth Framework Programme but also future lines of action .
We are dealing , as Mrs Quisthoudt has said , with the issue - which might be described as being experimental in nature - fundamental to the development of the Fifth Framework Programme that will soon be with us .
I have to say that my group is in agreement and will therefore be supporting the compromise that has been reached on this , but I want personally to stress two aspects : the issues on which we have focused , selecting them from among the Commission proposals , are definitely of interest , but the special point that has been raised by Mr Linkohr is certainly an important one - not only in humanitarian terms but also in terms of our responsibility vis-à-vis the scientific guidelines that cannot be separated out from the more immediate issues that currently concern us .
In that context specifically , we should devote a word or two to another important issue on which Mr Adam touched , that is to say the possibility of increasing , albeit partially , to a limited extent , the resources of Biomed and Biotec to develop research into what will surely be the next century 's ill : the new viral diseases and above all bionic diseases .
In conclusion , I believe that by approving the Linkohr report tomorrow , we shall be giving the Council a strong signal that the House wants to move in that direction Europe 's research strategy for the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I have already said on a number of occasions that the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party is by no means in favour of the task force model developed by the Commission .
Although it may be useful for identifying technical priorities in some industrial sectors , the task force model appears to add yet another management and coordination level to a structure which actually needs to be made simpler and more transparent .
It also interferes with the current programme structure .
There are a number of subjects which my group recognizes as extremely important for Europe and its citizens .
Information and communications technologies are vital for the future of Europe , and are areas where rapid changes are taking place .
Future workers are going to have to learn about telematics , and this is why the task force on educational multimedia is such a good idea .
Multimedia products need to be developed for and used in schools .
A good example here is the UK , whose schools have made much more progress in using information technologies than those in other EU countries .
Secondly , small and medium-sized firms must be able to participate fully in the fourth programme .
This is a point I have made repeatedly , but the Commission remains very ambiguous on the subject .
On the one hand , it is setting up task forces specifically targeting major industries , but it also states in every programme that there is plenty of scope for small and medium-sized firms .
The framework programme has taught industrial firms in Europe how to work together , and this is something we must not jeopardize .
Cooperation is the best way to disseminate new knowledge in Europe , and this is why it would be better to separate the two groups completely , so that firms both large and small can benefit from the framework programme .
Mr President , in the process of reorienting Europe 's productive activity to meet the demands of the globalization of the world economy , research and technological development play a crucial role .
In his report , Mr Linkohr responds to the Commission proposal for additional funding of ECU 700 million for the fourth framework research programme and the setting-up of task forces with a counter-proposal which is far more positive and significant .
The Group of the European United Left-Nordic Green Left disagrees with the Commission proposal and agrees with Mr Linkohr 's report , whilst recognizing that it does have some shortcomings .
Firstly , we disagree with the Commission proposal because it seeks to amend the fourth framework programme without a prior evaluation of the horizontal criteria on which the programme has been based , introducing vertical proposals which concentrate activities on a small number of countries and undertakings .
Secondly , we disagree with it because these proposals focus on the interests of the big multinationals and the nuclear , automobile and aerospace sectors , and so on - pressure groups , in other words - without taking into account the social interests of the citizens of Europe .
We therefore welcome the fact that Mr Linkohr has incorporated into his report our amendments concerning the elderly and health care - areas which will present the most urgent problems in the coming years .
There should also be a concern to promote a model of sustainable development .
And , thirdly , we disagree with it because the Commission proposal advocates , looking forward to the fifth framework programme , a vertical philosophy that will increase the research disparities which exist in Europe , given that some countries devote 0.5 % of GDP to research , whilst others dedicate 2.7 % .
For these reasons , we reject the Commission proposal and support Mr Linkohr 's report , acknowledging the efforts made by the rapporteur .
Mr President , in times of recession , one should actually be welcoming an increase of ECU 700 million for the fourth framework programme of activities in the field of research .
Research and development must receive financial backing , but the focus has to be right .
And , in our opinion , the focus no longer is right .
I should like to explain this by taking some examples .
First of all , another ECU 105 m - and we have in fact tabled an amendment here , but I fear it will not be adopted - is to go to Euratom , where it will be used for fusion , a form of energy which has already received ECU 895 m under the fourth framework programme , and which might perhaps solve our problems in the year 2030 or 2050 , but certainly not here and now .
Secondly , the money is to be spent on the so-called inherently safe reactor , something which does not and cannot exist , and for which there is no acceptance among the general public .
Moreover , as Mr Scapagnini has quite rightly said , research funds always go to major industry and not to SMEs , which could really do with them .
Another case in point is that , according to the proposal from the Commission , ECU 150 m was to be made available for the SAVE II programme .
The Council then had the impudence to reduce this funding to ECU 45 m : in other words , it has slashed a five-year programme , the only programme we still have which could go some way to meeting the commitments we made in Rio and Berlin .
But huge sums of money are to be spent on aeronautics and fusion and other such gimmicks .
My second example concerns THERMIE .
No one mentions THERMIE II any more , another programme which has become absolutely vital .
We hear every day that CO2 levels are rising .
And now some clever people are saying that the cause is our opposition to nuclear power plants .
What nonsense !
Having looked at the OECD statistics , I note that countries with a particularly large number of nuclear power stations do not have lower CO2 emissions .
In fact , this phenomenon is caused primarily by traffic , which is not being taken into account at all .
In conclusion , we cannot approve this increase , because we believe that the focus is wrong and it will not solve our immediate , pressing problems , even though many of the minor points contained in the proposal are - admittedly - worthy of support .
Mr President , thank you for allowing this exception .
On behalf of my group , I should like to highlight three important points , and firstly the amount of the increase : ECU 700 million .
Even though savings are now the order of the day in all the Member States and at EU level , we believe that there is an urgent need to invest in the future .
And this can only be done through innovation , the basis for which is research and development .
That is why we have endorsed this overall sum .
Secondly , we agree with the Green Paper on innovation that the dissemination and exploitation of results must be improved .
We have taken this into account in our amendment on the allocation of resources .
Even though money is not all that is needed here , it certainly does help !
Thirdly , we are in fact in a transitional phase , in the middle of the fourth framework programme .
The discussion has in some cases been unusually heated , however , due to the fact that the thrust of the research topics was altered in an over-hasty way .
We hope that the consultation process in preparation for the fifth framework programme will be smoother and more relaxed .
Finally , I am grateful to the rapporteur for having worked with us in such an open and fair manner , and I would thank the Commissioner for having sought and conducted a dialogue with Parliament , after certain initial difficulties .
As Gordon Adam has already said , we do need an absolute majority in Parliament .
For that reason , there has been a strong desire in the House to reach an agreement , and this is reflected in our compromise proposals .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , both the Commission 's proposals and Mr Linkohr 's report on the adaptation of the European Community 's fourth framework programme of activities in the field of research - in Annex I , footnote 5 , of that report , and Annex II , paragraphs 1 and 2 , of the report on the adaptation of Euratom research - rightly refer to research into increased safety in the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
It is most important to increase the safety of the nuclear power stations located , in particular , in the countries of the former Eastern bloc and in China .
But another Chernobyl-type accident would be extremely dangerous for us too .
That is why , for reasons of solidarity as well as our own safety , it is imperative for us to contribute and expand our practical help and know-how regarding accident prevention .
However , it is not acceptable that a covert or overt extension of the use of nuclear energy should be pushed through by these means .
Many people are in fact in favour of abandoning this fundamentally uncontrollable technology , and we should like to see a move into the age of solar power .
So it needs to be made clear that European research funding should not be used to develop new types of reactor , but only to enhance the safety of existing nuclear plants , including that of the disposal of radioactive waste .
That is the most we can possibly accept , and even that demands something of an effort from us , because in structural terms , even safety upgrades are an incentive to keep dangerous nuclear plants in service .
In principle , this means that the life-span of the plant and technology of a conventional nuclear power station is likely to be extended by a further 40 years .
With regard to Central and Eastern Europe , the following ping-pong effect , which might not be immediately apparent , will play a major role : because of the chronic lack of foreign currency in these countries , the upgrading work is to be funded by so-called payment in kind .
In this way , for example , not only is the latest nuclear technology to be introduced at Sosnovy Bor , but the decommissioning of the Grafenrheinfeld nuclear power station in Germany is to be avoided .
Therefore , because this legally questionable option of continued operation must be averted , I would urge the House to support Amendments Nos 53 , 54 and 62 , as does a large majority of my group .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the House , before anything else may I express my thanks to Mr Linkohr , whose enforced absence prevented him from presenting his report personally and to whom I wish a speedy recovery , and to the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , to Mr Desama , Mr van Velzen , Mr Ferber , Mr Collins and Mrs Ahlqvist , as well as to the members of the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , the Committee on Transport and Tourism , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .





Numerous Members of Parliament were involved in discussing the Commission proposal on supplementary financing of the fourth framework programme for research and development ( 1994-1998 ) .
The result is a balanced and constructive motion for a resolution , which should enhance the quality of the debate between the institutions and make this decision easier to take .
I shall not presume on your attention for any longer than is necessary .
In view of the importance of the subject , however , I should like to make a few remarks on a number of points .
I shall therefore begin by reminding you of the background to the Commission 's proposal on supplementary financing and then comment on some points in the report drawn up by Mr Linkohr on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , before finally informing you of the position adopted by the Commission on the various proposed amendments , specifying our reasons for accepting or rejecting them .
So let us begin with the background . You may recall that the principle of supplementary financing of the fourth framework programme was enshrined in the decision adopting the programme ; Mr Desama , indeed , put it perfectly earlier this evening .
This supplement is different in nature to the technical adjustment made last year after three new states had acceded to the Union .
It represents a political commitment by the Council and Parliament to adapt the fourth framework programme as necessary to developments that have intervened since its inception .
It was a wise decision .
Given the fact that it was launched over two years ago , the fourth programme does not satisfy all the needs that arise today .
As we await the fifth framework programme , which will not come on stream before 1999 , the option of this supplementary financing gives us a unique opportunity to improve the ways in which Community research responds to the needs of society .
These needs are more clearly apparent in certain domains . The Commission therefore decided to focus this effort on a few priority themes .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , along with the other committees consulted , have indicated their acceptance in principle of such selectivity , which takes account of society 's foremost expectations and of the prospects of creating jobs , and certainly of preserving them .
Priorities evolve .
Mr Adam referred to research into BSE .
Let me point out in passing that it was a Community research programme which enabled a team in Edinburgh to identify a probable link between the CreutzfeldtJakob syndrome and mad cow disease .
Mr Linkohr 's excellent report highlights two points to which I should like to return .
The first is the recommendation that these programmes should be managed more efficiently .
I know that this is a matter of concern to a great many of you .
It is also a concern that I share .
It has been referred to in this debate , notably by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl .
Despite the progress achieved in the course of the last few years , further improvements in this area can and must be made .
As a step in that direction , a seminar involving senior Commission officials and representatives of the scientific community and of industry is to be held shortly .
Allow me to reassure those of you who feel that small and medium-sized enterprises are not well enough represented in these programmes ; another aim of the seminar is to provide SMEs with easier access to research programmes , as several of you have requested , in particular Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel .
The second point relates to the evaluation of the way in which the fourth framework programme is being implemented .
This matter , which was addressed in one of the amendments , is also referred to extensively in Mr Lange 's report on the Annual Report of the Framework Programme Monitoring Panel for 1995 , which you will be discussing next month .
As I had the opportunity to inform the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , the Commission services are currently preparing a comprehensive document assessing the progress made in implementing the fourth framework programme , and this document will shortly be made available to Parliament .
All in all , I am keenly aware of Parliament 's wish to be closely associated with the preparation and implementation of research initiatives within the Union .
I can inform you that by the end of July the Commission will present an initial political document on the fifth framework programme , indicating the guidelines on which it intends to base its formal proposal at the start of 1997 .
The publication of the document at that stage will give Parliament the opportunity to express its views soon enough to be able to enhance or alter the proposed guidelines .
As promised , I shall now communicate to you the position adopted by the Commission on the various amendments to its proposal .
As a general rule , the Commission accepts all those amendments which introduce useful clarifications or which help to reinforce its proposal .
The amendments to which this applies are Amendment No 9 ( last part ) on the need for an indicative breakdown of the ECU 700 million , Amendments Nos 15 , 16 and 39 on various aspects of multimedia activities , as well as Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 , 11 and 12 , subject to some rewording , on the ways in which the task forces are to operate and the manner in which the supplementary financing is presented .
With regard to Amendment No 2 in particular , the Commission is prepared to refer to its proposed revision of the financial perspective but without establishing a link between the decision on supplementary financing and the final adoption of the revised financial perspective .
By the same token , the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 5 to the Euratom proposal , which add useful details to the text as it now stands , as well as the third part of Amendment No 6 , on condition that the concept of radiation protection is introduced into the second specific programme on international cooperation under the fourth framework programme .
Amendment No 9 proposes the creation of a René Descartes Prize to be awarded each year to reward and honour outstanding European research work .
I had occasion to mention to the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy just how excellent I find this idea . The Commission , incidentally , is already looking at ways of putting this proposal into effect .
There is no need , however , to add a new article , because Annex III of the Decision adopting the fourth framework programme already envisages the possibility of scientific awards ; the relevant passage there need only be amended accordingly .
On the other hand , the Commission would prefer not to accept at this stage the amendments that affect the substance of its proposal , in other words those which propose changes to the maximum overall amount , such as the first part of Amendment No 9 , those which adjust the balance between priorities , such as Amendments Nos 4 and 7 and Amendments Nos 17 to 21 , 23 , 24 , 29 and 36 , those which propose new themes alongside those already adopted , such as Amendments Nos 8 , 10 , 40 and 41 , 22 , 25 to 28 and 31 to 38 , or which suggest new research subjects within adopted priority areas , such as Amendments Nos 13 and 14 .
Amendment No 5 and the part of Amendment No 9 in which the integration of ECSC research into the framework programme is proposed cannot be accepted either , since the activities carried out in the realm of the ECSC have in fact been absorbed into the programme .
The same also applies , for similar reasons , to Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 6 and 7 to the Euratom proposal .
I should like to reply at this point to Mr Tannert , who spoke on the subject of nuclear energy .
When all is said and done , while noting the call for prudence in nuclear matters expressed in these amendments , the Commission wishes to emphasize that the wording of the technical annex accords perfectly with the text of the technical annexes to the proposal on the framework programme for Euratom and to the specific programme on nuclear fission safety .
The framework programme for Euratom clearly mentions the work on new safety specifications for the new generation of reactors .
The specific programme on nuclear fission safety refers to the need to improve safety in the operation of existing installations while advancing knowledge applicable to the reactors of the future .
The underlying idea is that the Member States work actively to develop better-designed reactors , while the task of the Union is to support the research required to guarantee their safety .
The Commission also deems it preferable not to make any pronouncements on amendments proposed in plenary which seek to alter its proposals beyond the bounds of mere clarifications and on which CERT has not had the opportunity to comment .
It does , however , note with interest the priority attached to intermodality by a number of speakers , especially Mr Ferber , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl and Mr Desama in their compromise amendments .


I should also like to stress an important point in this context .
While standing very firm on the principle of 700 million in supplementary financing , the Commission basically has an open ear for the ideas underlying several of the proposed amendments .
The Commission would not be averse , for example , to a balanced distribution of funds among the proposed priority themes that are linked to the activities of the task forces and some other more generic areas which are the subject of specific programmes .
It is likewise open to politically important themes , such as the detection of land mines , and to the idea of spreading the supplementary financing over three years .
At this stage in the proceedings , however , the Commission prefers not to incorporate the amendments in question .
It must be remembered that the supplementary financing has to be adopted by codecision , which means that the unanimous approval of the Council is required .
Any formal modification of key points in the Commission proposal would be liable to make the achievement of an overall compromise between the institutions even more difficult .
Such a compromise must be our objective .
In general terms and on numerous specific points , the positions of Parliament and the Commission are very close , as indeed is often the case .
We now have to take the Council with us .
An informal trialogue is due to take place on 25 June , the day before the meeting of the Council of Research Ministers .
We must be at pains to ensure that these talks proceed in a way that will enable the Council to reach an early political agreement on supplementary financing .
In their joint decision to adopt the fourth framework programme , Parliament and the Council undertook to formulate their positions on supplementary financing by the end of June 1996 .
It would be a pity if this undertaking were not honoured .
The people of Europe expect the Union to implement specific programmes in those areas in which research can help to improve the quality of life , to invigorate the economy and to promote the creation of jobs .
We cannot disappoint them .
I shall finish on that note , and I thank all of you who have contributed to the high quality of this debate on the supplementary financing of the fourth framework programme .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Energy efficiency of domestic electrical appliances
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0194 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C40203 / 96-94 / 0272 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on energy efficiency requirements for household electrical refrigerators , freezers and their combinations ( Rapporteur : Mr Macartney ) .
Mr President , Members will be aware that we have already been through the general aspects of this report in the first reading .
Just to remind Members , however , the whole objective was to make a contribution towards the problem of global warming , to try to take some steps towards fulfilling the commitments which the European States made at the Rio Summit and , at the same time , to make some contribution towards the question of saving the consumer bills on electricity .
The Commission proposals did this by looking at the question of improving the efficiency of refrigerators .
Both the Commission and the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy relied heavily on the background study which indicated that it was perfectly feasible to achieve substantial improvements in efficiency in the European Union , parallel to those which have already been achieved in the United States and Japan .
So when we went through the first reading we made some substantial statements and some substantial progress .
We come to the second reading now , having had our common position outlined by the Council .
Just to remind Members , the first set of norms proposed by the Commission was for a 10 % improvement in energy efficiency , whereas we are convinced that a 20 % target is required .
The committee also believed that a stricter timetable for implementation was appropriate two years after adoption of the directive , and that a second set of norms going beyond the first set should be implemented five years after the adoption of the directive .
It was proposed in the first reading that there should be a flexible implementation system which was based on information given to consumers , which was an innovative approach .
Some of these proposals met with the approval of the Council and some did not .
The first point is that the Council agreed on a 15 % energy efficiency target , which was similar to the Commission 's revised proposal .
It decided that the implementation time for the first norms would be three years after adoption , whereas the Commission and Parliament had proposed two years .
The Council text refers to a possible second set of norms but , frankly , it is so vague as to be almost evasive .
Unless there is a specific figure mentioned , then there is no point in talking about improvements or , for that matter , like one of the amendments which I do not support , ' substantial improvements ' .
That is not worth the paper on which it is written .
So we have a crunch here about setting firm targets .
At the same time , the committee has wisely compromised on two issues .
One is to say to the industry which is asking for a voluntary agreement or the possibility of a voluntary agreement : Okay .
You have got some time after the introduction of the first set of norms to come up with a voluntary agreement .
We will wipe the slate clean and forget about the fact that nothing happened for four or five years when you wanted one before and we will take you at your word now .
But , if this agreement is not achieved , the Commission has to propose a firm piece of legislation , and we would support this .
The other compromise we have made is on this rather controversial and , some would say , bizarre category of subtropical and tropical appliances .
The expert advice was that really the whole category did not make a lot of sense .
Nevertheless , the expert who was consulted by the Commission and by Parliament 's committee concluded that there was a case for making one small exception in this category and that is for the four-star fridges - if you want the full details - with a single compressor and two compartments .
So there is a small exception , which allows us to meet the Council half way .
What I am putting to Parliament is a plea that we go forward with a firm resolve to have a clear set of norms for the second phase , although we are prepared to go along with a couple of concessions in order to meet the Council half way .
I plead with Parliament to get the amendments proposed by the committee through in toto , otherwise we will have been wasting our time .
However , I am very confident in the wisdom of this House and the assiduity of the Members and I am very confident that when they vote tomorrow we will have an overall majority and Parliament will have achieved something for energy efficiency which will benefit both the planet and the consumers .
Mr President , on behalf of my colleague Mrs Jensen , who unfortunately cannot be here today , I should like to make the following comments . In this proposal , the point is made that the EU has committed itself to reducing CO2 emissions .
It is also stated that refrigeration appliances consume a great deal of electricity , and that this is an area in which the EU can do something .
The proposal seeks to remove the heaviest energy users from the market , but unfortunately the effect will be no more than that of natural innovation in the sector .
The technology is available , and the sector should make use of it .
The most important thing in the proposal is that the Commission commits itself to bringing forward a proposal for a second set of norms to match what modern technology can do .
With the first set of norms , we are merely getting rid of the heaviest energy users .
The Commission says that it will be of benefit for consumers , society and the environment to have refrigeration appliances which are more energy-efficient , and that this is technically feasible .
While we are waiting for the CO2 tax , we can make appropriate use of the mechanisms of the internal market .
This week , we have put the Union 's future climate strategy on the agenda .
In this context , it will be remarkable if we cannot agree on this proposal , which in spite of everything is a step along the road .
There is not very much good news regarding CO2 , since it now appears that the EU will be unable to achieve its aim of stabilizing CO2 emissions at the 1990 levels in the year 2000 .
As Commissioner Papoutsis rightly pointed out , the end is one thing and the means another .
For example , the Council recently cut back the SAVE programme from ECU 150 million to ECU 45 m .
This raises serious doubts as to whether there is any political will at all in the Council to tackle the CO2 problem .
The IEA has produced comparative studies of worldwide refrigerator norms .
In the USA , for instance , a third set of norms is being introduced in 1998 which is much more ambitious than the Council 's proposals , and that is in the free and liberal United States .
Europe is far behind .
We are all concerned about the effects on the climate when a billion Chinese and millions of Indians increase their energy consumption , but can we in the West ask so much of them if we are unable to meet limits to which we have committed ourselves internationally ?
Mr President , I should like , very briefly , to indicate the position the Socialist Group will take on Mr Macartney 's amendments .
In general terms , the Socialist Group intends to support Mr Macartney 's five amendments .
The last two of these are relatively formal amendments .
The first three , however , are important amendments , because in Amendment No 1 in particular the energy efficiency improvement is set at 20 % , not only in the first phase but in the second phase too , while Amendments Nos 2 and 3 provide respectively for a reduction of the period allowed for local industry to adapt to the new norms and for various specifications relating to tropical and subtropical refrigerators .
I could leave it at that , but honesty compels me to admit to Mr Macartney that the recommendation will not be supported by the entire Socialist Group .
In fact , a substantial minority of the Socialist Group intends to oppose the first three amendments for the following reason : in general terms , we feel that since the Commission - and very probably the Council too - will be unable to back these amendments , we are likely to become involved in conciliation procedure , which seems to be a luxury we can ill afford in the present circumstances .
We should have welcomed a greater degree of willingness to achieve some sort of rapprochement between the positions of the various institutions .
Be that as it may , notwithstanding this reservation - which does not concern the substance of Mr Macartney 's proposals - the recommendation will have the support of the Socialist Group , but not its unanimous support .
Mr President , the objective of reducing the greenhouse effect is absolutely praiseworthy given that there is a great deal of macroscopic evidence that the planet is heating up . In point of fact it would be useful to be able to undertake further research in situ to enable us better to understand the processes whereby infrared light is trapped , if I may be allowed a very brief digression , using satellites attached to long lines - like the one we had occasion to experiment with in a space mission in 1992 - which will make it possible to explore those high strata in the atmosphere which balloons cannot reach and in which satellites cannot remain .
That could perhaps be an ideal subject for the Fifth Framework Programme ; turning to the directive at issue , however , that document identifies energy-saving with energy-efficiency and applies the sole criterion of energy efficiency to a great variety of European refrigerators .
Different habits , in the European Union , that vary from region to region as a result of climate , eating habits and also the purchasing power of European citizens , trigger different market requirements , and the predictable result of this directive will therefore be to reduce the number of refrigerators on the market and direct the market itself towards products that are more efficient certainly but higher range and more expensive , particularly in the countries of the south .
This is not a question of respecting the concept of energy-saving , which is we accept , or taking a view on the fate of future generations , it is a matter of establishing whether this measure is fair and balanced or whether it benefits one industrial sector as compared with another , resorting to the expedient - if I may put it thus - of confusing energy-saving , which is our objective - not producing carbon dioxide then- and energy efficiency .
To demonstrate that energy-saving and energy efficiency are not the same thing , suffice it to say that a Mercedes may be more efficient in terms of energy than a scooter but a scooter clearly uses less energy than a Mercedes .
A person travelling by scooter saves energy as compared with someone using a Mercedes but has a less efficient vehicle .
When considered in detail , the directive at issue does not appear to constitute a balanced measure , given that there has been no socio-economic study on the costs for consumers in the north and in the south .
As regards the second step towards efficiency - following on from the first , on which we at any rate agree - I propose that the House support an amendment which leaves this vague , although incorporating the element of reinforcement contained in Amendment No 5 .
The intention is not so much to make it difficult to take that step as to allow the Commission to structure it better and resume the study .
That has in fact been the Commission position in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , and the Council position similarly .
I therefore commend to the House Amendment No 5 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , domestic fridges and freezers account for 7 % of the total electricity consumption in the European Union .
A 15 % reduction in energy consumption could mean as much as a 1 % drop in electricity consumption and lower CO2 emissions throughout the Union .
The Council has proposed a transitional period of three years for the directive instead of the two proposed by Parliament , which allows ample scope , especially when you consider that fridges can easily last 20 to 25 years .
There is also no evidence that energy efficiency will drive the price of fridges up .
On the contrary , there are already more energy-saving coolers which are no more expensive to buy than the average fridge .
So the cost will not be higher for the consumer or , in all likelihood , the producer .
The Liberal Group supports the rapporteur 's proposal to introduce a second series of measures once the first phase has been evaluated .
At the suggestion of the Netherlands , the Commission has been trying for the last five years to reach voluntary agreements with the industry , but this appears to be impossible , hence this proposal for a European directive and the amendments by Mr Macartney which my group wholeheartedly supports .
Mr President , the purpose of my remarks is to summarize in two phrases the position of a large section of the Socialist Group : total support for the Council 's common position , since it addresses the major objectives which will make energy savings possible ; and total rejection of the amendments proposed by Mr Macartney , who has ignored the views of many Members of the House and a large number of countries which have declared their opposition to these amendments .
These amendments are not about energy savings or environmental protection .
They are about something else : a disguised and covert trade war .
One cannot fail to take account of the different conditions prevailing in the various Member States .
One cannot say that there is a single study on this subject , when in fact there are several which justify the need to distinguish between different refrigerators .
More specifically , in the view of a large section of the House , allowing the industry time to adapt and accepting the category of tropical and subtropical appliances are essential not only for achieving energy savings , but also for ensuring that concern for the environment is not used as a covert means of supporting certain commercial interests .
In fact , Mr Macartney 's Amendment No 3 , concerning four-star refrigerators , is technically quite incorrect .
Today , refrigerators do not a have a single compartment .
The four-star compartment is a freezer , but refrigerators have other compartments which require fewer stars . And these compartments are not given co-efficients , although they would meet the directive 's requirements if they were .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Macartney for his report and for his work during Parliament 's second reading of the proposal .
As he has pointed out very clearly , the great importance of this proposal lies in the fact that it forms part of the European Union 's strategy for the stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions .
It will not , in absolute terms , make the biggest contribution to the reduction of those emissions , but it is a necessary element in the pursuit of the objective .
If we are really serious about that objective , we must do everything that is economically feasible to achieve it .
And this measure offers a favourable cost-benefit for society as a whole .
The proposal will also produce substantial savings for our peoples .
I feel obliged to say that Parliament , through the Committee on Energy , has done much to improve the text and to give the directive a good balance over the course of the second reading .
However , we should remember that time itself is a pressing factor in the struggle to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and that achievement of a reasonable result by the year 2000 depends on getting this proposal adopted as quickly as possible .
The European Union enters into a great many policy commitments ; however , as we had occasion to point out to the Committee on Energy recently , the final stage of decision-making for directives and specific proposals is often plagued by delays .
I think that you would be wise to bear that in mind now as you deliberate on this directive and tomorrow when you vote on it , because having a directive which can be implemented to produce real results by the year 2000 will boost the credibility of Parliament and the credibility of the three legislative institutions as a whole .
You will have noted that the Commission , with this modified proposal , has heeded Parliament 's call at the first reading for a strengthening of the original proposal .
The common position is now very much stronger than it was in the first proposal .
We believe that the common position now strikes the right balance between protection of the environment and the protection of consumers and the interests of the manufacturers , and we can therefore support it .
As regards the amendments , Amendment No 1 is very important because it has to do with the adoption of the second phase .
The Commission has always supported the need for a dynamic approach and for the implementation of a second phase of measures five years after the adoption of the directive .
The Commission welcomes the fact that Parliament has taken a positive stance on the question of the voluntary agreements to be implemented in the second phase .
That , too , conforms with the common position .
However , according to the recommendation of our experts in their extensive study , a precise determination of the technical and economic improvement in the level of efficiency is not possible at this present time .
The Commission thinks it important that the economic and technical factors should be evaluated when the first level enters into force and that determination of the second level of efficiency improvements should be embarked on afterwards .
In view of that , the Commission , while accepting the principle expressed in Amendment No 1 , cannot accept the proposed text where the improvement of efficiency is given a quantification .
We do not have the necessary figures , and it is far too early to contemplate such an amendment .
Rather than a specifically quantified improvement in efficiency , the Commission could accept the expression ' substantial improvement ' , and the Council also could accept that , which would make it possible for all of us to give the proposal final approval .
I believe that what we all want , in the policy sense , is to see the adoption procedure for this proposal brought to a satisfactory conclusion .
Amendment No 2 , concerning the period of adjustment for the first phase , is acceptable to the Commission .
And we are glad that the three legislative institutions agree on the 15 % figure for efficiency improvement in the first phase , because it obviously strengthens the original proposal .
Amendment No 3 deals with an exceedingly technical aspect which has already been discussed in detail in the Committee on Energy , and I would not wish to go into all the details of it today during this debate .
However , as the experts have said , at least for four-star refrigerator-freezers , these coefficients are technically justified .
I therefore welcome Parliament 's acceptance of them , and I can say that the Commission can accept this amendment .
Amendment No 4 , on the new version of the EN 153 standard of July 1995 can also be accepted by the Commission .

Amendment No 5 , tabled by Mr Malerba to Amendment No 8 concerning the adoption of the second phase , approximates very closely to the common position .
The only difference is that ' improving ' is changed to ' significantly improving ' .
This change would be acceptable to the Council and would obviate the need for the conciliation procedure .
For that reason the Commission supports the amendment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in concluding I would like to request Parliament to support amendments which will permit swift adoption of this proposal .
If we truly wish to contribute to the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2000 , it is the most significant thing that we can do .
We need to move rapidly .
I wish to thank all of you , and the rapporteur , Mr Macartney , in particular , for your substantial contribution to the improvement of this proposal and for giving it your support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Short sea shipping
The next item is the report ( A4-0167 / 96 ) by Mr Sindal , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 95 ) 0317 - C4-0297 / 95 ) on the development of short sea shipping in Europe - prospects and challenges .
Mr President , together with my colleagues , I very much welcome the initiative taken by the Commission in this area .
The Committee on Transport has worked on a good many maritime questions in recent years , particularly involving safety .
Now we have come to the development of shipping in the future .
This report may only deal with a communication , but it is a pleasure to be able to present an end result which supplements this initiative .
We have also noted in the committee that the Council has a positive attitude towards the maritime sector .
Unfortunately , this is not always borne out in practice .
As Pushkin put it , words are one thing , actions quite another .
We are therefore some way from the goal we write and speak about so much : short sea shipping as part of the European transport network .
And we all know how things are going with the conciliation procedure .
At this very moment , they will be sitting down and arguing in Luxembourg .
Unfortunately , that is why the Chamber is half empty , because those of my colleagues who are waging the campaign for the Maastricht Treaty to be applied in this area as well are not present .
But the wish to create a coherent transport system in Europe may be harder to put into effect than a common European security and defence policy .
Enough of that , however ; let us now turn to the report .
There are two points in particular which are important - two things which are important if we wish to promote shipping in European waters , in other words what we commonly refer to as short sea shipping , or coastal traffic .
The first is the ports structure and related matters .
The second is competition between the different modes of transport .
These two areas are mentioned in all the statements and all the answers from hearings in this context , and in connection with the production of this report .
It is very important for the Commission and the Council to be aware of this .
On the first point , when will a common position be established as regards the ports sector which all the Member States will apply ?
And on the second , will we succeed in making the initiative on fair pricing and so on something which the Council of Ministers takes seriously ?
Will any more concrete initiatives and decisions be forthcoming ?
Turning to the amendments , I am grateful for the contributions from the Committee on Regional Policy , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions .
It has been a positive experience to work with both internal and external committees , and it also means that there are not so many amendments to the report , a sign that the process we have been through has been effective .
We have reached out to each and every part of Europe , to every port and every ship , in order to discuss this subject .
There are two specific amendments to be dealt with , the first by Mrs Myller and others .
On a previous occasion , I found it helpful to ask the Commission to assess the growing volume of low-standard river-going ships operating in Europe which come from the former East European countries .
The amendment by Mrs Myller and others can therefore be accepted .
I have discussed the other amendment , by Mr Wijsenbeek , with the author and I am bound to say that it belongs in a different area of the debate .
I should therefore like to thank the secretariat and the Commission , and I hope that the Council of Ministers , which will be planning the development of European transport , will be able to achieve a good result .
Let me emphasize from a personal point of view , partly with my own father and grandfather in mind , that shipping was once the future .
For many years now , it has been underrated .
I believe that if we adopt a sensible approach , it will be the role of Parliament , the Commission and the Council to bring shipping to the forefront once again .
If we are serious about this , then decisions are the order of the day .
Politics is all about will , about having the will to do things .
It is not about waiting to see how the market develops .
We should not think that there will be any changes in European transport policy if we fail to decide anything at European level .
Mr President , on behalf of the PSE group I would like to join the rapporteur in thanking the Commission for this important contribution to the debate on the maritime sector and its future and in particular , the role of short sea shipping .
I would also like to underline the point made by the rapporteur that what we need here is political will and in the process thank the rapporteur , Mr Sindal , for the political will he has demonstrated throughout Parliament 's consideration of this communication .
I thank him for the effort that he has put into this report which has ensured that all parties concerned with the future of the maritime sector have fully participated in the development of our response .
The role of short sea shipping clearly needs to be developed .
As many of us are already aware , it already plays a key role in the transportation of goods throughout the European Union ; indeed 30 % or 40 % of our trade is already by short sea shipping .
Clearly that role needs to be developed , not just for historical or sentimental reasons .
I , although I represent the historic port-town of Dover and am very aware of the need to remember our history , recognise that the maritime sector and in particular , short sea shipping could play a key role in the development of transport policies in the future to fulfil both our economic and our environmental objectives .
I should like to deal briefly with both of those issues in turn .
Firstly the economic objectives : the development of ports and port infrastructure and short sea shipping would actually work well towards fulfilling our objective of assisting Ireland and the peripheral areas .
Many of the run-down areas in the European Union with high levels of unemployment are often associated with these ports and coastal areas .
We would therefore be facilitating the regeneration of declining peripheral areas if we supported the measures outlined by the rapporteur .
Secondly , overall within the European Union we will enhance industrial competitiveness if we make short sea shipping in Europe more competitive .
My second area of interest is the environment .
We must not overlook the fact that the short sea shipping sector could play a key role in fulfilling our environmental objectives .
Probably like many Members in the UK , Mr President , you were shocked to find that the EU 's commitments made at the Rio Earth Summit to stabilize CO2 emissions at the 1990 levels by the year 2000 not only are not being fulfilled but are well on course to exceed those particular commitments by a substantial margin .
We therefore desperately need to ensure that short sea shipping is promoted to enable the EU to fulfil its international obligations .
I should like to conclude by thanking the rapporteur for his efforts but I plead with the Commission to state this evening what actions they will now be promoting both within the Commission and the Council to put these fine words into action .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I wish to congratulate Mr Sindal on his excellent report on the Commission 's communication on the development of short sea shipping in Europe .
With just a few amendments , the Commission 's guidelines and action programme will be extremely effective .
But as my colleague Mr Jarzembowski never tires of pointing out , the general policy on seaports , formulated almost in passing and in an annex , is unacceptable in its present form , since it goes far beyond the promotion of short sea shipping .
A reasonable level of mobility in the long term depends on more flexible and efficient transport infrastructures and rational connections between them .
From this point of view above all , but also for environmental and regional policy reasons , I warmly welcome all those aspects which help to shift goods traffic from the roads to coastal waters .
This can only be done if , firstly , the fleet , port structures and links with the port hinterlands are modernized ; secondly , if there is greater transparency of the services on offer , port taxes and port administration structures ; thirdly , if there is coordination between the funding of public and private infrastructure ; and , fourthly , if administrative procedures are simplified .
It is interesting that short sea shipping is finally being regarded as a complex form of service transport : in transport terms , it is thus part of the door-to-door transport chain , and so in direct competition with road haulage .
Short sea shipping must therefore become simpler , cheaper and more efficient in terms of transport times .
The Committee on Regional Policy tabled some amendments at a very early stage . The thrust of these is contained in the Commission 's original text , or the rapporteur has picked up on the linguistic nuances and incorporated them into his report .
For these reasons alone , and not on grounds of content , our group is proposing to reject the majority of these amendments .
A new element raised in Amendment No 3 is the effect of the development of short sea shipping on the creation and preservation of jobs in EU shipyards .
We should therefore support this amendment .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Sindal for his work in highlighting this neglected sector .
We are always worried about job creation and here is an area where we could really stimulate enormous job potential .
At present there are 600 ports near industrial centres .
There are hundreds more that could potentially be developed for this purpose .
Previous speakers have mentioned the aid to stop congestion on the roads which is horrendous and costly in every way , and also that this is an environmentally friendly kind of procedure .
European funds would be well spent if we could encourage further action of this kind and it has to be encouraged because the political will seems to be lacking on the part of our governments .
There are 90 islands in my constituency and many have ferry connections .
But we no longer have direct links , as we used to have in Scotland , with the Low Countries , Scandinavia and the Hanseatic ports .
We could so easily have those links and it would help everybody .
If ever we were looking for ways to assist job creation , this would be an area that we should be considering .
Mr President , given the expected growth in freight transport and the problems we are already facing , short sea shipping is going to have to assume a more prominent role in relieving the burden on land transport .
In order to do so , it will have to be integrated into the trans-European networks , since it is only if it becomes part of the overall door-to-door transport chain that it will be able to compete strongly against other forms of transport .
Firms must make best use of the rapid developments in data processing to ensure smooth links with the other forms of transport used in each case .
Secondly , the time spent by vessels in port must be reduced .
A good deal of progress has already been made here through the use of modern loading and unloading techniques , but it would still be useful to investigate ways of reducing the time still further .
Short sea shipping is also very much held back by cumbersome customs procedures , particularly veterinary checks , and by the monopolies enjoyed by the providers of services in some ports .
This problem receives little attention in the Commission document , despite the fact that it is one of the Commission 's responsibilities to promote the smooth operation of the internal market .
Finally , we must not forget that the promotion of short sea shipping must be seen as part of our overall transport policy .
There is competition not just between the various shipping operators , but also between shipping and other modes of transport , particularly rail .
We endorse the Sindal report and feel that , taken together with the Commission document , it constitutes a valuable and helpful addition to the work of the Maritime Industries Forum .
The Commission must now ensure that all these good intentions are actually put into practice .
Mr President , there is no doubt that the rapid increase in the volume of traffic that we are seeing as trade expands within the single market means that we have to find new methods of looking at transport .
The recommendation drawn up by the Commission in its White Paper on Transport Policy is therefore an obvious and natural consequence of developments in the sector .
It is vital for that purpose that we move from land transport to other forms of transport , such as short sea shipping and river transport .
We have to bear in mind the cost / benefit ratio , the number of kilometres - 35 , 000 - of European coastline and the more than 600 ports from which goods can be distributed , the majority of them close to industrial centres .
That is why those working in this area should pay greater attention to sea transport , and specific infrastructures need therefore to be created to reduce costs and remove obstacles .
The ports should , in particular , make an essential contribution with customs checks , on persons and goods , and also animal health checks .
Moreover , relaunching short-haul sea transport could provide a fresh incentive for economic activity in certain regions , creating new jobs .
Mr Sindal 's report , which follows on from and expands upon the Commission and Council directives , gives us an opportunity to reflect and shows us that we can take the maritime route and that it for all of us to determine the future .
Mr President , sea shipping relieves and lightens overland traffic in many ways .
This is also the case in the area around the Baltic Sea , as Mr Sindal points out in his excellent report .
Despite a long tradition of co-operation in shipping in the Baltic area , going back as far as the Hanseatic League , and despite the fact that sea shippings on the Baltic Sea generally are known to be ecologically beneficial and efficient forms of transport , transport in this area is slower and more difficult than transport across the continent .
Transportation across the Baltic Sea involve the use of several different transport vehicles ; the cargo has to be unloaded and reloaded due to the water levels and the archipelago .
It should be possible to link cargos more smoothly to other parts of the transport chain .
A good example of this is the rail-ship combination , which is expected to increase strongly due to demand .
In the Baltic countries , any future Member States of the European Union , the legislation , the development of ports and of traffic structure require a good deal of work .
It would also be sensible for the European Union to invest in the development of port infrastructure in this area .
Transport connections to northern Europe which work well are obviously beneficial to trade in the entire EU .
The Baltic area should consequently be given similar status in EU traffic policy as has already occurred in the Mediterranean area .
Finally I would like to stress an environmental issue about which I feel that the European Union should make an initiative and start preparatory actions .
I am referring to the transport of oil in European waters - oil transportation , both in small and large vessels , should be prohibited unless the vessels are equipped with a double hull .
The catastrophe in Wales showed that double hulls are an absolute necessity in both small and large oil-transporting vessels , and consequently all vessels in question should be equipped in this way .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the report before us is to promote the transport of goods by sea and to correct the imbalance that exists between maritime and overland transport - an excellent aim , but one which raises various problems regarding the environment , social issues and safety standards .

Minimum safety levels really must be imposed in order to protect human life and to ensure respect for the environment .
A list of essential conditions could be drawn up , and special attention must be given to the need for a minimum training standard for crews .
In this respect , minimum nationality quotas might be a means of raising overall levels of aptitude in view of the lack of professional skills among certain crews whose members are recruited at low cost from countries outside the European Union .
Moreover , standards governing the construction and refurbishment of ships ought to be adopted , since the short sea shipping fleet comprises many small and dilapidated craft .
That could serve as an opportunity to promote European dockyards , thereby establishing a European preference in the domain of ship repairs .
Lastly , it is absolutely essential that there should be standards governing the conditions under which dangerous goods are transported and rules for the prevention of marine pollution , as well as regulated procedures for rapid assistance to ships in distress .
In conclusion , we note that there is convergence between these needs and the activities of the dockyards which exist in the countries of Europe , and we believe that the best possible use should be made of this convergence .
Mr President , it is vitally important , not least for environmental reasons , to do everything we can to move goods and passenger traffic off the roads and onto the railways and the various waterways .
From the perspective of a landlocked European country , inland waterways should be given rather more prominence in this overall context .
Given the likelihood that east-west transit traffic on Austrian roads will increase sharply as a consequence of enlargement to the East , shipping on the River Danube will represent an important alternative .
The efficient management of passenger and goods transport on the Danube is bound to take on a regional dimension in the context of the accession negotiations with the eastern countries bordering on the Danube , and this alternative transport corridor must be used to relieve the already unbearable pressure on the roads .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Kinnock has asked me to apologize to you for not being able to be here today .
He is attending a meeting of the Transport Council in Luxembourg .
First of all I would like to thank Mr Sindal and the Committee on Transport for this very positive and constructive opinion .
I note as well that the opinion gives support to the policy of the Commission regarding the measures proposed in the communication on the development of short sea shipping .
I understand the anxiety about the need for more emphasis to be given to the social dimension of maritime transport .
This dimension , which preserves , in particular , the know-how of European seafarers through education and vocational training and the availability of qualified personnel in the countries of the European Union , is covered in more detail in the Commission 's communication on the new strategy for shipping which was published last March .
The communication proposes joint action by the European Union and the Member States to promote seafaring vocational training programmes and to attract young people to the shipping professions with a view to preserving the seafaring specializations in the European Union and to meeting present and future demand for well-trained seafarers with high levels of skill .
In due course you , as the Parliament , will undoubtedly turn your attention to the specific measures proposed in the communication , and I feel sure that you will view them as positive .
In the framework of that communication , the Commission has embarked on a study of the vocational training and employment of seafarers in the Member States .
The study will cover the following areas :
first , world trends in employment in the marine professions ; -second , the measures taken by the Member States to promote shipping vocational training and career development programmes for seafarers ; -third , other measures which may be necessary for the purpose of attracting young people to the professions .
Obviously , we will make the recommendations of the study known to Parliament and the other institutions .
The study will be discussed with shipowners and the unions in the framework of the Joint Maritime Transport Committee.In response to the question by Mr Watts concerning the direct action that we intend to take , I can inform the House that the Commission is currently drawing up a draft Council regulation on the extension of the combined transport pilot actions .
The five-year experimental programme will be completed in December of this year .
The Commission intends to use the new PACT programme to make the combined transport pilot projects concerned with short sea shipping eligible for financial support on an equal basis with those relating to other forms of transport .
Short sea shipping continues to occupy an important position in on-going activities of the Commission such as the fourth framework programme on research and development , the integration of ports into the trans-European transport network and the support for pilot actions .
With reference to Mr Van der Waal 's concern about the cumbersome administrative burden of veterinary checks , and the question of the legislation itself , the Commission is working closely with the Member States , and I believe that we are already making some progress .
In the future development of policy in the short sea shipping sector the Commission will take account of Parliament 's recommendations and will keep it informed about progress that is made .
In addition , as recommended in Parliament 's report , the Commission will liaise with the Short Sea Panel of the Maritime Industries Forum on the implementation of the action programme envisaged in the communication .
This process has already begun , and the seventh plenary of the forum in Marseilles on 4 and 5 July will make a first formal assessment of the progress that has been made so far .
To conclude , I would like to thank Mr Sindal again for his splendid report and the European Parliament for its painstaking perusal of the communication .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Climate change
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the current and future strategy on climate change .
Mr President , I am glad to have this opportunity to discuss the preparations for the second conference of the parties to the UN framework convention on climate change , and especially the role which the European Union intends to play at this conference .
I shall not repeat here this evening what I said at the excellent hearing in February , and nor will I repeat what we all know , namely that we have sufficient scientific evidence of climate change and that what we need is political action .
So I shall concentrate on what is taking place now .
The second conference will be held in Geneva from 8 to 18 July .
It is part of the process of leading the parties to the convention to enter into further commitments .
The key issues as regards this mandate are as follows : firstly , to bring about agreement among the industrialized countries on setting targets for a reduction in greenhouse gases for the years 2005 , 2010 and , if possible , 2020 ; and , secondly , to secure their agreement on common measures which will enable them to achieve these targets .
For the industrialized countries , this mandate therefore goes much further than the commitment under the convention itself , which principally sets the target of stabilizing the emissions of greenhouse gases at 1990 levels in the year 2000 .
It is anticipated that these agreements will take the form of a protocol to the framework convention .
For the first time in the international negotiations on climate change , the industrialized countries will be focusing their efforts on specific targets for reductions in the coming decades , and on specific political measures to achieve them .
And the negotiations will of course therefore be difficult .
Under the timetable laid down in the Berlin mandate , agreement is to be reached on these issues at the second and third conferences of the parties , the latter to take place at the end of 1997 .
The negotiations on the Berlin mandate have scarcely begun , however .
The process is a complex and difficult one , not only because there are so many different matters to discuss , but also because the industrialized countries - both inside and outside the Union - have a variety of points of departure .
All the parties are now in the process of establishing what commitments they think they can enter into .
The second conference of the parties should thus be regarded as an intermediate step with the aim of giving further political direction to this process .
The view taken by the European Union is that we should continue to base ourselves on the principle of precaution , and that the second conference should therefore fully endorse the evaluation report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change which was also discussed by us in some detail in February .
It is extremely important that the European Union should maintain its leading role in these negotiations .
The targets that we set , the political strategies for achieving them and the measures to reduce emissions must be both ambitious and credible .
As regards the strategies and measures to be laid down in the future protocol to the convention , the Union has already put forward proposals covering a wide range of fields , such as economic instruments , standards for the energy efficiency of products , transport and renewable sources of energy .
At the second conference , this EU initiative will be pursued in other sectors , and here I would mention forestry , agriculture and industry .
Against this background , the Commission will continue to be a driving force in the process .
I have therefore decided to seek a mandate from the Council , following the second conference of the parties , to negotiate on the basis of Article 228 of the Treaty .
The proposal for this mandate , preparations for which are well under way , will concentrate firstly on securing ambitious and credible targets for reductions for the group of Annex 1 parties , i.e. for the most part the industrialized countries as a whole , in accordance with the timetable laid down in the Berlin mandate , and secondly on the content of the protocol on political strategies and the measures to be taken at a number of levels .
An ambitious and consistent policy on climate change has a very high priority in the European Union .
To implement such a policy , we need to be active and credible both domestically and internationally .
The measures we take must be framed in such a way that they show our wish to achieve results and increase our credibility .
The Commission fully recognizes this , and therefore regrets the recent development in the ECOFIN Council regarding the proposed CO2 energy tax , just as we regret the reduction in the Commission 's proposed budget for SAVE II by the Energy Council .
We in the Commission are firmly convinced of the need for an EU-wide tax instrument to support the efforts to reduce CO2 emissions .
The Commission therefore does not intend to withdraw the current proposal .
Mr President , it is now four years since the Commission published its original proposal for the introduction of a Community-wide CO2 energy tax .
At the time it was seen as an essential part of the Community 's efforts to meet international targets which , after all , they had agreed at Rio .
In spite of that agreement , four years on the proposal still stands blocked by the very Council whose members agreed these original targets .
As the Commissioner has said , earlier this year in February the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection had a public hearing during which a series of distinguished speakers told us of the dramatic effect climate change might have .
Drought , storm damage , floods would become more likely and medium and long-term insurance costs are therefore likely to become considerable burdens on industry and consequently on job creation .
The Council seems to have forgotten that sustainable jobs depend on a sustainable environment .
Short-term thinking in both industry and governments has meant that Council is still unwilling to take any action .
The latest ridiculous example of this was the slashing of the SAVE II programme .
Have these people never heard of the precautionary principle ?
Do they not take advice from their own scientists ?
Do they not realise that they are prejudicing the well-being and even the livelihood of European citizens ?
The lessons from last week 's Rome Conference in which the Commissioner , the Italian President-in-Office and myself took part are there to be learned .
In spite of increased unemployment , the fact is that taxation on labour has more than doubled in the last thirty years but taxation on resource-use has remained steady at only 10 % .
It is time we embraced the economic model advanced in Chapter 10 of the Delors White Paper and altered that balance .
As far as we are concerned , the Commission must redouble its efforts to persuade Member States that the creation of employment and the protection of the environment go hand in hand .
Both demand a credible and active policy to reduce CO2 emissions through a combination of incentive , regulation and progressive taxation .
That policy is needed sooner rather than later .
I hope , therefore , that when the conference of parties to the Convention on Climate Change meets in July , they will not simply add to the greenhouse effect by generating even more hot air .
We have had quite enough of that .
It is the role of the Community to persuade its Member States to take action and I hope the Commission will take that job seriously and persuade all Member States to cooperate fully in producing that action .
Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner 's statement and , in particular , that she speaks on behalf of the Commission in deploring the latest developments in the Council over the CO2 energy tax .
I agree with her emphasis on the political nature of this problem and welcome her call for us to take a leading role .
But if we are to take a leading role we have to be politically credible ; and if we are going to be credible we have to learn the lessons of the past , which is that very little has actually been achieved .
Very little has been achieved in recent years because of the determined blocking of the political process by particular lobbies that threw dirt in the potential way forward of solving the administrative problems and indeed denied the whole scientific basis .
I share with her the belief that the relevant timescale is from now until the Kyoto Conference .
The mandate is important : it is important that the Council gives the Commission a mandate for widespread negotiations , and these are not just negotiations with the Americans , they have to be negotiations with the Chinese and the Indians as well .
This is a global problem and it needs a global solution .
There is a need to refresh the debate and to talk about not global warming but climate protection , to recognize that the ground of the debate has shifted , that there are people in the insurance industry and the agriculture industry who are already feeling the advanced impact of climate change .
So I have brought her this evening a modest proposal which I invite her to support .
It would dramatise political attention if we were to indicate exactly why this is so politically difficult .
It is so politically difficult because of the fossil fuel industries ' determination to jam up the legislative process both here and in America .
So I invite her to support an idea of mine , which is that we should take to naming hurricanes after oil companies .
When hurricane Exxon hits the Florida coast this might well focus attention quite eloquently .
I should like to endorse what the last two speakers have said and also thank the Commissioner for the commitment she has shown on this issue ; the matter is best summed up by saying that we have the knowledge , but need political action , and this is not in fact a situation where there are grounds for criticizing the Commission .
I therefore join in the regret at the lack of a decision by the ECOFIN Council on the CO2 tax and the decision taken by the Energy Council on SAVE II , which show that when it comes to realities , the Council wants neither taxes nor research , in other words it wants nothing at all when it comes down to it .
The Commissioner said that the Union should take the lead in this field , and here one has to say that the Commission has taken the lead , but the Union certainly has not , and the risk we are running at the moment is that the climate issue will be one of the really sorry , not to say frosty chapters in the long history of the Union , while reality shows that what is in fact involved is global warming .
Mr President , I wish I could take pleasure in hearing the Commissioner say that the Commission wanted to be ambitious and realistic .
The realism , unfortunately , consists today in recognizing that we are in something of a blind alley , especially as far as energy taxation is concerned .
But since we are talking of ambition , I believe we must ask some questions about the types of initiative that the Commission and the European Union might take in the coming weeks in connection with the Geneva conference .
I should like to know what the Commissioner thinks of the German proposal that has been tabled , namely that we should set ourselves a new target of a 10 % reduction in greenhouse-gas concentrations by 2005 and a 15 % reduction by 2010 .
It is a proposal that my political friends and I find too weak , but it points in the right direction .
We believe it is totally realistic to set a 20 % reduction in the 1990 figure as a target for 2005 , a 30 % reduction for 2010 and 50 % for 2030 .
It is perfectly realistic from a technical point of view as well as being economically advantageous .
All the arguments prove that , which is why I think we ought to move in this direction .
My second question is this : it would seem that a discussion paper has been circulating in the Commission in which it is proposed that a maximum permissible concentration of greenhouse gases , or rather of CO2 , be introduced and that this ceiling be set at 550 parts per million .
May I point out that before the industrial age there were 280 ppm of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and that an increase to 550 ppm , which is virtually double the concentration , would entail a temperature increase of two degrees .
Is the Commissioner able to confirm or deny the existence of this paper , and what does she think of its alleged content ?
I believe that is quite crucial to the future course of our debate .
Commissioner , I should like to associate myself with the congratulations that have been expressed to you on the objectives and ambitions you have established for the Commission , but if I may strike a whimsical note - with all due respect to yourself - I feel that it is not the Commission we should be listening to here but the Council of Ministers , since all guidelines established by the Commission are systematically destroyed by the Council .
I am thinking especially of Jacques Delors ' Directive on CO2 -based energy , which was buried with great haste by the Council in Essen in 1994 .
I am also thinking of a number of other proposals made by the Commission which were never put into effect .
We have to tell the Commission that its ambitions are noble but that it ought to go further , especially with regard to the fifth action programme , in which it set itself the aim of incorporating an environmental aspect into all its policies .
But whenever we discuss transport in particular , we notice that the environmental aspect is excluded .
The Maastricht Treaty may well be criticized , but to its credit it does lay down convergence criteria and quantifies them .
We have no such criteria for the environment or for combating the greenhouse effect .
Why , Commissioner , should we not establish environmental convergence criteria which the Member States and the Commission and governments would be bound to follow and which would be quantified in accordance with environmental needs ?
I have the feeling that , with the environment and the greenhouse effect , we shall have to go careering into a brick wall - as is happening with the BSE crisis - before we realize that a radical change of direction is needed .
Once again , the vacuum left by the lack of political will has been filled , as Mr Spencer rightly said , by business , liberalism and the quest for profit .
Shall we have to leave the government of Europe to the tender mercies of those multinationals which , at the moment , are doing their business at the expense of consumers ?
I think not .
Finally , the latest UN conference , Habitat II on cities , illustrates to us how urgently the Commission needs to let its voice be heard by the Council of Ministers and , ultimately , to reassert its authority .
Mr President , I sometimes have the impression that disasters are already happening , but we refuse to admit that they are the result of climate change .
It is becoming increasingly clear from research that human intervention in the form of emissions of greenhouse gases is causing climate change , so that even those who most stubbornly refuse to accept that there is a link are beginning to have their doubts .
We do not appear to know yet what the precise link is , and I would therefore ask the Commission to intensify its research programme in this field .
It seems to me that we need more information on this link in order to be able to develop an appropriate reduction strategy .
What does the Commission think about this ?
What approach does it intend to adopt at the forthcoming conference on climate change and the developing countries ?
What efforts are we making in Europe , and which projects by the developing countries are we prepared to support financially ?
Does the Commissioner agree that if the Union is to maintain its credibility , we must ensure that the support we provide is balanced between Europe and the developing world ?
Mr President , as the greenhouse gases build up , there is a growing likelihood that our climate will be adversely affected , and we must always bear in mind that the climate is not a linear system , in that very sudden , unexpected changes can occur , causing whole eco-systems to disappear at a stroke .
We now know from many scientific reports what kind of counter-measures are required , and where and by whom they should be taken , but the introduction of such measures is being delayed , because unfortunately the many fine words are not being followed by the necessary deeds .
I would have particularly liked to see the introduction of what are described as ' no regrets ' measures - measures which , whatever the circumstances , bring immediate and substantial benefits to the environment by reducing pollutants , and which undoubtedly improve energy efficiency as well as creating jobs , as previous speakers have pointed out .
When one thinks that a third of all the CO2 emissions in the world are caused by energy generation and distribution , we have surely not yet fully exhausted the potential savings , which should at long last be introduced , because of course lower energy consumption not only does less damage to the environment and reduces emissions into the atmosphere , but can also have a major impact on the competitiveness of our countries .
I hope , Commissioner , that in the discussions on the mandate which you are to be given , you will draw the attention of the Council members in particular to the fact that decisions like the slashing of the SAVE II programme are totally at odds with the declarations which they make .
Mr President , the Commissioner tells us that we have done everything we can to reduce CO2 emissions , but we have failed in our aim and now , four years on , we are once again going to a conference where we will be trying our best to come to some sort of new agreement .
And what was the reason for our failure ? According to the Commissioner , it was because the ECOFIN Council will not accept our CO2 tax .
But we have known for two years now that ECOFIN will not accept the CO2 tax , so why does the European Union not try to develop a number of alternatives instead ?
The next question is : what exactly should it do ?
Will we have to change from fossil fuels to renewable sources of energy , and reduce energy consumption ?
What has the Commission agreed to do about this , or is the CO2 tax still the only thing anyone talks about ?
What precise agreements have been reached ?
The best idea , it seems to me , would be to see what we can arrange on a voluntary basis with our industries , in the form of self-regulation .
Why can we not do this , instead of simply waiting to see what a CO2 tax will achieve , when we know that there is no chance of it going through at the moment ?
I would therefore urge the Commissioner to come up with a plan that we can consider in parallel with the CO2 tax , so that we can go along to the international conference with some honest proposals .
Mr Blokland is quite right when he says that if we , the industrialized countries of the European Union , cannot get anything done , then we really cannot expect the developing countries to do anything either .
Mr President , my question relates to what the previous speaker and the other Dutch Members have said .
What we are talking about this evening obviously concerns the developing countries , and the Netherlands has already felt the effects , as it were , of climate changes in the Antilles .
I have a very specific question which relates to those raised by my colleagues .
There is an organization called AOSIS , the Alliance of Small Island States , and if there is one subject close to its heart it is climate change .
The islands of the Pacific and the Caribbean will be in the front line if the situation deteriorates .
An ambassador in the Pacific once said ' we are the canaries of the mines ' .
If the canary drops dead , you know you have to get out of the mine , and that is what these small island states are .
My question to the Commission is this : these islands are very well aware that they are in the front line .
There are atolls in the Pacific which are being evacuated at this very moment , but this is not even mentioned in the European press .
There are 200 or 300 people who are being moved from the atolls where they have lived for generations .
Many of the AOSIS states are ACP countries - in fact , one third of the ACP countries with which Europe has development agreements are small island states .
Is the Commissioner prepared to develop a plan with Mr Pinheiro , who is responsible for the ACP countries , to try to work with them to provide help for the AOSIS states , and is she also prepared to attend the hearing on climate change which the ACP Assembly is organizing in Brussels in September ?
Mr President , the reports we have debated here this evening have had a great deal to say about climate change .
They dealt with precisely the problem taken up by Commissioner Bjerregaard .
I believe that the debate has demonstrated Parliament 's concern for this issue extremely well ; there was not a single speaker who did not stress the importance of taking measures in this field .
I believe it is interesting to return to the report of the Brundtland Commission , where climate changes - the climate issue - is cited as being the environmental issue of greatest priority in the report ' Environment and Development ' .
With regard to the intensive debate we have had on nuclear energy , it is also interesting that this report takes roughly the same line as Commissioner Cresson did very recently , namely that safety measures must be increased in this field so that nuclear energy can be used in the positive battle to achieve lower carbon dioxide emissions .
I should then like to ask the Commissioner if it would still not be possible , despite previous failures , to continue with carbon taxes and attempt to convince the Member States of the wisdom of carrying out these measures .
I might perhaps be able to advise them to study carefully the carbon taxes which have been introduced in Sweden .
I willingly admit that we have had failures in some areas but in others these taxes have been very successful .
There is every reason to promote this in other countries in the Union .
Mr President , I am grateful for the many helpful comments on a problem which I recognize is one that we agree should be taken seriously .
There are a few points which I should like to make about some of what has been said .
I very much agree with Mr Collins that when you run into difficulties , there is little else to do but try to redouble your efforts , and I think we are in fact trying to do so .
That is why we are now seeking to obtain a mandate in connection with the negotiations at the end of 1997 , as both I and Mr Collins mentioned , and to make progress with the use of economic means in general .

I also share Mr Spencer 's view from the other side of the House that we must naturally concern ourselves with what we are able to do here in the Union , but that it is important for us to bring about the dialogue which is so urgently needed with China and India , for example , if these problems are actually to be resolved .
Several Members referred to the SAVE II programme .
Mrs Dybkjær did so , and Mr Blokland called for more resources to be provided for targeted research programmes .
It may well be said that what took place in the Energy Council , where my colleague Mr Papoutsis argued very strongly against the cutback which was decided , seems most unreasonable and also casts some doubt on what we can actually achieve in the area of research , but it will not prevent us from trying again to see how far it is possible for us to go .
Mr Lannoye referred specifically to the German proposal and the objective which it contained .
We are currently working on several different objectives put forward by countries in the Union , and we are glad to support many of the proposals which have been made , because we need ambitious targets in order to make any progress at all , and we do wish to make progress in the negotiations .
This is a general objective on which we have an opportunity of moving forward .
The only contribution here this evening which I did not actually understand was the one by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , because it appeared from her speech that we in the Commission are supposed to have sat back and waited and not really done anything , because we cannot get our CO2 tax through at the moment .
I am sure Mrs Oomen-Ruijten will remember that the Commission , when it emerged that we would be unable to get the tax through , brought forward guidelines which gave the Member States some scope for making progress , because we did not just want to resign ourselves to waiting when we made no progress on this in the ECOFIN Council , and so we have been continuing our work .
There is a new mandate , on the basis of which Commissioner Monti is currently working , and as regards the international conferences we have been talking about here this evening , they have nothing to do with the tax , they are about the targets , and then we have to choose the means we are going to use in this area .
I can tell Mrs van Putten that measures are well under way to help the smaller islands , and to help with the problems to which she referred .
I will gladly look at the scope for doing more , together with Commissioner Pinheiro .
We are very conscious of the matter , and there is excellent cooperation in this area .

I would say to Mr Virgin that one of the purposes of the conference in Rome on economic means was precisely to look at what the Member States have done - including Sweden , but other Member States as well - when they have tried to use economic means ; how these have worked , what weaknesses there have been , and how we can possibly make further progress with this approach .
The real breakthrough in this area lies in the negotiations at the intergovernmental conference and involves extending majority decision-making to other sectors , but that is - and I think Parliament would agree - a different debate which we must have on another occasion .
Mr President , I gather that the Commissioner says she did not understand my question .
Let me explain .
First of all , because of climate change we reached a number of agreements on reducing CO2 which we have been discussing for the last four years . In the meantime , the Commission has come up with the idea of a CO2 tax , but this has not gone through .
My question is : what progress has Europe really made in reducing CO2 ?
And the answer is none at all .
So I wonder why , in addition to this tax idea , we should not also try to bring about voluntary reductions by encouraging a voluntary shift from fossil fuels to other renewable energy sources , as has already been done very successfully in the Netherlands ?
Why can you not try something like this ?
Why not try and move forward with new projects instead of just sitting back and waiting ?
Mr President , the Commissioner answered one of my two questions but not the other .
The second question referred to whether or not a proposal was about to be put forward by the Commission limiting the acceptable future concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere to a ceiling of 550 parts per million .
That would lead , it must be said , to an average temperature increase of two degrees .
Does this proposal exist , or does it not ?
Is it a basis for discussion ?
I would say to Mr Lannoye that as far as I am aware , this is not our proposal , although it has entered into some of the negotiations ; however , it would not be particularly wise of me to say more without studying this in further detail , so as to be sure of giving you a correct and more complete answer .
I should then like to say again to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten that I understood her first speech very well , which differed from all the other speeches here this evening by taking the view that the Commission had done nothing at all since we were unable to secure the introduction of the CO2 tax .
That is not true .
As I pointed out , we went on to bring forward a number of guidelines designed to improve the situation .
In addition , we have been calling very strongly for targets to be established , and we have been active in this respect following the Berlin conference .
This has been achieved for some countries in various ways , and we have explained some of the ways in which it has been done .
We are continuing with our task , and it is clear from our programme of work that there will be a communication on voluntary agreements aimed at considering how these can play a part not only in terms of climate change , but in other areas too , and I very much hope that the programme concerning motor oils , which is closely linked to emissions and the scope for reducing them , will go through at the Commission meeting tomorrow .
So while we maintain that a CO2 tax would be sensible and appropriate , we have worked on guidelines , we are naturally working on many other proposals , and as regards the international conferences , we are not abandoning our aim of establishing reasonable standards in the negotiations that will take place with other countries .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was closed at 7.40 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , concerning item No 10 on page 16 of the Minutes , Mr Novo raised the matter of the use of the bridge over rue Belliard to film a demonstration .
The President said that he would reply in writing .
It was a legitimate question and we are all entitled to hear the answer .
If Parliament 's premises are to be used by the goons and the ginks and the finks we are all entitled to know .
Perhaps the Minutes do not record the President 's words accurately , Mr Smith .
He asked Mr Novo to submit his observations to him in writing .
Clearly , he could not give an immediate reply , and since he did not have direct knowledge of the events in question , he asked Mr Novo to make his point in writing , so that he could make the necessary inquiries and provide an answer as soon as possible .

( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Calendar of part-sessions
At its meeting of 13 June , the Conference of Presidents decided to propose the following calendar of part-sessions for 1997 :
13 to 17 January ; - 29 to 30 January ; - 17 to 21 February ; - 10 to 14 March ; - 7 to 11 April ; - 23 to 24 April ; - 12 to 16 May ; - 28 to 29 May ; - 9 to 13 June ; - 25 to 26 June ; - 14 to 18 July ; - 8 to 12 September ; - 24 to 25 September ; - 6 to 10 October ; - 20 to 24 October ; - 5 to 6 November ; - 17 to 21 November ; - 3 to 4 December ; - 15 to 19 December.The deadline for tabling amendments to these dates is 5 p.m. on Wednesday , 3 July .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday , 17 July .
Mr President , am I correct in thinking you said that the deadline for tabling amendments would be Wednesday 3 July ?
That would be preposterous .
It would be before we have a proper discussion in the main group meetings .
You have to allow the full group meeting in the week before the plenary session so that groups can make decisions as to how they will vote .
This is not the prerogative of four or five people sitting in a smoke-filled , or any other , room .
The groups have to meet .
I urge you to look at the deadline for amendments so that the proper full group meeting that is normally only held on a Wednesday afternoon and Thursday morning can take place and so that the Members of this House have some say in how and where they meet .
Thank you , Mr Tomlinson . The President set this deadline precisely so that the political groups would be able to discuss the calendar beforehand .
In any event , I shall pass on your comments to the President .
There is another meeting of the Conference of Presidents this Thursday , and the group chairmen will thus have an opportunity to discuss the deadline and change it if necessary .
Decision on urgency
Mr Santini has the floor to give the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture as the committee responsible .
Mr President , since Mr Jacob , the chairman of the committee is not here , I wish to express in his place the view of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , that is to say the decision we have taken not to agree to urgency on this matter .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , I would formally request the House to agree to urgent procedure .
We have fallen badly behind with our emergency aid for Bosnia-Herzegovina .
I was there with other Members a fortnight ago , and we were able to see that the emergency aid of ECU 92 million cannot be put into effect because of the lack of a legal basis .
Please do not make the people in Bosnia-Herzegovina , who desperately need this money , pay the price of the disagreement over the legal basis .
If we do not agree to urgent procedure , it will take longer still for this money even to reach the start of the administrative process .
I would implore you to vote in favour of urgent procedure in this case .
Mr President , we shall be looking at the question of finance tomorrow afternoon , and I hope that we can take the vote on Thursday , because the Committee on Budgets adopted that report unanimously yesterday evening .
So I do not see how urgency will make any difference as far as the report on the regulation is concerned .
We would prefer to keep to the planned timetable , in other words to have the vote on the Committee on Budgets ' report on Thursday and the debate on the report on the regulation in due course .
Mr President , with reference to the alarming situation in Bosnia , agreement was reached in January of this year at a tripartite meeting of Parliament , the Council and the Commission on guidelines for the budget concerned .
Most of the appropriations are to be used for the procurement of goods for the reconstruction of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
In other words , thanks to Parliament 's decision in January to approve disbursement , EU aid is already a reality in the region and continues to flow in .
The legal formalities surrounding this aid do not therefore need to be dealt with as a matter of urgency .
Secondly , Mr President , the Commission and the Council have taken six months before deciding they wanted to seek Parliament 's views on these legal issues .
If Parliament now takes one month it can hardly be regarded as unreasonably dilatory .
Thirdly , however , Mr President , we in the European Parliament have objections to the procedure proposed by the Council .
The Council decided on the regulation at its meeting of 10 June 1996 in Luxembourg , when it also amended the Commission 's proposal .
Now Parliament is being consulted on an issue on which the Council has already adopted a standpoint .
I do not wish to rule out the possibility that Parliament will request negotiations with the Council once it has given its opinion in July .
In any event , Mr President , we should today reject the proposal from the Council for a special urgent debate on this subject .
Thank you , Mr Cars .
We have heard one speaker in favour and one against , and Mr Cars has spoken on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I now put the request for urgency to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
EMI annual report - Currency fluctuations and the internal market - Exchange rate relations- Broad guidelines of economic policies
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A4-0180 / 96 ) by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the second annual report of the European Monetary Institute ( C4-0228 / 96 ) ; -the report ( A4-0181 / 96 ) by Mr Pérez Royo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 95 ) 0503 - C4-0011 / 96 ) on the impact of currency fluctuations on the internal market ; -the report ( A4-0186 / 96 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the interim report by the Commission to the European Council ( CSE ( 95 ) 2108 - C4-0308 / 96 ) on the exchange rate relations between the Member States taking part in the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union and the remaining Member States ; -the oral question ( B4-0561 / 96-0-0126 / 96 ) by Mr Cassidy , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , to the Council , on the recommendation on the broad guidelines of the economic policies ; -the oral question ( B4-0567 / 96-0-0130 / 96 ) by Mr Hughes , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , to the Commission , on broad guidelines of the economic policies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be very brief .
I do not intend to outline the report by the European Monetary Institute , but simply to comment on three rather important points which it raises .
First of all , there is the work done by the Institute since the end of last year , which I am pleased to be able to tell you has gone according to schedule .
In other words , we are still on course to complete the structure for the future European Central Bank , and we have not encountered any serious delays .
There is therefore every reason to believe that the Bank will indeed be able to get the single currency up and running in 1999 .
This was the first point I wished to make .
Secondly , there is the analysis of the economic situation which we give in the report .
There have been no significant changes since the report was drawn up .
Of course , we are all concerned about current economic developments , and we are all wondering , individually and collectively , how likely it is that we shall see signs of a recovery in the course of this year .
In my personal opinion it is extremely likely , and I expect to see a recovery in the second half of the year , though I cannot predict how strong it will be .
But whatever doubts there may be at the moment about its scale and strength , it is growing increasingly likely that it will happen .
Thirdly , there is the process of convergence , which the report covers in some detail .
I am pleased to say that further progress has been made on convergence on inflation , interest rates and the stabilization of exchange rates , and we are certainly heading in the right direction .
Our budgetary concerns are , of course , the same as they were when the report was drawn up , but it is encouraging to see that the analyses carried out in the various countries and the budget plans announced by the governments are converging too .
I think that each and every country is fully aware of the scale of the problems confronting us , with or without Maastricht .
So the fact that our thinking , analyses and determination to find a solution to these problems are all converging is of crucial importance , and is essential if the government policies which are currently being put in place are to succeed .
We will have a clearer picture towards the end of the year , once we have seen the budget forecasts for next year .
These were the comments I wished to make to accompany our annual report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the second Annual Report of the European Monetary Institute contains an adequate analysis of the progress made by the Union 's economies in the process of economic and monetary convergence , as well as a detailed description of the preparatory work for the third stage of economic and monetary union , with particular emphasis being placed on the report on the changeover to the single currency which formed the basis of the European Council 's decision of December 1995 , the agreement on the interconnection in real time of gross settlement systems - the ' Target ' system - and the coordination of the instruments of monetary policy .
There are still far too many question marks over the final outcome of this process , in which the European Monetary Institute plays a fundamental role .
Despite the fact that six months ago , at the Madrid summit , the Heads of State or Government of the Member States firmly reiterated their commitment to achieving economic and monetary union and introducing the single currency , certain statements made in political , economic and financial circles have been casting doubts on whether these objectives are entirely viable .

As Mr Lamfalussy said , the process of economic convergence is meeting with success in three respects : inflation , interest rates and exchange-rate stability . Furthermore , we have sound and competitive economies , as is demonstrated by the positive development of the European Union 's balance of trade .
Nevertheless , the hoped-for economic recovery - which six months ago , the European Commission was calling robust - has failed to materialize .
We are in a period of uncertainty , of economic sluggishness - there was even a slight recession in the first quarter of the year - which can only be explained by the lack of consumer and investor confidence brought about respectively by the high level of unemployment and the necessary budgetary cutbacks , all of which is preventing the economic upturn from occurring .
However , as is also stated in the EMI 's report , there is a clear need to reduce public deficits and debts substantially .
In my view , therefore , the only course is for the Community institutions - and especially the Council - to give a clear and resolute signal that the process of economic and monetary union , as set out in the Maastricht Treaty , is irreversible . Consequently , it is essential for economic operators to be provided with adequate guarantees that enable them to give a boost to the kind of economic activity in which investment plays a key role in both promoting the recovery and ensuring that the European economy is sufficiently competitive in the medium term .
In this context , the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy stresses the need to enhance the role and the capacities of the EMI , especially in view of the fact that 1996 is a decisive year for economic and monetary union , since according to Article 109f of the Maastricht Treaty , the EMI must specify by 31 December the regulatory , organizational and logistical framework necessary for the European System of Central Banks to perform its tasks in the final stage of EMU .
We believe that in its activities hitherto , the EMI has been excessively reserved and restrained .
Our committee takes the view that the EMI should adopt a firmer and more resolute approach , enabling it to play a more active role in the coordination of the Member States ' monetary policies and to establish flexible working relationships with the international financial institutions , in particular the International Monetary Fund . Also , the committee gives its backing to the proposal that the EMI should be rigorous in the application of Articles 104 and 104a of the Maastricht Treaty , which prohibit monetary financing and privileged access - cases of which have occurred , albeit on a small scale , and which must be eliminated completely .
Our committee also stresses the need for the adjustment of internal control mechanisms , with the introduction of new and effective procedures aimed at preventing the kind of distortions which occurred in connection with financial derivatives .
Finally , it is calling for the European Monetary Institute 's activities to be extended to more operational fields , in view of the timetable and objectives entrusted to the EMI , which is a key player - and , we would wish , a more active one - in the process of preparing for economic and monetary union and the single currency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report which I have the honour of presenting to the House today concerns the monetary fluctuations which occurred during 1992 and 1993 - and indeed 1995 - and which , as we know , had a significant impact on the functioning of the European exchange-rate mechanism and the internal market itself , leading first and foremost to changes in competitiveness in favour of those currencies which suffered depreciations .
Secondly , it should be remembered that as a result of these monetary fluctuations or upheavals , two currencies left the European Monetary System in 1992 .
The EMS was itself modified in 1993 , with the broadening of the fluctuation bands .
Above all , however , the distorting effects on the internal market caused by the uncertainty and insecurity in the markets resulting from these fluctuations should be underlined .
The main concern of our report is not so much to produce a balance sheet of winners and losers as a result of these fluctuations , but to draw the lessons from the past which must be taken into account in the future , especially when it comes to defining the relationship between the euro and the currencies which temporarily remain outside EMU .
As far as the causes of the fluctuations are concerned , we must focus principally on the inadequate coordination of the economic policies of the Member States , whose economies , prior to 1992 , displayed very different patterns of behaviour as regards inflation , budget deficits and interest rates .
This situation contrasted with the stability of nominal exchange rates , which progressively diverged from real exchange rates , giving rise to the corrective action of the markets , which was also encouraged by the lack of flexibility of the EMS which existed at the time .
With regard to the effects of the fluctuations , we agree with the Commission communication that they were not particularly noticeable at macro-economic level , neither in terms of the volume of external trade of the countries affected , nor the increase in market share .
On the whole , the effects were mainly felt at sectoral level , with a reduction in the profit margins of undertakings in countries whose currencies appreciated .
In any event , we would stress that the principal damaging effects were those caused to the smooth and effective functioning of the internal market . This was especially due to the fact that the fluctuations of European currencies were accompanied by fluctuations of the dollar and yen , underlining Europe 's need for a single currency - the euro - capable of functioning autonomously as a reserve currency at international level and offsetting the fluctuations of these and other currencies .
I should also like to draw attention to the fact that in recent years - those of the second stage of EMU , the current stage in the process - there has been an improvement in the coordination of the economies of the Fifteen , which have made progress towards convergence . This progress has been underpinned by the behaviour of the markets , which appear to be demonstrating their confidence that the timetable for economic and monetary union will be met .
Since 1993 , the European Monetary System has functioned satisfactorily .
Despite the broadening of the fluctuation bands , the currencies which form part of the EMS have been moving within reduced margins which correspond to the narrow bands in force before the summer of 1993 .
This very week , if we examine the EMS grid , we can see that the difference in parities between the strongest and weakest currencies is less than 2 % . And this has been the case continuously now for several months .
In this context , the report recommends that an explicit call should be made for those currencies at present outside the European Monetary System , both those which left it in 1993 and those of the new Member States - which , with the exception of Austria , have not yet joined the EMS , to be integrated into it as soon as possible .
And , in this respect , we must welcome the rumours - because at present they are no more than rumours - of the imminent return of the lira to the EMS , as well as the entry of the Finnish mark .
Looking towards the future , it is important to stress the need to strengthen the mechanisms for coordinating economic policies at European level ; and it could even be argued that the ECOFIN Council should progressively become a kind of economic government of the Union .
Finally , I should like to make a few brief comments concerning the relationship between the ' ins ' and the ' outs ' - between the euro and the currencies which remain outside EMU .
This issue is the subject of the report which will be introduced next , so I shall deal with it very quickly .
There is a broad consensus on the need for a system which has the euro as a pivot , in relation to which the currencies which remain temporarily outside EMU would float within bands of an agreed width . This system would be complemented by a practice of inflation targeting approved jointly by the European Central Bank and the central banks of the countries outside EMU .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the third stage of economic and monetary union will begin with the establishment of the European Central Bank on 1 January 1999 .
However , it is probable that not all the Member States will participate , because they are either unwilling or unable to do so .
This means in effect that monetary union will be achieved at various speeds , and we must ask ourselves the question : is this in fact compatible with the Treaty of Rome ?
For Denmark and the United Kingdom , the relevant protocols to the Treaty make explicit reference to the socalled ' opting in ' and ' opting out ' .
It is fairly certain that one of these countries , and possibly both , will make use of this opportunity .
Thus the Treaty itself makes provision for a two-speed Europe .
Other countries will initially remain outside because they cannot yet meet the stability criteria .
I would remind the House on this point that the criteria were decided jointly by all the Member States , and then ratified by all the national parliaments without exception .
We must abide by these criteria as stipulated in the Treaty ; they must not be relaxed .
But nor should any further conditions be laid down before the entry into force of monetary union .
It would of course be preferable for all the Member States of the European Union to accede to the monetary union simultaneously , but that could only happen at the expense of stability .
The Maastricht Treaty sets out the priorities unequivocally : the stability of the common European currency is more important than its simultaneous introduction in all the Member States .
But will not a variable-speed monetary union jeopardize the smooth functioning of the European single market , one of our major achievements ?
I would refer here to the exchange-rate turbulence experienced in recent years .
Since 1993 , competitive devaluations have caused numerous jobs in the European Union to be put at risk , and even lost .
Unless stability in the exchange rate between the euro and the other currencies of the Union can be maintained , there will be a danger that the European single market could break up , even after the transition to monetary union , in other words even after 1 January 1999 .
What instruments do we have to prevent this ?
The prerequisite for exchange-rate stability is that all the EU Member States should operate credible and sound financial , economic and monetary policies .
In addition , the existing exchange-rate system should be retained in a modified form .
However , when the new exchange-rate system comes to be designed , with the euro as its anchor currency , account must be taken of the experience gained with the EMS .
The new system must demonstrate greater simplicity , transparency and flexibility than its predecessor .
Flexibility is the key : the new exchange-rate system must be more flexible than the previous one .
Any necessary exchange-rate adjustments between the euro and the other currencies must be geared to the realities of exchange relations , and they must be made in good time .
A major weakness of the ' old ' EMS was that it was up to the Member States involved to initiate the process for adjusting exchange rates .
Time after time , this resulted in delays for political reasons , leading to adjustments being made under chaotic conditions ; such difficulties must be avoided with the new system .
We therefore support the proposal that the right of setting the adjustment mechanism in motion should be granted to the President of the European Central Bank .
What is more , the system must have fairly broad margins of fluctuation , to be set by mutual agreement .
Member States wishing to do so could choose to have closer links with the euro , as they make progress towards meeting the stability criteria .
Intervention measures in support of currencies experiencing difficulties should be automatic when a currency reaches its fluctuation margin and possible before it does so , provided that such measures are justified by fundamental economic factors , and that their volume does not run counter to the objective of achieving price stability .
In my personal view , this new exchange-rate system will still function even if the United Kingdom declines to participate .
The UK only participated for a short while in the present exchange-rate system : its lengthy absence brought no significant disadvantages , and nor did its brief participation lead to significant gains in efficiency for the system .
It should be borne in mind , however , that under the Treaty , exchange-rate policy is a matter of common interest .
The UK is therefore obliged to keep the rate of the pound stable against the euro ; whether that happens within or outside the exchange-rate system is a secondary issue .
However , if the UK were to join the system , the exchange rate on entry would this time - unlike last time - have to be set by agreement with the other EU Member States .
Finally , I would just comment briefly on stability policy after the transition to monetary union .
Global public sector debt in Europe remains too high , and this works to the detriment of competitiveness and of the younger generation .
We are therefore awaiting clear proposals from the Commission on how budgetary discipline can be maintained after the entry into force of monetary union .
Clearly , however , the objective must be that ultimately all the Member States of the European Union will also be members of the monetary union .
1999 will be the decisive date for the central banks .
The decisive date for the citizens of Europe will not come until the year 2002 , when banknotes and coins in the new currency are to be introduced .
If all the EU Member States pursue their convergence policies with determination , I am confident that by the second date , which is more relevant to the citizens themselves , a large majority of the Member States will be on board .
Mr President , it is not in any sense part of my job this morning to answer comments made by previous speakers .
However , just in parenthesis , I will make the point , following on what my colleague , Karl von Wogau , has just said , that the question of the United Kingdom 's relationships with the European Monetary System and exchange rates is , of course , one for markets and not for governments .
But that is a matter which I am sure we will discuss endlessly in the coming months .
I speak this morning as the rapporteur on the annual economic report and part of the responsibilities that go with that rapporteurship is producing a report on the broad economic guidelines .
My first suggestion , addressed to the Commission - and I promise the Commission that this will be my last criticism of it - is that it would be most helpful in future if the Commission could contrive to produce its annual economic report and its broad economic guidelines in sufficient time for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment because these two projects are the joint responsibility of those two committees .
It would be helpful in future years if we could have the broad economic guidelines a bit earlier , because the trouble this time is that we have had to rush to conclusions because of the deadline at the end of this week of the 21 and 22 June meeting in Florence .
This has meant that we have not really had time in the Economic Committee to produce a report debated in committee , adopt amendments in committee and then present to this House a report that is properly balanced in the way in which the three previous reports are balanced and reflect consensus in the committee .
The compromise resolution , which we shall be voting on later today , is therefore unsatisfactory in some respects , but that is an inevitable part of having a compromise .
Compromises , by definition , do not satisfy everyone and we would say that the joint resolution is all right up to a point but we shall be tabling a number of amendments to it .
One is to remove the Commission from the line of fire of criticism , because you will have noticed that our resolution is somewhat critical of both the Commission and the Council .
But we believe that at this stage it is too late to criticize the Commission .
We shall also be tabling amendments on matters which we feel very strongly about and which , indeed , are in our question to the Council , because at the moment there is no reference in the final resolution to the need for the Member States to analyse the best practice in Member States and , in parenthesis , the United States , in order to identify the policies which can achieve results in bringing down unemployment rapidly .
This is something which the committee as a whole felt strongly about in the resolution on the annual economic report and it is a significant omission that it is not in the resolution to wind up this debate .
I hope that the House will agree to incorporate this point and that the House will also agree to the addition that the Member States should create an environment where employers are encouraged to take on workers .
It is not part of my job to anticipate what the speakers on behalf of the Social Affairs Committee may say on that matter , but it is very clear , with the high level of unemployment in the European Union , that it is unacceptable that there should be something like 18 million unemployed in our society , with 50 million living in poverty or in near poverty .
Coming to the substance of what the debate this morning is all about , this is actually the European Parliament 's opportunity to put forward its views to the European Council which meets in Florence at the end of this week .
You will find in our resolution something to the effect that our President should take this resolution to Florence .
The other important point is paragraph 11 of our resolution which calls upon the Irish presidency to report very quickly back to this House on what action is going to be taken by the Member States on the broad economic guidelines .
I do not know whether there is a representative of the Irish presidency here but , if not , perhaps the representative of the Italian presidency would be kind enough to pass on that message and a copy of our resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we are moving towards an important decision .
The House is likely , by a large majority , to reject as unrealistic and inadequate the broad economic guidelines presented by the Council .
That is very important , and it is also very important that we should do so by a large majority .
I agree with Mr Cassidy that we can no longer accept economic growth which is such that employment levels continue to decline .
I would , however , like to discuss with him in more detail what he means by encouraging employers to take on workers .
I believe that a very specific form of encouragement is required in the case of companies which are now able to earn far more from currency speculation than they can through genuine economic activity .
We need a change of direction here .
As a Parliament - and here too I turn to Mr Cassidy - we have taken a joint decision in many areas that it is high time to put an end to the superficial strategy of pretending that all is well and there are no structural problems ; these problems need to be resolved as a matter of urgency .
Parliament has asked a number of questions which the Commission has taken up in part , very tentatively , and which the Council has not even acknowledged .
It is therefore the duty of the House to reject these guidelines , not merely for reasons of parliamentary etiquette , but because it is central to our task as a Parliament to tackle the mass unemployment and mass poverty which have become the real scandal of the European Community .
I would assume that a large majority of us will address ourselves to this task .
Because of the speed of the procedure , and not any fundamental disagreement with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment has asked the Commission a number of supplementary questions .
This is not because we think that the Commission is the main culprit in this situation , so to speak - rather , the guilt lies chiefly with the Council and the Member States .
However , the Commission too could do more , and we are therefore asking what initiatives it plans to take to bring about the necessary change in economic policy .
We are asking about the implementation of our priority of combating mass unemployment effectively , because we cannot expect the citizens of Europe to tolerate another outpouring of meaningless fine words .
We are also asking in particular about additional Commission measures to send a strong signal to the markets and help revive the economy .
We are asking for the much-trumpeted initiative of a European pact on employment to be presented at long last .
We are asking what efforts the Commission plans to make to redress the balance between fiscal and employment policies in the multiannual programmes submitted by the Member States .
We are asking how the Commission is going to devise and apply common socio-economic indicators which make it possible for a binding debate to take place on the coordination of economic policy , no longer geared solely towards a monetarist approach to national debt . And we are asking for greater coordination between economic and employment policies .
The decision which we have to take today is not a trivial one .
The real issue is the point in time when the European Community becomes relevant to every individual in this Community .
It is a matter of making it clear at last that our Community is one which has set its sights on genuine improvements in the welfare of its citizens , and which is not solely determined to push through a narrow monetarist view of stability policy and a technocratically agreed timeframe and strategy for the introduction of monetary union , at the expense of millions of impoverished and unemployed people .
I hope we shall decide by a large majority that this cannot go on .
I also hope that this will be the first impulse for real change .
Unfortunately , the House does not yet have the power to force a change , but the governments would be well advised to react now , because otherwise the problems will seek out new governments .
Mr President , you said , when you spoke at the meeting held in Luxembourg on the Council 's current economic policy strategy , that although the economic fundamentals were favourable , the Community 's overall results were not yet satisfactory .
That does not , however , mean that the strategy itself is called into question : progress has been made more difficult as a result of the slow-down in activity over the past twelve months but the current strategy needs to be continued and reinforced .
The Council expects the positive impact of the action taken by the Member States in response to the maximum guidelines to become more perceptible as time goes on , with an improvement in economic conditions .
The Council therefore confirms the need to continue with the balance-of-payments adjustment and control of inflation , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty , and stresses the importance of achieving a stable and appropriate macro-economic policy framework as the pre-condition for increasing growth and reducing the level of unemployment .
The Council unanimously confirms the need to implement this policy combination , as these are policies which have the backing of the other Community Institutions , the Commission and the European Monetary Institute .
Consolidation of the process of adjustment , in its current form , is the way to create a macro-economic framework which increases growth and creates jobs .
That , naturally , presupposes in particular that further progress will be made in reducing government deficits and implementing stability-oriented monetary policies and trends in salaries and wages that are consistent with the objective of price stability and increased productivity .
If that very ambitious objective is achieved , we shall be able , in the medium if not in the short term , to create the macro-economic circumstances needed to improve the Community 's negative record on unemployment , by cutting interest rates .
As far as structural measures are concerned , the maximum guidelines provide us with a useful set of policy recommendations that have to be implemented under the responsibility of each Member State , enabling us to banish the rigidity that currently affects the labour market by , for example , reforming the social welfare system to guarantee efficiency and fairness between the generations in the current systems ; introducing improvements into the education and vocational training system so that priority is given to employment for the less qualified , young people and women ; reducing indirect wage costs ; encouraging , where appropriate , regional and intersectoral mobility ; and reviewing working hours and the organization of work .
Increasing employment is the main priority , and the Council is trying to identify those experiments which have been successful in the different Member States in improving the employment strategies of those same States .
That will be one of the focal points of the annual report on employment at the Dublin European Council , and , naturally , as Mr Cassidy has requested , the Italian presidency will pass on your requests to the Irish presidency .
I can assure you that the convergence programmes are the focal point of the Council 's multilateral monitoring procedure .
The aim of those programmes is to secure the convergence required for participation in the single currency area and they are important in themselves because they are designed to bring about sustainable and non-inflationary growth .
The Treaty itself establishes a useful range of procedures - maximum economic guidelines , convergence programmes and procedures covering excessive deficits - in order to secure effective coordination .
This will be further improved as a result of the process which will bring into effect the third phase of European Monetary Union .
The maximum guidelines for economic policy , as well as the procedures relating to excessive deficits will , of course , become more rigorous in the context of Monetary Union .
As far as the objective of sound public finances is concerned , some limited progress has already been achieved in the last year .
The excessive deficit procedure is an effective means of encouraging the efforts of Member States towards consolidation ; the concept of countercyclical policy , taken up by Mr Cassidy , is difficult to apply in the context of an open economy , but it is certain that achievement of the fundamental objectives of economic policy , as set out in Article 2 of the Treaty , in particular non-inflationary , stable growth which respects the environment and secures a high level of employment , depends on effective and close coordination between the Member States .
If we are to increase growth and , therefore , levels of employment , there have to be measures designed to improve the operation of the markets , services and products .
In its plan for the maximum economic policy guidelines of the Community and the Member States , the Council points out that , as far as the improved operation of the markets is concerned , the individual Member States very largely possess the key to this .
The Council , however , appreciates that national measures can be reinforced via the guidelines at Community level .
The problem of increasing levels of unemployment is the main crisis area in a Europe caught between two requirements : the need to reposition its own economic and productive structures generally and the need to safeguard those fundamental social achievements that constitute the distinctive feature of Europe 's cultural tradition built up over the passage of time .
If we are to do that , we need to attach less importance to the role of financial returns and concentrate resources on productive uses .
Since our approach cannot be to restrict the social rights of workers in an effort to increase Community competitiveness , we shall have rapidly to adopt measures designed to encourage innovation .
The Commission 's Green Paper on innovation makes a very useful contribution to the debate on competitiveness and deserves to be looked at closely in terms of how it can be applied at both national and Community level .
The Council will be very interested to take part in and contribute to the forthcoming discussions designed to devise specific measures .
At its meeting of 3 June , the ECOFIN Council achieved some important progress in the field of economic and monetary policy that we are discussing here today .
Let me just summarize the main issues : as regards preparation for the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union , the Florence European Council will reaffirm that it intends to conclude by the end of the year the technical preparatory work on the legal framework to be used for the euro ; the Council has concluded that it would be helpful to consider in parallel the problems of exchange rate parities and budgetary discipline ; it has also stressed that , regardless of whether or not they adopt the euro , it is of great concern to all the Member States that Economic and Monetary Union should function properly and that there should be an exchange rate parity mechanism which provides a point of reference for the application of sound economic policies .
Membership of the new system of exchange rate parities would continue , in the Council 's view , to be optional ; however , provision can be made for those Member States given an exemption to join the mechanism .
The Council has suggested that , like the earlier systems , the new system will be set up on the basis of a European Council resolution and become operational following an agreement between the European Central Bank and the central banks of those Member States that have not joined the euro area .
The Council stated that it favoured an asymmetric system in which the euro acts as an anchor .
The new system would be designed in such a way as to permit various levels of convergence of the Member States .
Turning , finally , to budgetary discipline in the third phase , the Council has asked all of the Member States to aim in the medium term for a budgetary position that is close to equilibrium or in credit .
That should allow the automatic stabilizers to operate throughout the whole of the economic cycle .
The Council , finally , has proposed strengthening the procedure concerning excessive government deficits under Article 104c .
It takes the view that it will be necessary to set rigid time-limits , based on the assumption that the Council will impose pre-set and proportionate penalties in cases where excessive deficit persist .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is delighted that the House has decided to focus on economic and monetary union this week .
At this time , in the run-up to the Florence European Council , the Commission feels it is important to restate our clear commitment to the approach we have adopted up to now in pursuing a stable and healthy macroeconomic policy which enables us to take determined and coordinated measures to combat unemployment , while at the same time keeping the preparations for the third phase of EMU on schedule .
First of all , improvements to the macro-economic situation .
There is no alternative to the Commission 's recommended policy of reducing public deficits in order to create jobs .
This year , the Commission has two new recommendations : first , that the policy mix should be made more flexible over the long term .
The Commission has established the broad economic policy guidelines on the basis of Article 105 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , and the macro-economic policy it recommends should help towards achieving the objectives of the European Union as laid down in Article 2 of the Treaty , namely growth , employment and stability .
We cannot hope for a substantial reduction in unemployment without strong , sustained medium-term growth supported by growth in investment .
So as far as the Commission is concerned , we must make credible budgetary improvements , but as well as the quantitative reductions in public deficits , we also need to redirect public spending towards productive areas such as investment in infrastructure , human resources and an active employment policy .
The social effects of budgetary consolidation also need to be carefully balanced , and wage increases should be kept at suitable levels .
Instead of increasing overall fiscal pressure , the Commission recommends that increases in spending should be curbed and tax structures modified to reduce the tax burden on labour .
This will enable the policy mix to be relaxed still further , making it possible to create monetary conditions that are likely to keep interest rates down .
Secondly , the structural measures taken to promote employment should be better coordinated .
The pact on employment gives the Commission the tools it needs to implement the 1993 White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment and the conclusions of the Essen European Council in this field .
The pact is a collective initiative which spells out the various commitments undertaken by the public authorities and the social partners as part of an overall coordinated strategy .
As you can see , the Commission is following its own recommendations in trying to make unemployment a matter of common interest .
But the broad economic policy guidelines are also a vital instrument in our progress towards economic and monetary union , and must be applied to the letter .
Article 103 of the Treaty states that Member States must coordinate their economic policies as a matter of common concern , and this is why the Commission recommends that updated national convergence programmes should be developed this year .
The programmes must make it clear how the convergence measures adopted pursue the general aim of strengthening growth and improving employment .
If economic policy is to be better coordinated at Community level , the national programmes must represent a much firmer statement of political commitment , and the Commission asks that they should be approved as such by the Council .
The broad economic policy guidelines may be an effective and coherent method of achieving economic and monetary union , but transition to the third phase also depends on the achievement of monetary stability throughout the Union .
The reports by Mr Pérez Royo and Mr von Wogau are an important contribution to the work the Commission is doing on monetary stability and the need to avoid splitting Europe in two when the euro is adopted .
The Commission notes with satisfaction that your rapporteur confirms the analysis of the impact of currency fluctuations which it presented to the European Council in Madrid .
Currency fluctuations are damaging to the single market , but at the same time we must not allow the market to be jeopardized by the introduction of protectionist measures .
The Commission is determined to remain vigilant , and as you have requested , we will keep a close eye on the impact of currency fluctuations by regularly monitoring the economic indicators .
As your rapporteur himself recommends , the solution is to be found in closer convergence , particularly in the area of public deficits , and the introduction of the euro .
On the subject of relations between the ' ins ' and the ' pre-ins ' , in accordance with the instructions of the Madrid European Council , the Commission and the European Monetary Institute are working hard to set up a new monetary system between the countries participating in the euro and those not participating at the outset .
The report by Mr von Wogau will make a useful contribution to the work which the ECOFIN Council has been doing on this subject since Verona , work which I would point out has involved a broad degree of consensus .
The Commission feels that this new system should both guarantee monetary stability in the Union in the transitional phase , while at the same time keeping the door to the euro open for those countries which are ' preins ' .
But we cannot have lasting monetary stability without convergence , and this is why there will be stronger convergence procedures running alongside the exchange-rate mechanism .
However , if it is to be entirely credible , the new system must also be flexible enough to accommodate the various levels of convergence between the different countries .
Although anchored to the euro , it will still have to have fairly broad fluctuation margins , with compulsory intervention within these margins , as well as credit facilities .
As many Member States as possible will need to participate if the new system is to operate smoothly , and it will be in their interests to do so , since it will be to the advantage of all the Member States to join the economic and monetary union as soon as possible .
The new system will also open the door to the euro , and the conditions of entry will be the same for the countries which are ' pre-ins ' as they are now for the countries which are ' ins ' .
The ' pre-ins ' should join as quickly as possible , an idea which your rapporteur obviously supports when he asks the Commission to design new instruments to strengthen convergence and accelerate the process of integration .
It is for this purpose that the Commission is currently examining ways of improving the present convergence programmes , which have proved that they are effective and will remain at the hub of the system .
In conclusion , I should like once again to underline the Commission 's commitment to a coherent approach .
Only by pursuing a healthy and stable macro-economic policy can we restore confidence and stimulate growth .
The broad guidelines were adopted unanimously by all the Member States at the last ECOFIN Council .
It is vital to maintain the overall dynamics of this policy by developing the necessary structural policies for promoting employment in Europe .
All the preparatory work must be completed at least one year before the decision is taken to enter the third phase , so the European Council needs to decide how the new monetary system and the stability pact are to work and what legal status the euro is to have .
Economic and monetary union is a comprehensive project which will be concluded under the conditions and timetable set out in the Treaty .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Council and the Commission for their presentations this morning .
I shall concentrate on the broad economic guidelines .
The Socialist Group firmly rejects the guidelines adopted by the ECOFIN Council recently and we are deeply unhappy with the approach taken by the Commission regarding the economic prospects for the European Union .
The first point is to look at the economic fundamentals which the Commission claims are favourable .
We have historically high levels of unemployment .
Some 50 million people in the European Union are suffering social exclusion and poverty .
Internal demand in the EU is depressed because of the attack on social protection and jobs .
Real wages are stagnant .
Business confidence fell again last month for the seventeenth month in a row and there is a collapse of consumer confidence .
Public investment has fallen over the last ten years from 3.5 % of GDP to 2.5 % .
If the Commission and the Council claim these are favourable economic fundamentals I would like to see the statistics they are basing this on .
Clearly Europe is in crisis and we need coordinated measures by the Commission and ECOFIN to try to bring Europe out of that crisis .
The growth rate this year is 1.5 % , which I imagine will be estimated as even lower by the end of the year .
There may be a growth rate of 2 or 2.5 % next year .
It is completely insufficient .
That is why we have produced a very critical report on these guidelines .
In particular , I want to refer to the guidelines as approved by the Council .
Mr De Silguy did not refer to the way in which the guidelines were changed by the Council and I should like the Council and Mr De Silguy to deal specifically with the changes that have been made to those guidelines by the ECOFIN Council .
I hope the Council is listening carefully to this .
There are ten cases where the Council has deleted points from the Commission 's guidelines , which Parliament was already unhappy with .
Why did the Council delete the reference to a better economic policy mix more favourable to growth ?
The ECOFIN Council deleted this .
I want to know why .
The reference to the European Parliament 's opinion on the economic annual report was deleted by ECOFIN .
Why did it delete that ?
A durable detente in macro-economic policy is essential to relaunch activity and strengthen growth in job creation in the medium term .
Again , in the Commission text , the Council deleted that reference .
Why did it do that ?
Monetary policy can , within the spirit of Article 105 of the Treaty , contribute in a substantial manner to the achievement of Community objectives as laid down in Article 2 of the Treaty .
That reference was deleted .
Why ?
The Council has to explain to the House why it made these changes .
The Commission text referred to the social partners and to the dialogue that exists .
The Council deleted the reference to an efficient coordination between the different actors concerned and between countries as essential to ensure the coherence of these policies .
That reference was deleted and we want to know why .
It deleted the reference to the fact that measures aimed at improving convergence go hand in hand with the promotion of growth and employment in the medium term .
Why did the Council delete that from the broad economic guidelines ?
In relation to TENs - the trans-European networks - the statement proposed in the Commission text , that action has to be taken to remove the last obstacles to the achievements of the TENs projects is deleted in the Council text .
The ECOFIN Council is acting with extreme arrogance if it believes it can simply disregard growth and employment in the European Union .
We were deeply unhappy in this House with the Commission text but at least it made some effort to refer to the need to bring unemployment down and to deal with the appalling levels of growth .
The Council text is completely unacceptable to this House .
If the Council would look at paragraph 10 of the resolution that we will vote at lunchtime today it will see that we insist that in Florence these deletions from the Commission text be reinserted , and that is the text which should then be endorsed by the Council .

Unless that happens I warn the Council that whether it be the Italian presidency winding up to their presidency in July or Mr Spring or Mr Bruton presenting the programme of the Irish presidency , this Parliament will roundly reject the conclusions of Florence , unless the Council gives a real commitment to bringing unemployment down , getting growth back to Europe and ensuring that the EMU project can continue on a path that will mean something to the citizens rather than simply being something which is pursued by central bankers .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , allow me first of all to thank Mr Lamfalussy and Mr de Silguy for their reports .
As far as the report of the European Monetary Institute is concerned , I must say that , as with the previous one , a very good and serious attempt has been made to cover the issues of preparation for the third stage , and we are pleased to see that substantial progress is recorded .
In connection with Chapter 1 , however , on the growth of the economy , I have a number of observations that I think deserve discussion at greater length at some juncture .
For instance , the report does not stick as firmly as I think it should to the duration of financial performances , and the importance of that is something that I think needs to be stressed all the time .
The cause of smooth transition to economic and monetary union is certainly not helped if a country , after achieving satisfactory convergence figures , suddenly goes off the rails .
The Institute 's report is , of course , pervaded by a certain optimism .
Thinking back to my previous remarks , I have to say that it is logical for there to be some element of optimism in these analyses .
Statements given out by the institutions of the European Union cannot be pessimistic in tone or doom-ridden in their assessments .
Naturally , there is a very big difference between that and projecting baseless assessments and analyses .
However , one can see that the financial prospects , as analyzed , are not far short of reality .
Despite the element of optimism the substance is pretty accurate .
That applies for both the European Monetary Institute and the Commission .
As regards the Commission 's analysis and the changes in the financial prospects , I , too , have to say that I find them totally incomprehensible . Unless , that is , ECOFIN decided to adopt a purely technical approach and to refrain from policy projections and appraisals .
If that was the case - and if it was I would regard it as mistaken - the deletions can be justified , but it means that ECOFIN is now functioning as a technical body rather than the policy institution which it should be .
The EMI report refers to the internal market as the instrument for growth , by contrast with 1994 when the talk was of export-led growth .
Of course , the internal market is supposed to promote competitiveness , but the big difficulty with regard to competitiveness in the European Union is that we have developed a quality of life and forms of social conduct that give us problems vis-à-vis those of our competitors who are not bound by the same criteria .
This difficulty , however , must be tackled in a logical and constructive manner and not by opting for things such as a slackening of monetary policy , which is the sort of thing that we often hear advocated .
At this present time there is no alternative to the strict monetary policy .
There is no other policy available to us , and to tackle phenomena of a structural nature with measures that are appropriate for cyclical adjustment is mistaken because it would be damaging rather than beneficial .
On the matter of unemployment , to attribute it to something entirely independent , to something which is not the consequence of other phenomena , is a massive error .
Unemployment did not appear from nowhere .
It is the consequence of other phenomena , of structural phenomena to be precise .
We have to try to rectify these structural weaknesses , but it cannot be done via the countercyclical measures that are always being recommended here .
I say again : in these circumstances , countercyclical measures would in the long term bring a result exactly the opposite of that which is desired .
On the question of convergence and relations between the Member States taking part in the third stage and the remaining countries , I must say that here , happily , the Treaty is beginning to be implemented correctly and that the analysis of the parameters is beginning to show an element of flexibility .
And why is this so ?
The reason is that is very important that we keep to the 1999 starting date and that progress is not impeded by certain very small percentages .
In this regard , Mr President , it is important that the analyses should take account of the criteria of those countries which wish to join the EMU but will not be in the first group and that notice is taken also of factors stemming from occurrences of an urgent nature .
I am thinking of my own country which , precisely because the European Union would not give political support if it were to be faced with a threat of war , is now having to embark on an armaments programme to the tune of ECU 10 billion , which will totally negate all of the efforts of recent years to achieve convergence with a view to joining the EMS and the EMU .
At some juncture more attention will have to be paid to this matter than at present .
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating the three rapporteurs , in particular Mr Gasòliba , on the drafting of the reports we have been listening to .
As did the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , my group is examining closely the EMI annual report for 1995 , as this is a major document that deals comprehensively with the state of preparations for Economic and Monetary Union .
During the coming six months , however , it will be necessary to define the parameters of the framework as a whole , as we look to the third phase and the responsibilities attaching to the European system of central banks .
As Mr Lamfalussy has already said , the process of economic integration is on the right path , but the recovery we had all hoped for has not got off the ground and unemployment remains Europe 's number one problem .
The EMI report clearly indicates that the solution necessitates , among other things , consistent reduction in government deficits ; in that connection , the Institute should take action particularly in regard to those Member States in which those problems are all too marked and have so far prevented them becoming full members of the European Monetary System .
We need therefore to look more closely and more receptively at those Member States which , although not at the moment fully complying with the Maastricht parameters , are , nonetheless , showing signs of a change in trend , indicating that their - currently negative - parameters could , in just a little while longer , meet the conditions for the single currency system .
As Commissioner de Silguy has pointed out , the EMI framework defined in Maastricht should be directed towards a more active role in coordinating the Member States ' monetary policies .
There has also to be preventive assessment of what might happen as a result of the coexistence of those States that belong to the single currency and those that do not , with the distortion of competition and fluctuation in exchange rates that would ensue .
There is finally a practical aspect on which we are focusing particular attention : this concerns the introduction on to the market of the new currency , the euro , and its distribution in the Member States .
Explaining to the citizens of Europe how the single currency operates will certainly not be an easy process : there will have to be the maximum of cooperation on the part of those market structures in which citizens actually come face to face with the euro .
I have in mind here the retail industry , in all its guises , in which there will have to be a campaign of information directed towards businessmen , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , and towards those working at the point of sale .
That will in fact be the point at which consumers discover the euro and with it perhaps a greater understanding of the Community 's economic system .
Public acceptance and understanding of the single currency will also imply acceptance and understanding of a united Europe .
Mr President , I am speaking on the broad economic guidelines .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party believes that there is a credibility gap at the heart of Union economic policy , which is undermining public confidence in the entire enterprise .
There is a gap between aspirations and their realization , rhetoric and substance , and economic guidelines and their implementation .
The gap is measured most starkly by the 18 million people out of work and up to 50 million suffering from social exclusion and poverty .
It is a dismal record .
Ecofin 's report to Florence on what I would characterize as the non-implementation of the 1995 guidelines , following hard on the heels of the non-implementation of the 1994 guidelines , is a ritualistic , bland and passive document in the face of this pathetic factual record .
Little wonder that in their day-to-day lives so many citizens are questioning Europe 's ability to deliver the goods , because they know that action speaks louder than words .
The ELDR Group is strongly committed to achieving EMU in line with the Treaty criteria and timetable , but there remains space for real policy debate .
I have several questions to the Council in the time permitted to me .
From the institutional point of view , I repeat the question : why has the Council , even in the preamble to its recommendations , made no reference to Parliament 's opinions ?
Policy-wise , I wish to ask the Council to respond today on the question of inflation policy , where we know that inflation is historically low and contained , according to our own analyses .
Why is it that it recommends these results should be improved on ?
Does the Council not share the fear expressed recently by the Bank for International Settlements that there is a risk of deflation if we push the price stability objective beyond what is appropriate ?
What is the Council 's view ?
Finally , on the macro policy mix conducive to growth , employment and convergence , the Commission correctly referred to Article 105 ( 1 ) and let me quote it briefly : ' Monetary policy shall support the general economic policies of the European Union , including those concerning a high level of employment ' .
The Council today needs to explain why politically it has scandalously disregarded this capacity for an appropriate flanking measure , because symbolically it is saying to the 18 million unemployed : we frankly do not care about the appropriate mix , we are monetarists and we will do it our way .
If that is your way , it is a political mistake for the Council and for Europe .
( Applause from the centre and the left )
Mr President , the single currency scenario is paving the way for a multi-speed Europe .
Our group is extremely worried about the repercussions for the weakest countries , most of all , and for the millions of workers and unemployed people in the European Union .
The whittling away of the whole concept of national sovereignty , with the management of monetary and exchange rate policy being handed over to bodies such as the European System of Central Banks , which have no political and democratic legitimacy , is a particular cause for concern .
The countries which do not join the EMU will fall even further behind those which do ; divergence , in real as well as nominal terms , will increase .
That will be followed by an even harsher anti-popular policy for the purpose of trying to meet the Maastricht criteria , which will remain an unattainable dream .
The countries which remain outside will face serious problems over resources as capital , albeit for speculation at first , moves to the euro core , and this will have a domino effect on currency reserves , on growth rates and on the living standards of workers in those countries .
The abolition of the ECU will generate new problems in connection with the Community budget and fiscal relations between the European Union and the countries which do not join the single currency .
Risk premiums and the obligatory circulation during the transitional period of the new currency in parallel with the national currencies will create additional difficulties for those countries , difficulties which they will have to tackle in various ways to the detriment of their economies .
The decision to pursue further enlargement of the European Union adds another complication to the single currency process , and the costs of enlargement will be transferred down to the countries which remain outside the system .
Mr President , we hope that the peoples of the European Union will fight against these options , that they will rise up and demand referenda in the Member States when the new treaties come up for approval and that they will refuse to go quietly down the one-way path of bankers ' democracy .
Mr President , the common denominator in this morning 's reports is that they all want to keep strictly to the schedule and criteria set for EMU , regardless of the consequences .
It is clear however that by the end of the millennium we will not have a situation where all EU countries will be participating in a common currency .
In addition to this it is of course questionable whether EMU will be implemented in the first place .
In any case EMU will cause divisions in the Union , and taking into consideration an expansion from the Eastern bloc there will be at least a ' three-speed ' union .
As we know EMU is a continuation of the internal market .
It is interesting and indicative that even Mr Mario Monti , member of the Commission , has now tabled a question concerning the fact that the internal market has not fulfilled the expectations on a macroeconomic level .
As far as employment especially is concerned the internal market has hardly had any positive effect .
The Commissioner has also chosen to present this report during the summit in Florence .
There has to be big question mark as to whether we are in for a similar disappointment as far as EMU is concerned , since the internal market and EMU are products of the same mind set .
The Green Group unanimously supports a healthy economic policy , where there is an equilibrium in the public sector and where budget resources do not have to be largely spent on interest payments on public loans .
At the moment however the European or Nordic society is threatened , because we are aiming to implement these EMU criteria far too quickly , perhaps even arrogantly .
For this reason the schedule simply has to be postponed .
Another reason for a postponement of the EMU schedule is that it makes a genuine rapprochement between the economies in the EU countries possible .
The economies of the European Union Member States have , according to some research , recently moved even further apart from each other .
Perhaps we should agree on a factual precondition for EMU , that employment really should be halved before EMU is implemented .
This objective has been voiced by many Member States with high unemployment and also by the European Union .
A somewhat more flexible economic and monetary policy would have to be considered .
According to some estimates a one percent increase in inflation could help to create two million jobs .
Above all the Green Group proposes a thorough reform of taxation .
The Commission has recently published an interesting document on taxation within the European Union .
The document expresses the view that , essentially , taxation at the EU level should be considered as a complete entity , rather than on a tax by tax basis , since the Member States have already lost a major proportion of their taxation sovereignty to the markets , much to the politicians ' discredit .
No solutions regarding taxation have been achieved at the EU level , and I would like to ask the Council whether it is aware of the enormous contradiction that is involved in aiming for a rapid implementation of the EMU and the complete inability to deal with taxation , a matter with far-reaching effects on the economy and on employment .
Mr President , I rise on behalf of my group to support the compromise resolution and to say I would like to identify my group with the questions that were asked by Mr Cox and the criticisms that were expressed by Mr Donnelly on the question of the broad economic guidelines .

The compromise resolution speaks out against this terrible gloom and doom of the 18 million unemployed and the 50 million on the bread-line .
There is such a colossal loss of dignity involved here that it is surely not to be tolerated .
Nor should we tolerate the many fears of our citizens : fear of those in jobs - whether they will still have a job ; the fear of the lack of social protection - we have seen that in the unrest in Germany and France ; the lack of consumer confidence ; our growth is low and getting lower and public investment is dropping .
All this demands action and yet the Council and the Commission do not seem to be listening to the European Parliament which is the democratic base of all the institutions .
They must listen to us and we must see investment boosted , consumption boosted , lower interest rates , a rise in labour-intensive growth and an increase in consumer confidence .
Today , when we see greater profitability , we do not necessarily see a reduction in unemployment or an increase in wages .
I have just read in The Guardian today that British Steel made £ 1 billion profit .
We have seen incredible profits made by British Telecom recently .
This has not led to higher wages or a significant increase in employment .
We also all have to guard against the wishful thinking of some of the economic forecasting we have seen from the other bodies of the Community .
Economic forecasting has so often had to be revised downwards .
This creates yet more mistrust out there in the minds of our citizens ; it worsens confidence and has negative effects on consumers .
Turning to EMU , few Member States seem to be able at this moment of forecasting to meet the criteria .
I have noted them : Luxembourg , Ireland , Denmark and the UK .
Denmark and the UK have an opt-out , so in effect that is two .
I was privileged to be in the EMAC delegation to Dublin recently where we had an excellent address from the Irish Finance Minister .
He was pointing out that despite Ireland 's strong growth they have not reduced unemployment .
So , you can meet the convergence criteria and still have the basic problem of unemployment .
Ireland has that in a very serious way .
It must be looked at as an entity , almost separately from all these other matters .
It is quite clear that France and Germany will have difficulties in meeting the criteria , Italy more so but making confident noises and Belgium has problems with one particular aspect but surely the Benelux countries will not go in and leave Belgium out .
The date is being constantly reiterated as if it is all going to happen and yet there is an air of sleepwalking , it seems to me , and of wishful thinking .
Because , when you examine the criteria , very few countries seem to be likely to meet them and the flexibility which does exist does not seem big enough - to me anyway - for 1 January 1999 to be the date .
I would like to support the compromise paragraph 6 and the emphasis on life-long learning , education , and the creation of new jobs in new sectors .
I am at the end of my speaking time but this recent debate in the UK about being able to leave the EU is so disgraceful and so detrimental to consumer confidence that I feel I have to mention that as well .
Mr President , the report by Mr von Wogau is extremely useful .
The European Union 's internal market benefits from having a monetary system which is designed to prevent fluctuations in the exchange rates between European currencies , and we agree with the rapporteur that a ' new style ' of European Monetary System will be of great assistance here .
The motion for a resolution rightly states , however , that monetary stability cannot be created by EMU or an exchange-rate mechanism , but depends on the Member States pursuing a credible economic and budgetary policy .
Like the rapporteur , I too expect relatively few of the Member States to take part in the third phase of EMU in 1999 .
Many Member States , including France , Germany and the Netherlands , do not currently meet the entrance criteria , and there seems little likelihood that the position will change in the short term .
Some politicians have panicked and called for the criteria to be relaxed , but all this does is to undermine the credibility of the euro and place a time-bomb under any new exchange-rate mechanism .
I really do wonder whether there is any point in forming a monetary union with only three or at most four Member States , since the advantages would scarcely outweigh the costs of setting up EMU .
An important practical reason why we should not establish a monetary union prematurely is that it would create a barrier to the early accession of countries from Central and Eastern Europe .
It would be much better to align the economic and monetary policies of the present and future Member States in a totally unforced way , with the Member States themselves working to achieve monetary and exchange-rate stability .
This would improve the operation of the single market and avoid creating any unnecessary obstacles to the accession of Central and Eastern European countries .
Mr President , the Commission 's report confirms the view of those who believe that both the Union as a whole and individual Member States will be adversely affected if the monetary union enters into force step by step on the scheduled dates .
Degeneration into a two-speed Europe is inevitable , and even if this state of affairs were to be only temporary , it is at odds with the goal of economic and social cohesion .
The prerequisite for unrestricted participation by all Member States in the euro will be that the budgets of those countries already meeting the criteria , weakened as they will be by savings measures , will have to provide substantial support for the ' outsiders ' .
The distortions of competition , caused by unilateral devaluations , which are at present a burden on the external trade balances of certain Member States , cannot be overcome by the countries with soft currencies remaining outside .
It is therefore particularly important to devise as soon as possible intervention mechanisms to neutralize speculative pressure .
This report , at any rate , contains only vague and general indications , and does not state when the general guidelines for the future exchange relations between participating countries and those not yet participating will be drawn up .
Yet again , the fears of citizens in many Member States are being borne out : that in view of the poor economic situation , only a few countries will be able to meet the stability criteria ; and , at the same time , that the vital question of the stabilization of exchange rates between the ' ins ' and the ' outs ' is unfortunately only now beginning to be addressed .
Furthermore , in this divided Europe , some parts of the export and tourism sectors in countries with hard currencies will continue to suffer significantly from the adverse effects of savings measures introduced in order to achieve convergence .
Mr President , the reality that our economic guidelines have to deal with is that there are at least 18 million people officially out of work , with another nine million not covered by statistics .
They should be getting to grips with this problem , but they are patently failing to do so .
Once again , we are faced with one-sided monetarist recommendations offering absolutely no support for the active structural employment policy for which the Delors White Paper and the Essen summit laid the foundations .
Monetary stability creates confidence , but monetary stability cannot be achieved by creating social unrest .
This is a crucial time at which to be holding this debate , and it calls for more balanced guidelines than those before us at the moment .
First of all , instruments and indicators are going have to be adopted at the end of the year in Dublin to give the Essen agreements a more practical form and make them more binding .
Second , the Heads of Government will shortly be meeting in Florence to plot a course for a common , active European employment policy .
EMU has already shown that coordination at European level which is binding on the Member States can prove beneficial , and in Florence this must be shown to be equally true for employment .
Third , the European Commission is currently making a desperate attempt to persuade the social partners to conclude agreements on a European employment policy in the form of a pact on employment .
But this will only work if we abandon our unilateral faith in EMU in the broad economic guidelines and establish a basis for agreement with the social partners , such as on creating apprenticeships for the millions of unemployed people under the age of 25 .
Finally , the negotiations at the IGC are currently considering how to establish a balance in the Treaty between monetary and structural employment policy .
A move from taxes on labour to energy and environment taxes can only be made at European level , and competition between the Member States means that a common policy is needed for which the broad economic guidelines should establish a basis .
But there is no sign of this happening .
The balanced economic policy which Parliament has called for on so many occasions involves recognizing the economic importance of the European social model .
The model is not just about expenditure : it is , first and foremost , a powerful means of promoting employment by maintaining purchasing power and demand , and thus creating stability .
The same applies to decent wages , which can also in turn encourage continuing training and education .
In short , restricting economic policy to a single market and a single currency is simply asking for the European Union to remain economically weak and to continue to suffer mass unemployment .
For this reason , these economic guidelines should be at the very least amended or better still , in my opinion , rejected by the Commission and the Council .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following what Mr Donnelly said , there is one point I should like to make first of all about the broad economic guidelines , which is that we firmly support the line the Commission has adopted , especially as it is largely based on the consensus positions reached by Parliament itself .
Although we are aware of the financial constraints which restrict what the governments can do , our group nevertheless regrets the changes which the Council has made to the Commission 's proposals .
That is why , unlike the Socialist Group , we do not want to tar the Commission and the Council with the same brush .
Moving on to the von Wogau report , I would point out that changes to exchange rates between the currencies of countries belonging to the same common market have always been a matter of common interest .
What this means is that the Member States can no longer do as they please .
It is something which applies today and will continue to apply tomorrow , something which was spelt out in the Treaty of Rome and was not amended in the Maastricht Treaty , nor is it likely to be at the IGC .

This makes sense , because changes to the exchange rates which are not simply designed to redress imbalances in purchasing power would distort competition and seriously damage the operation of the single market .
That is why , despite the fact that after difficult negotiations and completely contrary to the spirit of the Treaties , two Member States have finally been allowed to opt out of monetary union , this does not mean that they no longer have to act in tandem with all the others when it comes to realigning exchange rates .
It is also totally unacceptable for some people to say that they will refuse to be bound by any future discipline adopted jointly , by democratic methods and in accordance with the Treaties , in relation to exchange policy with the euro .
If the new European monetary system is sufficiently flexible , as the rapporteur has claimed , then the United Kingdom should not have any serious objections to taking part .
It is therefore a mistake to give it the option , even now , of going its own way , which it tends to do all too often these days .
That is why , on this particular point , we do not agree with some of our colleagues and have tabled an amendment reaffirming the basic principles on which Europe was founded .
One final comment on the ' ins ' and the ' outs ' , or the ' pre-ins ' and the ' ins ' , to use the current jargon .
There is clearly a degree of solidarity involved here , as we have said on many occasions , but it should not , as certain amendments seem to imply , go so far as to restrict the independence of the Central Bank and impose in advance certain constraints or requirements regarding its interest-rate policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reports before us cover three areas of major importance : economic and monetary union , the impact of currency fluctuations on the internal market , and the annual report of the European Monetary Institute .
The motion for a resolution is an important contribution to the construction of Europe 's monetary system , and the mechanism proposed by Parliament is very similar to the outcome of the discussions in the Council itself , which was presented at the informal ECOFIN Council in Verona and is shortly to be presented at the European Council in Florence .
The exchange-rate mechanism is essential if we are to prevent currency fluctuations in non-participating countries and to protect the single market .
The resolution rightly points out that while it relies mainly on the Member States achieving convergence and sound financial management , it also needs to include ways of supporting any currencies under attack .
Our group has some reservations , however , concerning paragraph 4 .
We feel that while stable real exchange rates are certainly necessary to prevent unfair competitive advantage , stable nominal rates are also a powerful deflationary force , help towards convergence and underlie the very principle behind the European Monetary System .
In order to prevent exchange-rate fluctuations in future , we agree with the resolution that we need greater convergence and closer monitoring of the macro-economic situation within the Union .
The report also opposes any corrective measures which run counter to the rules of the single market , and it proposes specific measures to help small and medium-sized firms .
On the subject of combating currency fluctuations , I would point out that the French Finance Minister recently put forward three proposals to his Union counterparts designed to prevent exchange-rate turbulence .
The measures involve keeping payments made under the Structural Funds in line with changes in the real exchange rates , introducing macro-economic conditionality for Structural Fund payments similar to that which applies for the Cohesion Funds , and making procedures stiffer under the broad economic policy guidelines .
The resolution proposes the right way to prevent currency fluctuations : stronger macro-economic and budgetary discipline in the Member States , which will boost economic convergence and prevent the imbalances which are the source of financial instability .
Once we have entered the third phase of EMU , the same question will arise in relation to the currencies of those countries which are still outside the system .
The Council has already made progress in this direction by adopting , with the exception of the United Kingdom and Sweden , a proposed exchange-rate mechanism based on the EMS .
The technical details are to be finalized at the Dublin Council , which is a concern raised in the motion for a resolution .
Our group has serious doubts , however , as regards the proposal to introduce a tax on currency speculation .
How can you tell the difference between a speculative transaction and a cover operation ?
How effective would it be in a world where capital moves around freely and European currencies can be traded in financial centres in America , Asia and elsewhere ?
In other words , why should we give the rest of the world an advantage over Europe at a time when unemployment is still our biggest problem ?
It is subject to these reservations that our group supports all three of these reports .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are enormous challenges involved in introducing a single currency , and our experience up to now has taught us a number of important lessons about the exchange-rate arrangements between the countries at the centre of EMU .
I would emphasize once again , perhaps unnecessarily , that any arrangement that limits reciprocal exchange rates is always better than no arrangement at all , and we should therefore follow the recommendations put forward by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and Mr von Wogau .
However , leaving aside the tremendous importance of EMU , which my group hopes will create jobs , we must not forget the terrible problem of unemployment .
As many speakers have already mentioned , we have 18 million people out of work and many different forms of hidden unemployment .
It is a subject we have been talking about ever since I have been in the House .
An excellent report was produced on employment , growth and competitiveness which we have been discussing for two years now , but it has not yet been implemented .
The Council is mainly to blame for failing to make adequate progress on its recommendations concerning education and training , greater flexibility on the labour market , new working hours , shorter working hours and above all shifting taxes on labour onto other targets .
I also gather that in the pact on employment which President Santer is taking to the Florence summit , the 17 areas where employment could have been created , mainly in the regions and the cities , have been dropped .
I should like to know why the Council has decided against implementing all these specific examples on which Parliament and the Commission have worked so hard .
Mr President , despite all the considerable doubts and criticism the leaders of the Union continue obstinately to insist on a dogmatic theory and its implementation - a theory which has no basis in reality .
What are the consequences which we can all see ? They include the inability to pursue a constructive economic policy , the destruction of important social infrastructure , powerlessness and cynicism in the face of mass unemployment and social crisis , total capitulation to the destabilising effects of speculative finance capital and now finally also the risk of splitting the Union .
What conclusion should be drawn ?
The conclusion is that it is time to give up an obsolete , dogmatic idea and choose a modern , flexible form of monetary cooperation and economic policy which is grounded in reality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how we have seen our language and ideas change since the Maastricht Treaty !
In 1992 , we were promised that all the Member States of the Union would adopt the single currency by 1 January 1999 at the latest , apart from a few minor derogations .
We maintained at the time that this was completely unrealistic , and we asked instead that the European Monetary System should be reformed so that it would work properly .
Today , those responsible for the single currency project have been forced to invent a new monetary system , more or less at the last minute , in order to prevent the Union from being split into two or more groups .
Even worse , having proclaimed that the EMS was dead and buried , they are now having to resurrect it , and having said that the single market could not function without the single currency , they are now having to admit the opposite .
However , while the current developments are certainly heading in the right direction , we are still not entirely happy with them , for two reasons .
First , the new EMS cannot be more than a temporary arrangement , since the official objective , in theory at least , is still a single currency for everyone and convergence in the foreseeable future .
This policy seems as unreasonable as expecting all the Member States to go for the single currency at the same time .
It suggests that it will be possible to apply a single economic policy across the board in the near future , which presupposes that our problems and therefore our societies will be as one .
In our view , this is ridiculous !
If disparate societies have this bureaucratic convergence forced upon them , it could have a very negative or even destabilizing effect on the system .
Another reason why we have our doubts is that the new system they are trying to invent has never been thought through and has never been democratically approved by the national parliaments , despite the occasional indications that you find here and there in the Treaty .
It is difficult to impose discipline where it has not been accepted , and we cannot take a major step of this kind in the dark , so we shall sooner or later have to reopen formal discussions on the subject .

Mr President , Mr Lamfalussy , Commissioner , the reports by Professor Pérez Royo - who totally disagrees , incidentally , with Milton Friedman , the monetarist , who thinks the single currency is suicide - Mr Gasòliba and Mr von Wogau bring us back to the ' theological ' and ' teleological ' problem of the single currency .
Let us consider the theological problem first of all .
Is the Lord good ?
Is the single currency good ?
France 's strawberry producers tend to think the single currency is good because of the devaluation of the Spanish peseta .
But as it happens the Spanish peseta and the Italian lira , which are of interest to France 's cattle breeders , will probably not even join the single currency , so the apparent advantages are somewhat deceptive .
And even if the Fifteen all join , the dollar will not , nor will the undervalued currencies of South-East Asia , Morocco and so on .
The single currency might suit the European single market , but the single market is becoming less and less European and more and more global , mainly because of the European Commission 's free trade policies .
Another much more serious problem is that a currency is nothing more than a vehicle for information on the economy .
It is the reflection or shadow of the economy , not the economy itself .
It is like the story of Plato and the cave ; it is the signifier , not the signified .
But trying to force 15 different economies to have the same official monetary shadow is really just forcing them to chase their own shadows .
Experience shows that if you chase your own shadow , you will eventually fall down exhausted and die .
And that equates , in economic terms , with unemployment , austerity , recession and protests , even in Germany .
This brings us on to the teleological problem , or what it is all for .
The single currency may be fine , but what is it for , what purpose does it serve ?
Is it Europe 's objective to have a single currency , a single central bank and a single market , or is it prosperity , democracy and development ?
Forgive me for saying so , Mr Lamfalussy , but when Articles 107-109 say that the president of the European Central Bank shall not take instructions from anyone , it smacks more of oligarchy than democracy .
So even if there are some kind of parliamentary controls , they will not go very far .
And if the aim is prosperity , Mr Pérez Royo , the situation of farmers in Andalusia , Finland and France reflects what Jaurès said about money being the blood of the poor .
Just look how we have forgotten what history has taught us !
We have already had a single currency in Europe and throughout the world : the gold standard .
But it did not stop deflation .
The great depression in America happened at a time when it had a fixed exchange rate with the gold standard .
I know that I will not convince you , Mr de Silguy , since this is a religious question .
At least we shall know what to think about the disasters it will bring in its wake .
Market forces produce contaminated meal .
Mr President , if we wish to have monetary union , we must combat unemployment in the European Union , as is repeatedly stressed by both the European Monetary Institute and the Commission in its annual economic report .
To my mind , however , it is not enough to carry on as before .
We need to provide greater impetus on the structural policy side , and that is why the economic policy guidelines must indeed be reoriented , as Parliament is calling for today .
This is now more important than ever , because we need a more optimistic and confident approach in order to complete the project of monetary union . If , happily - as is also noted by the EMI - the work is on schedule , this project must not be jeopardized by a lack of credibility as regards the other policy elements .
I do hope that the European Monetary Institute will continue to adhere to the timetable , and that Mr Lamfalussy can give us a guarantee that the EMI will carry out its evaluation of convergence this autumn in such a way as to establish whether or not a majority of the Member States meet the convergence criteria , so that there is clarity about the appraisal and the scope for interpretation , and also about the need for participation in a European exchange-rate mechanism .
The House stated very early on that currencies not participating in European monetary union should be linked to it by means of an exchange-rate mechanism with the euro as its anchor-point .
Fortunately the monetary institutions , as well as the Commission and the Council , have since come round to Parliament 's position .
What kind of mechanism should this be ?
In my opinion , we need a European system of solidarity and stability , because on the one hand the currencies not belonging to the monetary union must be protected from speculative attacks , and on the other a split in the internal market must be prevented .
Above all , we should assure the other currencies of our support and solidarity , so that they can join the monetary union as soon as possible .
In fact , as the past few years have shown , exchange-rate turbulence has a detrimental effect not only on economic growth , but also on employment .
It is therefore important to introduce an exchange-rate mechanism on these lines , in order to maintain the credibility of the initiative .
In my view , it is very important that the European Monetary Institute should conduct further studies of these exchange-rate fluctuations , in particular to examine their micro-economic effects , since these can give us a much clearer picture of individual sectors and branches of industry , especially in 1995 , and show how these elements have contributed to the lack of confidence in business circles .
Ultimately , what is crucial today is not wage costs , but the factor which distorts competition within the internal market by pushing up unit labour costs in countries with hard currencies , namely exchange-rate variations and fluctuations , as well as exchange-rate protection operations .
So it is high time for us to invent a mechanism which makes one thing clear : that those currencies which do not participate in monetary union immediately will be able to join in later , and that the internal market as such will not be fragmented ; rather , European monetary union is a further step towards its consolidation , and another contribution to the multinational dimension of the market .
Mr President , unemployment is at the moment a Europe-wide problem , to which a solution is sought in all Member States of the European Union .
Unemployment does however not a constitute a barrier to joining the EMU , since EMU not only improves competition but also increases demand , which helps maintain employment .
EMU reduces sharp economic fluctuations , lowers the interest rate particularly in smaller European countries and increases trade within the internal market .
There is no short-cut to employment and it is not improved by short-term measures .
Economic and monetary union is a natural extension to the internal market , since full benefit from the internal market can only be achieved through co-operation and convergence within economic and monetary union .
It is true that the implementation of the third stage of monetary union within the schedule set in the Maastricht Treaty is uncertain , due to economic problems .
However , a postponement of the third stage and the postponement decision in itself will slow down the recovery of the European economy , keep interest rates high and cause great economic uncertainty .
By fulfilling the EMU criteria stability can be achieved .
The political decision-making within the economy , regarding both exchange rates and interest rates , will decrease , and this reduces the benefits of not joining the third stage .
After EMU 's third stage , currency policy will be of general concern to Member States .
Price stability has to be regarded as an essential objective both within and outside monetary union .
Countries outside the EMU should receive help from the system to join at a later date , and the system should not complicate activities in the internal market or the European Central Bank 's monetary activities .
From the point of view of EMU support , it is important for the Commission to define the currency rules for the countries staying outside the EMU during the course of the current year .
I hope that the Commissioner will see that this is implemented and aim at finding a solution to the situation as soon as possible .
The rapporteurs ' views on the current situation of the EMU and on the preparatory stage prior to progressing towards a common currency are realistic .
I find however that fulfilling the convergence criteria is more important than linking floating currencies to the European monetary system , since it enhances political credibility regarding economic issues and provides greater opportunities for achieving both monetary stability and national economic stability .
Mr President , in April 1996 the European Monetary Institute published its annual report for 1995 .
This excellent document contains a section detailing the economic and financial conditions in the European Union including the existing situation in the different Member States with regard to the Maastricht criteria of convergence necessary for the successful implementation of economic and monetary union .
Our group , for its part , recalls the necessity , eventually , for the participation of all currencies of the European Union in the exchange mechanism if we wish to guarantee the correct working of the single market and ensure the transition towards EMU .
Mr Böhm 's report , which we generally support , welcomes the EMI report and draws on its main principles , which are the need to follow the Treaty at all institutional stages towards the transition to the third stage of EMU ; to continue the reflection on exchange relations between the future Euro-zones and other parts of the Union ; and continued pursuit of the adjustment of public debt .
The Institute 's report , like the rapporteur 's resolution , goes in the right direction from the point of view of our group , with one slight exception .
In fact in one of the recitals the motion for a resolution notes a contradiction between the EMI and the European Commission with regard to their explanations of the economic fluctuations which were so evident in 1995 .
The term is a bit strong and for our part we think there is consensus and that the prognoses of the two differ only in the respective importance given to the level of the rate of interest in 1994 and to the monetary fluctuations during the first quarter of 1995 as well as their impact on the confidence of economic agents .
In this general outline our group welcomes the report by Mr Pérez Royo , which puts the emphasis on the efforts in terms of convergence and budgetary discipline , which alone are able to prevent monetary fluctuations .
In conclusion , we believe that the system of monetary cooperation is not the competence of the Commission and the EMI alone , but also the competence of the Council , the EMI and the Commission respectively .
At the same time one should bear in mind that the possibility of narrower bands of fluctuations should not be the only resort of Member States concerned and that there should also be a multilateral framework at the disposal of the Ministers of Finance , of the European central banks and of the central banks of countries which are not yet in the system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make a specific comment on behalf of my group on the Pérez Royo report .
The Liberal Group agrees with the main thrust of the report , but we have two fundamental objections to paragraph 4 , which states that a tax on currency speculation can help to keep the exchange rates calculable .
First of all we doubt just how effective such a tax would really be , and it is not even a good idea in the first place .
Why can we not introduce this tax ?
Because we could not limit it to currency market transactions , otherwise the speculators would simply turn to other financial transactions such as derivatives .
Furthermore , the introduction of such a tax in Europe would simply mean that capital movements would shift to other countries such as Singapore and Hong Kong .
In other words , if the tax is to be introduced , it must be extended to all financial transactions and to every country in the world .
But even if we succeeded in introducing the tax , it would still not be a good idea .
First , it would lead to less liquidity on the financial markets , which can in itself trigger greater currency fluctuations .
Second , it would also make capital more expensive .
It makes no distinction between genuine speculation and investment .
Both business credit and cover transactions for direct investments would be affected , and curbing investment is surely the last thing we want .
I find it extremely regrettable that the idea of taxing currency market operations is brought up time and time again without ever being properly thought through , and that is why I and my Liberal colleagues will be voting against the paragraph in question .
Mr President , one more voice , one more minute .
So that once more it can be made clear that the so-called path of consensus is not actually a path of consensus at all .
What was decided about EMU and a single currency at Maastricht was not set in concrete .
Reality has shown that the planned path cannot be achieved .
One voice and one minute to remind everyone of unemployment and social decline and the share of responsibility borne by the nominative criteria which served to impose a policy even though they were proved to be unattainable .
But after the total inflexibility shown towards arbitrary goals and deadlines we might now have a more easygoing and arbitrary flexibility in the interpretation of the Treaty articles once it has been realised that applying previously set and inflexibly applied conditions was out of the question .
Above all , one voice and one minute to assert that the problem is the fall in demand , the orientation of investment , the need to tax speculation and stimulate production and job creation .
To change our economic policy to one where the single currency has its rightful place of monetary instrument and the objective is improving social conditions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , representatives of the Commission and the Council , since September 1992 , there have been a number of devaluations of national currencies : one of the most significant , in terms of loss of value , was that of the Lira , which lost as much as a third of its value against the Deutschmark , causing the Lira to depart the EMS .
And now , in Italy , all we hear about is the re-entry of the Lira into the European Monetary System as soon as possible .
This seems to be a priority which , in my view , is likely to cause us to lose sight of the fact that the prime objective that the Italian Government has to achieve is to reduce the government deficit and , therefore , apply a sensible and stable fiscal policy which may help ease the rate of inflation which , in Italy , continues to be one of the highest .
It is precisely because I agree with the spirit of the report by Mr Fernando Pérez Royo that I am worried therefore : the devaluation of the Lira has been the consequence of speculation and short-term economic policy but , at the same time , we have seen it recover very rapidly against the Deutschmark - something which I personally find it hard to come to terms with , precisely because of the rapidity of this development which leaves me confused .
We need to have transparency : a policy of transparency is a good thing , and nor do I believe that this sudden revaluation of the Lira is the result of the so-called confidence of the markets in the stability of a government which has been barely two months in existence .
I therefore ask that we delve deeper into the causes of financial fluctuations which occur too regularly not to be suspect , bearing in mind that there was a time in Italy when all it took was a ' leak ' of information on guarantee notes to send the Lira tumbling , with the cost then being borne by Italian workers in terms of their purchasing power .
To conclude , Mr President : we need common aims and a common macro-economic policy designed to resolve those economic and monetary problems currently besetting certain Member States which could , however , affect others in the future .
Mr President , in welcoming the 1995 EMI annual report , I wish to congratulate not only Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , but also EMI President Alexandre Lamfalussy , who has recently announced his retirement in 1997 .
That does not , however , mean that the Socialist Group agrees with all that is set down in the 1995 report or , indeed , the rapporteur 's gloss on it .
In many areas the report adumbrates ideas given wide currency in the Commission 's annual economic report , on which Parliament has already pronounced .
Some differences between these two snapshots emerge however .
The EMU idiosyncratically scarcely mentions the shaky state of consumer and business confidence as a significant contributing factor in the current and recent economic slowdown .
As a consequence , it omits to highlight the need for active measures , including the judicious use of monetary policy to prompt recovery of business and consumer confidence .
On the other hand , the EMI report talks glibly about the rigidities of the labour market and seems to follow the simplistic approach that labour-market flexibility means poorer wages and conditions for workers rather than improving their mobility through education , training and investment .
Similarly , the doubtful observation that percentage rates of public expenditure were unacceptably too high , was only half-heartedly qualified by Mr Lamfalussy when he came under fire in Parliament 's Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs recently .
Finally , the EMI report failed to point a finger of blame at the rigid monetary policies pursued by some national monetary authorities whose effect in the real economy has been so deleterious .
Socialist amendments underscoring some of these sins of omission and commission have been incorporated in Parliament 's report .
I am also pleased that future EMI reports will contain more detailed analyses and evaluations of the effect of the exchange-rate fluctuations on the economy .
Secondly , Mr Lamfalussy has promised that he and his successor are prepared to issue half-yearly reports on the EMI 's preparatory work for EMU .
This will give greater transparency to the EMI 's work and that , in turn , will benefit us all .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Every speech that I have sat through this morning has been extended one way or another through your incompetence in the chair .
It is no good exhorting people to shorten their speeches .
You are in the chair on behalf of Parliament to shut people up when they go over time , because they transgress on other people 's democratic rights to speak in this Parliament .
Could you wake up and do something about it ?
Mr President , if everyone keeps to what has been agreed , not just here in Parliament but everywhere else , then economic and monetary union will be in place by 1999 .
It is not just the politicians already in favour who believe it will happen , the financial markets also already seem to be counting on it , as we can see from the convergence of long-term interest rates in France and Germany .
Next comes the man in the street .
We are going to have to earn his trust in practical ways , by meeting the criteria and by providing proper information from now to 2002 .
My group believes in the single currency , let there be no mistake about it .
But we do still have a number of questions which I should like to put to the Chairman of the European Monetary Institute , Mr Lamfalussy .
The Treaty states that the central banks must make themselves independent of the decision-making powers of their governments and parliaments by 1 January 1999 at the latest .
At the same time , the institutions of the ESCB , the European Central Bank and the central banks , are not to take any further instructions .
This is often referred to in the press as the sixth convergence criterion .
The majority of the national central banks do not yet meet the independence requirements , and far too little progress is being made here .
Finland , Greece , Ireland , Italy , Portugal and Sweden have done particularly badly .
And even once a bank is formally declared independent , it may take a considerable time before it develops its own tradition of independent decision-making .
The independence of the future European Central Bank would provide a sound basis on which its president could build a reputation for reliability .
France yesterday came up with a proposal that could become the political equivalent of the Central Bank , or something resembling an economic government , as Mr Pérez Royo described it this morning .
I should therefore like to ask Mr Lamfalussy two questions .
What does he think in general terms of the progress made by the central banks towards independence ?
And does he see the French proposal as a restriction on the independence of the Central Bank in particular ?
Do Mr Waigel 's ' stability pact ' and other similar proposals also imply restrictions on the independence of the Central Bank ?
I should also like to ask about the blueprint which the EMI is to produce for the future operation of the European Central Bank .
According to the Treaty , this blueprint is supposed to be ready by the end of this year , and it is being increasingly widely reported that the Central Bank is probably going to pursue a policy of controlling the money supply .
This was the system used by the German central bank , the Bundesbank , and according to reports it worked successfully in only ten years out of twenty .
What is the argument in favour of using this system ?
My third and final question is this : what does Mr Lamfalussy estimate the value of the euro will be against the Asian currencies ?
I ask this because I am convinced that in some sections of the market , the European currencies are overvalued against the Asian currencies and vice versa , and that this may lie at the root of some of our unemployment .
Mr President , thankfully we live in a Community where the weapons of war these days are economic rather than military .
It is important that we seize the opportunity to get our economies together to prevent future conflict .
It is a bit like the difference between nuclear fusion and nuclear fission .
We all know that nuclear fission is an inherently dangerous process , as indeed is a fission in our economies .
But if we were able to achieve the economic equivalent of nuclear fusion and fuse our economies together , we all know that the benefits would be great and that we would produce a lot of economic energy through a growth in trade on our continent and a lot more jobs , which is so important .
I belong to a tradition of a party in Great Britain which has always believed in the United Kingdom 's full participation in economic and monetary union .
Indeed , one of the more eminent members of my party , Mr Roy Jenkins , in his time as President of the Commission , was one of the main proponents of currencies coming together .
I am proud to be in that tradition , to stand against the prevailing government policy and sentiment in my country .
Mr von Wogau said that perhaps it would be better if the UK did not join a single currency .
I beg to disagree with him .
I am arguing very strongly in my country that we should join a single currency .
It is important for us irrespective of its importance to the European Union as a whole .
On Black Wednesday in September 1992 we saw the immense damage that can be done by great devaluations of currency .
In his report , Mr Pérez Royo talks about the growth in Italian competitiveness through the short-term devaluation .
One can also look at the growth in UK competitiveness and the damage it did to the French and Belgian economies .
I do not agree with him that we need a tax on currency speculation but certainly we need to avoid this kind of movement .
Finally , I am arguing in my country that the logical consequence of an opt-out from the single currency is a lockout from the single market .
Countries cannot co-exist in a single market with partners who reserve the right to indulge in competitive devaluations to gain short-term advantage over their neighbours .
If we live in a union it is a union where solidarity in these matters must prevail .
In our view , the point of this debate we are holding is that the economic guidelines and , above all , the political measures taken so far are insufficient given the real state of affairs ; the truth is that we are in a stage of economic slow-down with an unacceptable level of unemployment .
And so , if in those circumstances the internal market is not strengthened , if there is no fresh investment , if we do not have an effective employment policy , that slow-down could turn into a new period of recession and , if that situation persists , then the time-scales ahead of us cease to be credible .
This is a political and not a technical problem .
The closer we come to the third phase , to the single currency - which is essential and has to be maintained - the clearer it becomes that Economic and Monetary Union has not been brought into effect as a whole and , more particularly , that Economic Union has not moved forward .
There is at present not even a trace of government of the economy ; there is no coordination , save in theory , between the Member States ; and the main guidelines are not being put into practice - despite the fact that those are the very elements that need to be given a boost , not forgetting the priority to be accorded to employment , as happened at the tripartite conference recently held in Italy .
That is the point !
Finally , we must be clear that the policy of austerity , albeit vital , cannot be allowed to destroy development ; that is fundamental point but does not seem to me to be taken fully into account in either the discussion or the documents of the Community Institutions .
That is why I think it would be a mistake to make the Maastricht criteria stricter , as some would wish .
What we actually need is to revert to an intelligent reading of Article 104c which says , among other things , that public investment needs to be rid of deficit - and that is a basic factor .
I know that it is difficult to balance out deficits with a high level of public investment ; difficult to reduce the fiscal pressure on employment , as Commissioner de Silguy said , but that is what needs to be done , and coordination between the Member States is needed for this .
I wish also to point out that , as President Santer rightly said in a recent statement : we need to make full and good use of the Structural Funds - ECU 170 bn - to aid investment and employment .
The Commission and Council must do more here .
Mr President , honourable colleagues .
The economic guidelines now before us are marked by the preparations for EMU and the tragic fact that the European model has created a situation involving 18 million unemployed and 50 million people suffering social exclusion .
It is obvious that the new jobs and sectors of the future are not thriving in today 's EU .
I am convinced that cooperation on economic stability and a common currency is the most important contribution that the EU can make towards the creation of better conditions under which we can all be more competitive , achieve greater growth and thus create new jobs .
Even for those countries which will not qualify for the first round of EMU the process has resulted in a thorough and in many cases necessary revision of the economy .
For it is to be hoped that we have come to the end of the era in which budgets could be expanded and politicians could buy popularity by shifting the burden of debt irresponsibly onto future generations .
Much remains to be done , however , as part of a structural revision , responsibility for almost all of which lies with the individual countries .
It is the responsibility of the members of ECOFIN and of the Ministers meeting in Florence to effect changes in the various countries ' national tax , social security , labour market and education systems rather than just talking about them .
As regards the Union , and not least us here in Parliament , it is a question of gearing our work to deregulation and not to new expensive regulations which hinder development .
I would stress what is said in the guidelines , namely the need to reduce expenditure and the fact that increased taxation is not an alternative , particularly with a view to our competitiveness .
We must thus forcefully reject increased taxes , European taxes and in particular the proposed Tobin taxes .
There are no quick and easy solutions to the problem of unemployment .
We could learn something from other countries ' experiences , however , more quickly than getting bogged down in meaningless political formulations about vague ideas of an employment union which has shown itself to have no effect whatsoever , at least not in the way it has been put into practice in my country .
The old structural problems in Europe cannot be ignored .
The omissions of many years must be dealt with in the short term if we wish to retain our prosperity .
And we have white papers , Essen conclusions , these guidelines - which is to say that the conclusions and the direction to take are clear .
I should now like to hear fewer fine words and see more concrete evidence that the leaders of the EU are really serious about their goal of halving unemployment .
The Commission 's recommendations to the Council on the broad guidelines of economic policy are a source of some concern to us , since they appear to be determined by a strictly monetarist approach in which employment and growth are incidental considerations .
This approach could take us straight to the wall .
Look at what is happening in Germany , Belgium and France .
We cannot have a single currency if we do not have the support of public opinion . The currency has no virtue in itself , but it has a vital political dimension and represents part of what it is to be European .
What is more , experience has shown us that in industry for example , excessive belt-tightening can be counterproductive in that it destroys the social cohesion which everyone agrees is a vital element in being competitive .
This is also true of the macro-economy , but its importance is underestimated , and I therefore wonder what Mr de Silguy means when he recommends ' suitable ' wage increases .
In his preliminary remarks , Mr Lamfalussy told us that we should seek to get to grips with the serious problems facing us .
But if we are to do so , we cannot accept the economic guidelines being proposed by the Council and the Commission .
In particular , the Council must agree to adopt and finance the 14 major infrastructure projects proposed by Jacques Delors , which Parliament has called for time and time again .
On the jobs front , our structural policy must be to reduce working hours .
Looking beyond the accepted monetarist approach , simply saying that we intend to invest in infrastructure and human resources is not enough , we must also say how we intend to do this and how much we intend to invest .
I have one comment on the report by Mr Pérez Royo .
His proposal for a tax on currency speculation is absolutely vital for the system we wish to introduce , and Europe should take the initiative on this subject at the next G7 meeting .
Finally , while we are in favour of monetary stability , it is our political responsibility to condemn the conditions under which the Council and the Commission expect us to pursue this objective .
The Commission 's economic guidelines are unacceptable , and have been made even more so by the ECOFIN Council .
They merely demonstrate that our executive bodies have caved in to monetarist pressure , and they play into the hands of those who oppose the single currency .
Mr President , what message do Europeans have for our almost 18 million unemployed people ?
Are we able to solve real problems , instead of simply making solemn declarations ?
New jobs in the environmental sector , social services and information and communications technology are not enough in themselves .
Disputes over competence will not take us any further forward .
Only when measures at European level are coordinated with those of the Member States will effective results be achieved .
Jacques Santer 's confidence pact on employment in no way impinges on the legitimate aim of subsidiarity .
A chapter on employment in the new EU Treaty will not in fact create a single extra job , but the foundations are being laid for an active policy on employment .
After all , the Commission is supposed to complement , not replace , measures taken by the Member States .
It is therefore not a question of new programmes costing millions , but rather of jointly agreed resources , such as the Structural Funds , being coordinated so as to enhance their effectiveness .
The European Council in Essen took the first real steps by establishing five areas for action .
The Madrid Council then decided to reduce regional imbalances , not least as a means of combating long-term unemployment .
Research and development must be strongly promoted , alongside small and medium-sized enterprises , which provide the bulk of the jobs and traineeships in Europe .
We need more flexible working hours , greater investment in training and further training , the introduction of lifelong learning and more generally a policy of stability .
The convergence criteria and the third stage of economic and monetary union must be adhered to .
As a hard currency , the euro will help to boost investment and to create new jobs in Europe .
The social market economy is and will remain Europe 's number one export in intellectual terms .
But both parts must be in harmony : the economic part , with an increase in competitiveness , and the social part , which must never be allowed to fall by the wayside .
Our model is based on consensus , not on confrontation .
The alliances on employment which should be pursued and respect for the interests of the social partners belong in this context .
Mr President , I will start by bringing the House 's attention to the Delors White Paper which was charged with the task of providing a blueprint to get 15 million of Europe 's citizens back to work by the year 2000 , an ambitious task but one which I believe we should still pursue .
At the same time we have within the Maastricht Treaty a timetable laid down for monetary union which we need to stick to .
Indeed until recently the growth projections of both the Commission and the OECD suggested we could still possibly complete that task of getting millions of people back to work by the year 2000 .
What concerns me is the revision that has taken place on those growth figures and the likely impact on jobs .
The jobs , I believe , will not come with such low revised figures and what we really need is the measures outlined in the resolution that will go before Parliament shortly so that those jobs are created .
Modest growth in itself will not bring those jobs .
What is clear is that the reductions in the number of people paying income tax because of the increased unemployment and the increased number of people dependent on social security payments will seriously affect the achievement of the debt and deficit targets of Member States in the European Union , and I draw Members ' attention particularly to the situation in Germany .
Only by getting people back to work , getting people to pay taxes , reducing social security spending as a whole , will we actually get to meet those debt and deficit criteria and see jobs and the single currency at the same time .
We know that growth does not guarantee jobs but without growth jobs will not be created at all .
Mr Santer came to us with a package of confidence-creating measures which at the moment seems to many like a confidence trick .
What we need are the measures outlined in our resolution in order to see the real growth and the real jobs that we need in Europe so desperately .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to the speeches of all those have taken part in this debate , and I was particularly struck by Mr de Silguy 's comments .
I would agree with the Commissioner that the introduction of the single currency must not give rise to a split between the rich and poor countries of the European Union , but I note with regret that this statement is far from consistent with the intention expressed by the French Government - and partly taken up by the Commissioner - of at least studying the possibility of paying Community grants in depreciated currency and - what is worse - of making Structural Fund support conditional on the improvement of public finances .
Besides having no legal basis in the Treaty , these two measures - and especially the second - would be in clear conflict with the Commissioner 's statement , since they would mean adding new penalties to the existing penalty of exclusion from the hard core , increasing the ' pre-in ' countries ' difficulty in joining the common currency , and ultimately widening the disparities and causing the split which the Commissioner does not wish to be created .
The Spanish delegation supports the establishment of an exchange-rate mechanism which encourages the convergence of those countries which do not participate in the third stage of EMU from the outset and protects their currencies from external pressures .
However , it does not - and will never - support the introduction of penalties which make convergence more difficult and impede the entry of those countries which initially remain outside the hard core .
Mr President , economic growth will not be a magic cure for all the European Union 's problems , but adequate growth is absolutely essential if we are to achieve both our current main aims of higher employment and economic and monetary union .
The first thing we might expect the broad economic guidelines to do is to set a course for achieving adequate growth in the short term .
It is therefore quite astonishing to realize that neither the version put forward by the Commission nor the ECOFIN version actually does this .
What is worse , if we followed today 's recommendations to the letter , our already stagnating growth would be slowed still further .
The main problem seems to be that the Commission and the Council live in a one-dimensional world of supply economics where the concept of demand is completely taboo , so no account is taken of the impact which the recommendations given in the broad guidelines might have on actual demand .
The Member States ' convergence programmes are still under review , with adjustments being made to accommodate declining economic performance , and we shall not see the cumulative effect of all these until the end of the year at the earliest .
Clearly , the idea that 90 % of the Union 's gross national product is earned within the Union itself and only 10 % through external trade has not yet got through to everyone .
If the Commission and the Council are recommending a number of measures designed to curb demand to all the Member States , where are we going to find the impetus for growth to help us increase employment and achieve EMU ?
From the 10 % of GNP which we earn from exports outside the Union , against a background of strict monetary policy geared towards lower inflation , when the BIS is already warning against deflation ?
By refusing to take advantage of the flexibility built into the EMU criteria and imposing an unnecessarily severe programme of belt-tightening on all the Member States , which would run counter to present economic trends ?
And by curbing wages in all the Member States , so that there is little growth in internal purchasing power and therefore in intra-European exports ?
When our joint resolution says that the approach adopted by the Commission and the Council is unrealistic and inadequate , we are really understating the case .
It is actually a danger to the Union , and must therefore be rejected .
Mr President , we are here to discuss a common project , the single European currency , and its next stage .
A precondition for the progress of EMU is that European citizens have confidence that it is justifiable .
Large Member States play a significant role in this .
The interest rate is a good example of the above .
The interest rate of the anchor currency will have to be lowered before interest rates in my own country , Finland for example , can decrease , even though Finland has the lowest inflation rate in Europe .
Finland has discussed joining the European exchange rate mechanism .
Before joining , however Finland wants to be certain that the anchor currency , the German mark , is not used to protect Germany 's national interests , as was the case in the early 1990 's , when Germany was forced to sustain an unrealistically high interest rate in order to prevent an inflationary election campaign of a politician which would affect the value of the German mark .
This lead to a collapse of the entire ERM , and the weak ones are still struggling with high unemployment as a consequence .
In EMU discussions we are talking about necessary savings within the public sector .
With regard to EMU 's progress it is important that this concept is not misunderstood .
Public savings should not mean that everybody is saving - on the contrary .
The private sector in particular , where there is money , should invest and also spend .
This serves to bring about an equilibrium in the public sector , more jobs are created , more tax revenue is collected and there are fewer costs related to unemployment .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lamfalussy , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to concentrate on just one aspect of the subject that we are debating ; on a very important aspect on which the success of the whole single currency venture may hinge .
Namely , the relations between the Member States in the first group and those which remain outside .
We have before us a first class report , and I would like to congratulate Mr von Wogau on the intellectual range that he has displayed in producing it .
However , various points have remained unclarified in this debate and I will recall them for you now .
First , the likelihood that the countries which are not in the first group will face a worsening of the terms of the Treaty because of the stability pact , otherwise known as the Waigel pact , about which there is intense discussion .
The Waigel pact makes things worse , and it matters not whether those in the first group agree on it .
What matters is that it will worsen the situation and make things much more difficult for the countries in the following group .
To put it in a nutshell , I think that the main issue that should be concerning us in the whole affair is the position of the European Central Bank which will support the currencies of the countries which are outside when they are threatened , but only sufficiently , so it tells us , to prevent a threat to the stability of the euro .
And , of course , that is just as it should be .
No one would wish to see the stability of the euro threatened in the very early days or to see it sacrificed on the altar of stability for the currencies which are temporarily outside .
However , there is no reason why it should ever come to that , because each intervention by the Central Bank in support of a currency can be sterilized .
The essential element is equitable apportionment of the interest cost , of the cost of interest rate changes , so that the economies of the countries which have remained outside are not excessively burdened .
I would like the Commission and the European Monetary Institute to take note of this point .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with three days to go to the Florence summit , it was important for Parliament to say what it thinks about the economic situation in the Union and its economic and social prospects .
The only option open to us was an oral question , and so I now have only two short minutes in which to restate my dissatisfaction at the far too liberal approach adopted by the Commission and the Council .
Budgetary discipline , combating inflation , flexible working conditions and increasing competition have proved to be anything but the right way to get Europe out of its present severe crisis , with 18 million unemployed , 50 million people living in poverty , inadequate demand , a lack of confidence , falling investment and excessively high interest rates .
None of these remedies has worked .
As the French socialists see it , we should instead promote economic growth by bringing interest rates down , abandoning the fight against inflation , which is now in any event practically non-existent , channelling profits towards investment in order to create jobs , implementing a regeneration programme based on the Delors White Paper , and reducing working hours so that people can share them more fairly .
And , lastly , the Intergovernmental Conference must give Europe a social and , above all , a political dimension .
An economic Europe which is soon to have its own single currency will really need political government by a governing body .
This may be a different issue , but the fact that Europe does not have a political dimension certainly partly explains the Union 's poor economic and social performance at the moment , which has brought such condemnation from the public .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened very carefully to what you have said , and I have learned a great deal .
Although I obviously cannot reply to all the questions you raised , I should nevertheless like to say something about EMS II and unemployment , two subjects which were mentioned in almost every question .
On the subject of EMS II , I would confirm what Mr de Silguy said : that there are not one , but two objectives .
One is to ensure that the single market is able to function properly .
The other is to prepare the way for those who are provisionally outside the system to join the first team .
What we are all wondering is whether there is really any hope that EMS II will achieve these two objectives after the serious crisis that the first EMS went through in 1992 and 1993 ?
My reply to this is simply that there is hope , for a number of reasons .
First , do not think that the 1992-1993 crises marked the collapse of the EMS .
The EMS did not collapse , though it was certainly badly shaken .
But the countries which remained in the EMS experienced far less turbulence in their exchange rates than those outside the system .
Second , we can learn lessons from past experience , and the proposal which is currently being discussed and which is to be completed by the end of the year rectifies every single one of the deficiencies which the EMS showed in 1992-1993 .
Third , the convergence process is considerably further advanced than it was at the time of the crises in 1992-1993 .
Fourth , there is still talk of the danger of ' asymmetric ' crises .
We have already had one , in the shape of German unification , but it is not something which is likely to be repeated , or at least I hope not .
Furthermore , I would point out that the danger in the past has not come from ' asymmetric ' crises , but from the asymmetric nature of the reactions to them , particularly the political repercussions .
Think of how chaotic the reactions were to the oil crises in the 1970s .
For all these reasons , I am confident that EMS II will work , but I would stress one vital point , which is that EMS II cannot be more than a transitional or provisional arrangement , and that the final solution to exchangerate instability is monetary union .

Finally , a few words about unemployment .
In every speech I have made , I have always recognized the fundamental importance of tackling the unemployment problem .
I have never concealed my concern about this , nor do I intend to do so .
But I would advise you to resist the temptation to draw parallels , as some people have occasionally done , between the preparations for monetary union , or even monetary union itself , and the increase in unemployment .
If there is such a temptation , it is misleading in that it does not correspond to what actually happened .
The strong upward trend in unemployment began in Europe in the 1970s and gained momentum at the beginning of the 1980s , in other words at a time when monetary union was not even on the agenda and we were a long way even from the Maastricht negotiations .
I therefore feel we should analyse the seriousness of the problem as it is now , instead of drawing over-simplified parallels which are easily exploited .
Mr Cox has asked for the floor ; since we are about to start the vote , I would ask you to very brief and take the floor only to make points of order , given that I have still to give the floor to Mr Macciotta , on behalf of the Council , and Mr de Silguy , on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , you have anticipated the point of order I wished to make .
I welcome the fact that Mr Lamfalussy has made his closing comments but I must insist that the House also hear the other institutions .
We have asked direct questions and we should have direct answers before we go to vote .
It is rather difficult for me to answer all the individual points ; I shall therefore focus on a number of general considerations .
To begin with , considerations of an institutional nature : there is no question that , objectively speaking , difficulties exist in relations between the Institutions , these provoke tensions and , looking ahead , represent an obstacle to further integration : we have a communications ' deficit which is resulting in a shortfall in participation and democracy .
We shall have therefore to find a way of involving the European Parliament , but also the national parliaments , in the decision-taking processes of the European Community .
This is not an artificial concession but a real need to which it is in all our interest to respond through the appropriate institutional changes , which are , in any case , being considered by the Intergovernmental Conference .
A few points now on the substance : the achievement of Economic and Monetary Union will help reinforce the conditions needed to give a fresh boost to economic and social development in Europe , making it more competitive in relation to the three other major economic areas in the world , and will therefore make it possible to speed up the process of creating new jobs .
If that process is to be pursued in a resolute and credible manner , the priority objective of reducing levels of unemployment is both a necessary and a consistent one .
I should like to say to Mr Martinez at this point that not taking part in the stable system of exchange rates is not helpful , as is clear from experience in Italy which did not devalue in order to be more competitive but experienced , in 1992 and between 1994 and 1995 , sudden instability from which it is only now emerging with difficulty and determination .
A stable macro-economic framework is not then of itself enough to guarantee the creation of new jobs .
If we are bring down unemployment to a reasonable level , we need to take more wideranging measures , of a structural nature , designed to improve the operation of the markets , in particular the labour market .
There are indispensable constraints and objectives : first and foremost the social welfare model - which , as I have already said , is an essential feature of Europe - needs to be defended and preserved but , given the changes in the age pyramid and the professional qualifications of Europe 's population , if we are to do that we have to review it to make it more effective and alter the balance .
Secondly , we need to increase investment in human capital which is the most important source of wealth for our continent , by strengthening and improving education systems and vocational training .
Thirdly , we need specific measures to help the less-favoured groups in society : young people , women and the long-term unemployed , to make it easier for them to join or rejoin the labour market .
The issue of employment is a priority for the European Union .
The Florence European Council , to take place at the end of the week , will focus essentially on that issue , with the objective of making still more targeted and effective the strategy for combating unemployment , the broad lines of which have already been identified in earlier European Councils , beginning with the Essen European Council .
The tripartite conference , convened last week in Rome by the Italian Government , showed that the broad lines of that strategy enjoy a large degree of support from the social forces .
We need to increase that support because it is vital if we are to make this strategy more effective and more vigorous .
Strengthening consensus , through dialogue and consultation , underpins the confidence pact for employment launched by President Santer .
We are certain that the Florence European Council will be able to give fresh impetus to the strategy of combating unemployment and that resolute implementation of that strategy will soon produce real results .
Noninflationary macro-economic policies geared to stable growth are not incompatible with the aim of increasing employment : they are in fact the vital prerequisite for achieving that objective .
In that context , we need also to find and apply in all of the Member States fiscal policies able to reduce pressure on earned income - a hope that has been expressed in the course of this debate .
That aim is not inconsistent with the need stated in the Council resolution not to reduce , for the time being , overall fiscal pressure : we are talking about a targeted redistribution of the tax burden .
The objective we have set ourselves is difficult and requires a collective effort at all levels , but it is essential , and the future of the European Union depends on its achievement .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office .
Commissioner de Silguy will now take the floor on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , I cannot hope to reply in just a few minutes to all the questions put to me , but I should like to make two points , one about the single currency and the other about unemployment .
On the single currency , I feel we should put an end to all the doubts and misunderstandings .
There is no doubt that the euro will enter circulation on 1 January 1999 .
Public debate on this subject has been changing over the last few weeks and months , and the question now is not whether the euro is a good idea and whether it is really going to happen , but what preparations we should make in order to obtain the maximum possible benefit from it .
To prepare for the euro , we must of course carry on with the work on convergence , as we discussed at length this morning .
We also need to set up a second European Monetary System .
I would refer here to what we have just heard from the Chairman of the EMI on the subject , and I would point out to Mr García that the Commission has never said that it would make payments from the Structural Funds conditional on meeting certain macroeconomic criteria .
It simply said that it would agree to a request from a number of Member States to carry out a study on the subject , which is not the same thing at all .
What we must also do to prepare for the euro , and I feel this is absolutely vital , is to introduce a stability pact , because there is no point in being ready on the day if we are subsequently unable to adhere to rules of good conduct and sound management for the duration of the monetary union .
I would add that the policies we pursue here must be both credible and socially acceptable .
These are two very important points .
We also need to introduce statutory regulations for the euro ; you should receive the Commission 's proposal shortly .
Such regulations are essential if we are to provide the legal security which operators , firms and the markets in general demand of us .
Finally - and this is in response to many of the questions raised this morning - we must organize an information campaign in close cooperation with Parliament to convince public opinion that the euro is necessary , and to prepare people psychologically for the changeover and reassure them about what will happen .
As you can see , we have an enormous task ahead of us , but it is also a very exciting one , in that we shall now be making real preparations instead of simply asking questions .
Moving on now to employment , this is a subject to which we should devote all our energies .
It is a political priority , and as such should be the focus of our concern .
When the Commission presented its broad economic guidelines , I told you that they were based on three vital elements : growth , stability and employment .
So I was astonished to hear the criticisms made of these guidelines , criticisms which would seem to suggest that people would prefer to have inflation and deficits , neither of which has ever created jobs , as far as I am aware .
If deficits created jobs , then Europe would probably be suffering from over-employment at the moment .
The euro is another subject on which we need to eliminate misunderstandings .
The euro will mean less unemployment , simply because it will mean healthier public finances . I would point out here that 40 to 50 % of budget savings go to finance public deficits , whereas the money would be much better used to promote investment and consumption , and thus to create jobs .
The euro will also put an end to currency fluctuations , and on this point I share many of the concerns expressed this morning .
I would point out that in 1995 , currency fluctuations cost Europe half a percentage point of growth and one and a half million jobs .
So here too , the euro should make a big difference to our unemployment problem .
I am quite aware that although the euro itself may be a vital element , it is still not enough on its own and further measures are needed .
This is where the structural policies come in , but these are primarily the responsibility of the Member States , with Europe merely providing the leverage .
President Santer 's proposals to be discussed at Florence adopt this same line .
Let me just mention three other points which I feel are important , and which reply to some of the questions raised this morning .
One of Mr Santer 's proposals is to exploit the potential of the single market by making small and medium-sized firms more competitive .
He is also proposing that the major infrastructure projects should be stepped up , and the Commission intends to stress the urgent need for the trans-European networks , because it is totally unacceptable that , four years on from the Essen summit , the funding for these is available but has still not been released .
There are also proposals for reforming the employment systems , and although the main burden here again rests with the Member States , the Union can still act as a very useful lever .
The measures we are taking are thus coherent , comprehensive and carefully thought out , and they need firm support if we are to restore confidence and return to growth .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Votes

Madam President , since Parliament has , as was to be expected , rejected Amendment No 1 , I should like to call on all my colleagues in the House to support Amendment No 5 , tabled by the Union for Europe Group , since we shall then at least signal a certain amount of willingness on the part of Parliament to move in the direction wished by Mr Macartney .

Madam President , as rapporteur I wish to say how disappointed I am at the vote on Amendment No 1 and I think this House will have cause to feel ashamed about that .
As a fall back , at least we can adopt Amendment No 5 , which puts in the word ' substantial ' which has no legal force .
But at least let us put it in .
So I support Amendment No 5 , although it is very much weaker and this House has just made a fool of itself .
( The President declared the common position adopted as amended )
Madam President , I have a comment to make about the voting order .
It seems logical to me to have the vote on the two amendments tabled by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Nos 59 and 60 , before Nos 64 and 65 , in view of the substance of the amendments and the fact that the Committee on Transport and Tourism feels that they go further .
I would ask all Members who think we need to find a solution to the backlog to take another close look at Amendments Nos 59 and 60 .
Madam President , the amendments by the Committee on Transport and Tourism certainly do not depart further from the text than the others , since they do no more than restore the Commission 's original wording .
( In successive votes , Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions )
Madam President , I should just like to thank the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy for their support in drawing up this report , and especially for their valuable contributions in the discussions in committee .
I think we can vote on the report and the amendment together - given that there are no other amendments - but I should like to clarify the following technical point .
We accepted Mrs Randzio-Plath 's amendment to paragraph 10 in committee , but the second part of that paragraph - referring to the role of the EMI - has been left in by mistake .
Consequently , we should vote on the report and amendment together , but we should not vote on the second part of the paragraph in question .
That will leave us with the following :
' Stresses the need for a balanced policy mix ' .
( FR ) We therefore do not need to vote on the second part of this paragraph .
Madam President , I think our translators do an excellent job , but on this occasion I would like to ask for the Dutch version of the report by Mr Gasòliba to be revised again .
There are four translation errors , all stemming from the same problem .
' Fiscal policy ' is translated as ' fiscaal beleid ' instead of ' begrotingsbeleid ' . And ' fiscal consolidation ' is wrongly translated in three places as ' fiscale consolidatie ' .
This is not the first time this mistake has occurred , so I suggest that not only should this report be checked again , but that the problem should also be brought to the attention of the translation service , so that they know that ' fiscal ' in English can be translated in two different ways in Dutch .
Thank you , Mrs Thyssen .
We shall not only make the corrections , but ensure that these mistakes do not occur again in future .
( Since no Members opposed the tabling of the oral amendment , the President put it to the vote )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
This is an excellent report which proposed to make a concrete difference by its proposal for energy efficiency which in helping to reduce carbon dioxide emissions also addresses climate change .
The Green Group supports all the amendments by the rapporteur and I agree with Mr Macartney that it is a shameful day when this Parliament cannot take direct concrete action on a simple , straightforward issue like energy saving .
Linkohr report
I cannot support the EU investing a great deal of money in research which is not in line with the Greens ' proposals .
The research includes aerospace research , as the text states that air traffic will double within the next 15 years .
Flying is not an environmentally friendly form of transport .
More resources should rather be made available for research in the fast train industry .
It is true that this is also included in the proposal but I would like to increase its share considerably .
There are many areas and objectives that I approve of , however , and I support the amendments , for example the reduction of the appropriation for nuclear safety by ECU 10 million .
Unfortunately , experience shows that this money contributes to the continued use of nuclear energy and gives the impression , in the Eastern European countries as well as elsewhere , that nuclear power is safe .
Nuclear power is not safe and we should instead invest money in renewable sources of energy in order to get away from nuclear power .
I am voting against Amendments Nos 50 and 51 because they do not take money away from Euratom .
I support Amendments Nos 55-57 because they ensure that Euratom money goes into support for renewable sources of energy .
On the occasion of the refinancing of the Fourth Framework Programme , Commissioner Cresson has altered the political objective of European research for integration and cohesion and geared it to new purposes :
support for the international competitiveness of European industry ; - making the subject-matter of research comprehensible to Europe 's citizens ; and - bringing together national and Community endeavours.The rapporteur , Mr Linkohr , was quite right to take up the three issues he considered , but looking beyond those particular issues and the priorities relevant to each , it seems to me that , on the occasion of this all too short debate , Parliament should give an early signal to the Commission concerning the approach to be taken in the Fifth Framework Programme .
I would like to suggest that we use this opportunity to take a further step forward by earmarking a percentage of the total budget for projects involving a technological challenge , the so-called ' challenge-led ' projects .
A ' challenge-led ' project is characterized by :
a high risk , such that it cannot be carried out at national level ; - the possibility of triggering a multi-disciplinary approach and international cooperation ( in the context of which it is Europe 's interest to speak with one voice ) ; - a real technological challenge - the breakthrough , when it comes , bringing with it substantial economic or social benefit.A ' challenge-led ' project does not integrate existing technologies .
Examples of challenge - but these are examples only - are :
the magnetic-levitation train or superconductor electric cable ; - the super-efficient battery ( all renewable energy technologies are limited by the problem of batteries ) ; - vaccines which prevent illness : they are ruining the pharmaceutical companies but require major investment.Parliament and the Commission should start thinking now about the most important technological challenges - selecting one or more topics - and , in the context of the Fifth Framework Programme , adequate European resources should be earmarked for them , to ensure that specific programmes are viable and have a clear European profile .
The Commission should not drag its feet , content to do only what it is well-equipped and knows how to do .
If we want to keep pace with innovation , we must be prepared continually to re-invent ourselves .
It is good to have the task forces for the time being !
Strengthening the funding of the 4th Framework Programme for technological research and development , in effect since 1994 , together with as assessment of its activities , is of capital importance for guaranteeing Europe 's competitiveness .
But I must point out that the area of technological R & D is particularly important for countries like Portugal .
By introducing the notion of task forces , interesting in fact in terms of principles , the Commission has somehow undermined the balance struck when defining the 4th FP .
By banking on major applied research projects it runs the risk of harming cohesion , preventing the less developed countries from taking part actively , even though they want and need to take part for the whole Union 's good .
All Member States must have a voice in defining the future task forces but it is also important that the priorities already defined in the 4th Programme should continue to be taken into account .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to concentrate priorities or focus on such basic areas as educational multimedia and hydraulic resources .
Educational multimedia is the perfect Trojan horse for stating European identity and the European Union must accept this and draw the necessary consequences .
The introduction of the new area of research on landmines deserves my full support .
I am well versed in this problem since in Portugal 's brother states , Angola and Mozambique landmines are still a scourge claiming countless lives among the younger generations in those Portuguese-speaking countries with so much to offer the future of our society .
I back the amendments referring to the multimedia priority but must stress that only the budgetary increase proposed by the Committee on Culture will make them operational .
I back all the amendments referring to concentrating priorities , the amendment on mines and the amendment calling for better and more permanent interdepartmental interaction .
We Greens believe that a key element of any sound economic policy in the future is effective support for research which is not thrown off course by cyclical pressure for cuts , but in fact lays the foundations for future progress in an anti-cyclical way , at the very time when the economic cycle indicates that the innovations made have been exhausted .
We therefore particularly regret that the proposed increase in resources for the fourth framework programme , which we shall support whenever we have the opportunity , has once again been inextricably linked to unacceptable changes in direction which will hamper and obstruct future developments , rather than facilitating them .
These decisions include the funding for Euratom , for research into fusion and aeronautics - which might be of use 50 years from now , if ever - as well as the one-sided concentration on research carried out by large industry and the reckless determination to pursue biotechnological research without adequate risk surveillance .
We regret this , and call on Parliament to devise a procedure for similar decisions in the future which enables us and others to make our criticisms of substance in an appropriate way , without at the same time having to reject the EU 's whole research policy .
Sindal report
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the main concern of this report is to make sea transport more flexible and attractive .
There is a need to give a greater role to this mode of transport , so as to relieve pressure on the others .
However , various problems and shortcomings have come to light in the course of examining of this report , especially as regards environmental protection and safety standards .
Indeed , the vessels employed in short sea shipping are particularly small and dilapidated .
The risks of an accident are therefore greater .
We must now take all these factors into account , with a view to making short sea shipping a mode of transport which is environmentally friendly and safe .
Madam President , in commenting on the Sindal report , I very much welcome the plans contained for a switch of 30 to 40 % of trade between Spain and Britain from the roads to short-sea maritime transport .
It will be good for the environment , take 0.6 million tonnes of trade off our roads and it will be six times more efficient in terms of energy usage and reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
I rise in support particularly to plead to the Commission that it ensures that the port of Tilbury in my constituency is at the heart of this new increased trade .
It is a port which is close to London and the major transport networks from the south-east of England to the whole of the United Kingdom .
It has an unmatched range of flexible facilities .
Recently it has announced a fast , daily container service to Rotterdam .
It has the potential to benefit from this increased trade and I ask the Commission to ensure that it does so .
After months of intensive work , Mr Sindal 's report is now ready for adoption by the House and , despite some criticisms , I should like to congratulate him on behalf of my group .
An intensification of coastal shipping should have positive economic effects and a dynamic impact on employment in the coastal regions of the European Union , and above all in the least developed of them :
the necessary modernization of the fleet will revive the European shipbuilding industry , thereby preserving or even creating jobs in coastal regions ; -moreover , an increase in the volume of turnover should result , and this will be of benefit to small and mediumsized ports as well as large seaports ; -finally , an intensification of short sea shipping will above all benefit small and medium-sized firms in the maritime transport sector : it is mainly small shipping companies which are involved in the cargo sector , and a large percentage of the jobs on board vessels flying EU flags are concentrated in the short sea shipping sector.The Sindal report acknowledges that an intensification of coastal shipping must go hand in hand with a good deal of modernization , both of the fleet itself and of ports and their connections with the hinterland .
At the same time , the text comes out in favour of free competition , which is generally to be welcomed , but against any aid measures , whether direct or indirect .
This appears , at least to those of my colleagues who were actively involved in drafting the opinion on the Sindal report in the Committee on Regional Policy , to be somewhat at odds with the reality in many coastal regions .
The Committee on Transport would therefore have been well advised to devote rather more attention to that committee 's proposals , which were adopted with the strong backing of the PPE Group and the support of the socialist Members .
Because - and here I have three questions to those present - is there any such thing as ' fair ' competition between prosperous and less-developed coastal regions , or between large and small ports ?
Can it really be said that some individual Member States or regional and local authorities , for example in Objective 1 regions , have as much budgetary scope for the necessary modernization work as their more prosperous counterparts ?
Was it taken into account that coastal shipping offers major development prospects in regional and planning terms , particularly in the Atlantic and Mediterranean areas , as demonstrated by the case studies for the planning document ' Europe 2000 + ' ?
More account should be taken in future of such imbalances and different geographical circumstances , especially in the context of transport policy .
After all , economic and social cohesion is one of the fundamental objectives of the European Union : the individual Community policies are committed to supporting this goal , and there is a broad consensus in the groups as to its importance .
Finally , I have two further comments in support of a coherent European transport policy , as called for by most of the political groups :
it would have promoted safety on the high seas and the protection of coastal regions , which are of ecological importance as both residential and economic areas , if specific research or training measures had been called for in this sector : new , safe types of vessels and their handling , as well as portside logistical support for navigation , create a need here for accompanying measures ; -lastly , it is strange , in view of the conciliation procedure currently under way concerning the trans-European transport networks , that the motion for a resolution fails to reiterate Parliament 's appeal for short sea shipping to be included in the TEN guidelines .
The Greens have voted in favour of the Sindal report .
In comparison with rail and air transport , short sea shipping uses very little energy and is therefore less damaging to the environment .
The geography of Europe being as it is , with its many coastlines , short sea shipping could and should be much more widely used , which makes it even more incomprehensible that it does not form part of the TENs , a situation which should be remedied immediately .
My group has drawn attention to the rather surprising comparison made between road and rail transport in recital A and paragraph 6 .
These two are by no means developed and subsidized to the same extent .
There is a risk that the poor working conditions in short sea shipping will be used as an excuse to bring further pressure to bear on working conditions in land transport , and for this reason I would again stress the importance of paragraph 19 .

Finally , my group was unable to support Mr Wijsenbeek 's amendment , which would have reopened the debate on weights and dimensions .

We were delighted to give our support to Amendment No 2 , which is an excellent example of how short sea shipping and inland navigation can be combined .
Gasòliba i Böhm report
I agree with the criticism in the report concerning the late arrival of the annual report and believe , like Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , that the Monetary Institute should submit regular interim reports to the EU Parliament and others .
This is because the issue is one of the most important in the EU and one which affects all citizens of the Union .
What I miss in the annual report is a proper analysis of how the policy being pursued affects ordinary people , as regards such things as the coordination of Member States ' monetary policy , budget consolidation and the transition to EMU as a whole .
The annual report should also get away from the usual economic terminology and be easier for ordinary people to read , explaining simply what the Institute is doing and how it affects the man or woman in the street .
I oppose the introduction of a common currency in view of all the negative effects it will have .
My goal of an ecologically sustainable society is not compatible with EMU .
In view of the above I am voting against the report in the final vote .
Referring to the national compromise and the Edinburgh agreement , the Danish social democrats naturally cannot support those elements of this report which run counter to Denmark 's four reservations .
Pérez Royo report
I am voting against all of this report by Mr Pérez Royo because it includes so much that I cannot support .
It is primarily a question of the views expressed which pay homage to a common currency and the need for progress in the convergence process .
On the other hand , I support the idea of a tax on currency transactions because it would reduce speculation considerably .
Such a tax should be introduced by countries outside the EU as well as the EU Member States .
The tax should , however , not be seen as a stage in the process leading to the introduction of the common currency ; rather it should be introduced simply in order to reduce speculation .
I find the totally uncritical praise of EMU , the convergence criteria and the schedule for those criteria totally incomprehensible .
I am not against the national economies of the Member States being put in order but the cuts which are now resulting from the convergence policy should give cause for reconsideration .
Rather than simply thinking in terms of the traditional economic objectives it is necessary to consider the new economic policy , the aim of which is an ecologically sustainable society .
This objective is not compatible with the EMU project which must therefore be stopped .
Referring to the national compromise and the Edinburgh agreement , the Danish social democrats naturally cannot support those elements of this report which run counter to Denmark 's four reservations .
Although it contains a number of good proposals , such as the tax on currency transactions , we are voting against the report because we are against the entire EMU project .
The report contains many good proposals , for example in paragraph 4 , which states that a tax on currency speculation would be an effective way of stabilising exchange rates .
I am nevertheless abstaining because so many paragraphs of the report recommend completion of monetary union and the establishment of a new ERM .
I believe that a new exchange rate mechanism will encourage speculation and could result in the same kind of economic disaster we experienced in 1992 .
I also believe that completion of monetary union at a time when the Union has almost 20 million unemployed is an economic gamble which could seriously backfire both socially and economically .
This is why I have chosen to abstain .
von Wogau report
Madam President , it is remarkable that in different contexts - including the reports which have already been debated today and the Von Wogau report - it is stated that there is a broad consensus in favour of EMU and the main principles involved in the introduction of the common currency , including an exchange rate mechanism .
However , there can be no-one who does not know that outside the EU institutions there is considerable doubt about the splendid qualities of EMU , the schedule for EMU and the convergence criteria .
This criticism comes from politicians , economists , bankers and trades unionists .
Demonstrations in Belgium , France and Germany bear indisputable witness to the social unrest which the convergence criteria are causing among ordinary people .
Naturally all countries must make every effort to pursue sound economic policies .
However , this requires healthy development , not constant growth which adds to the growing environmental deficit .
It also requires fair distribution of common resources and policies which prevent social exclusion and unemployment .
With EMU , however , the EU has established an economic policy which puts price stability and balanced budgets above all else , which may entail cuts in public services and cause many more jobs to disappear .
From a democratic point of view the European Central Bank is unacceptable .
The Von Wogau report speaks of accountability but the truth is that it is impossible to impose accountability on the decision-makers .
The six members of the European Central Bank 's board cannot be removed in the course of the eight years for which they have been appointed .
EMU is to be administered by experts over whom no political control will be possible .
Economic and monetary union thus faces far too many unsolved problems and risks becoming a political owngoal , far removed from the real world and economic realities .
As the idea of an economic and monetary union is basically a federal one and conflicts with our belief in the creation of a Europe of democracies , we will abstain from voting on this report .
Allowing monetary policy to be determined by officials at the European Central Bank is not in accordance with our view that economic policy should be governed by the people through their elected representatives .
On a separate point , it may be noted that during the membership negotiations Sweden made a unilateral declaration that we would decide for ourselves whether we would participate in EMU or not .
The legal validity of this declaration is doubtful but the political view is that it is the Swedish people who will decide on EMU membership .
As far as Sweden is concerned the matter has by no means been decided .
As an opponent of the entire EMU project I am voting against this report by Mr Von Wogau .
There are some good amendments , which I support , but they do not outweigh all the less satisfactory parts of the report which remain .
I do not support the establishment of an exchange rate mechanism for the common currency in the present situation .
Each country must bear responsibility for and be able to pursue its own economic policy , which takes into account the conditions in that particular country and the country 's industrial structure .
This will be made impossible by participation in EMU .
It is naturally desirable that exchange rates fluctuate as little as possible .
This is not only true with regard to the EU 's Member States , however , but also with regard to those countries outside the Union , of which there are far more .
The report is permeated by the demand that the convergence criteria should be implemented .
In view of the massive cuts which many of the EU Member States are now being forced to make or will make , there should be some pause for thought .
Rather than fostering the expansion of social welfare EMU policy is now resulting in the dismantling of the welfare system in country after country .
This is not a policy I can support .
As I oppose the entire EMU project I am voting against the Von Wogau report .
I followed the debates this morning carefully .
At no point was there any mention of the fears of the citizens of the Member States with regard to the single currency .
Our political leaders , the Commission in Brussels , deliberately encourage confusion between a single currency and a common currency .
Clearly , the people of Europe find it hard to tell the difference .
For example , if you talk to French people about a European currency , or indeed a single currency , they think you mean a common currency , and seem to be in favour of it .
But if you clearly explain to them what is at stake , they are against it .
When they realize that the introduction of the euro will mean the disappearance of their national currency , they oppose it - and they are right .
Why ?
The people of Europe have a deep emotional , psychological and practical attachment to their national currencies .
Depriving them of a reference point as essential as their national currency would undermine them psychologically .
In the words of General de Gaulle , the currency links the citizen to the nation .
I voted against the von Wogau report because , as a convinced European , I believe that Europe must not be built on a massive lie .
Since Maastricht , there has been a growing suspicion on the part of people in Europe that partisan economic interests are increasingly taking hold of the process of building Europe .
In this crisis of credibility in the EU , those who had been relying on the monitoring and corrective powers of the European Parliament have been deeply disappointed for months now .
It is becoming increasingly apparent that the convergence criteria for monetary union are a vehicle for the destruction of welfare standards in the Member States .
The pressure to achieve the criteria simultaneously and as soon as possible has begun to have a recessionary effect and is leading to a sharp increase in unemployment .
Yet people in the European Union are waiting in vain for the EU institutions to reform these criteria , which have long since become socially irresponsible .
A few days ago the President of the Commission , Jacques Santer , drew attention once again to the Member States ' responsibility for pursuing an active policy on employment , but he cynically failed to mention that these EMU convergence criteria are precisely what has eliminated the necessary political room for manoeuvre .
This inconsistency is heightened by the lack of any social initiatives at European level .
In view of this policy , which is severely disrupting the social peace in Europe , it is the duty of the European Parliament to speak out strongly in favour of the development of a social and ecological Union , and against a policy of stultifying economic liberalism .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.12 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Fisheries
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0189 / 96 by Mrs Péry , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ( COM ( 94 ) 0335 - C4-0086 / 94 ) on the crisis in the Community 's fishing industry ; -A4-0133 / 96 by Mr Arias Cañete , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the problems of the fisheries sector in the NAFO zone ; -A4-0172 / 96 by Mr Arias Cañete , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the amended proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0117 - C4-0299 / 96-95 / 0252 ( CNS ) ) laying down certain conservation and control measures in the Antarctic ; -A4-0169 / 96 by Mr Kofoed , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 95 ) 0670 - C4-0033 / 96-95 / 0338 ( CNS ) ) amending for the sixth time Regulation ( EEC ) No 1866 / 86 laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the waters of the Baltic Sea , the Belts and the Sound .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are debating the crisis in the Community 's fishing industry .
This economic , social and ecological crisis is affecting the entire sector .
For a number of years now , we have been obliged to cut back on catch authorizations , apply more effective controls , reduce fleet sizes and step up structural and social accompanying measures .
At the same time , although the amounts of fish caught have decreased - in my own country , for example - many species have suffered the effects of international market forces .
In certain regions of Europe , fresh fish prices have fallen by an average of 25 % .
' Blue Europe ' is a fragile common policy because it is incomplete .
All Europe 's coastal regions are looking to the future with concern .
That is why I felt it essential to begin this report by calling on the Commission and the Council to map out some clear prospects and to show a willingness to ensure a maritime future for the countries of the Union .
By chance , Commissioner , our respective timetables meant that we learnt your response a few days after this report went to print and after our seminar in Quimper .
Consequently , our committee has not yet been able to debate the fourth multiannual guidance plan which you are submitting .
Certainly , we were expecting a message of vision , but we were also expecting one of confidence .
However , seeking to reduce fishing opportunities by an average of 40 % in five years will , as you well know , not only mean the scrapping of large numbers of vessels , but also lead to the certain death of several ports which are already heavily in debt as a result of their efforts to modernize .
This is a very hard blow to the economic and social activity of the whole sector .
I am convinced that we must now display not only vigilance and firmness , but also imagination and political will as regards a number of new proposals which are capable of restoring confidence to the sector .
I shall restrict myself to dealing with three key points , concerning resources , the markets and structural policies .
As far as resources are concerned , we are aware that sacrifices will still have to be made .
So let us adopt stricter technical measures which genuinely make it possible for resources to be renewed .
We refer in the report to the use of square meshes and more selective fishing gear , and to the protection of zones in which juveniles are concentrated .
We propose the introduction of biological rest periods when species are particularly under threat .
However , Commissioner , the Fisheries Committee also refers to the need for financial compensation .
The Commission 's reply will be that the common fisheries policy does not provide for this type of funding , save in very exceptional cases . ' No support for incomes ' , you will say .
I do not believe that I make populist speeches very often : I will not conceal the difficulties , but I cannot accept that the sacrifices should be one-sided .
If we have the money to compensate for the destruction of a vessel , then we should also be able to find the money to conserve resources .
In order to produce maximum effect , all these technical measures must be underpinned by constant and increasingly in-depth scientific research and far more rigorous controls .
Hence it is essential not only to encourage those directly involved in the sector to assume their responsibilities , but also to equip ourselves with new means of surveillance .
I know that I am wrong to put forward ideas which are not financially neutral , Commissioner , but this will allow us to gauge if there is a genuine political will in the European Union and its Member States to maintain a competitive European fisheries sector .
With regard to the markets , I should like to point out firstly that the internal European fisheries market is heavily dependent on imports , both for consumption and supply to the processing industry .
When the common fisheries policy was launched , the creation of a free market , a market which is open to international competition , was the choice that was made ; and the crisis has affected the markets , the auctions and the distribution sectors .
The industry as a whole must improve its systems of information and communication .
The modernizing of the industry is vital in today 's world .
We also believe that it is important to involve producers more closely in the distribution sector , as well as to exploit the quality and the origin of fisheries products .
However , Commissioner , I do not believe that the ' blue Europe ' of 2002 will be able to make do with such a weak ' market ' aspect .
I am firmly convinced that it will be necessary to establish a more binding Community framework - compulsory withdrawal prices , preference prices which are better respected - and to put in place a financial instrument to help fresh fish producers ' organizations in times of serious crisis and when there is a collapse in market prices .
Here too , I know that you will say : ' But that is a form of income support ! ' I would reply that when the market fails to perform its function , support measures are required , especially in view of the fact that only 2 % of the Union 's fisheries budget is devoted to price support .
Time will not allow me to elaborate on my third key point , which relates to structural policies .
This is undoubtedly the aspect of the common fisheries policy for which the Member States and the Union have provided themselves with the most extensive resources - and so much the better - through the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance and the PESCA programme , which we wish to see implemented as a genuine ' SEA LEADER ' .
We also give our backing to your achievements in respect of early retirement measures - although we wish that the Member States would play the game too , when they know that the Union is already co-financing these measures by up to 50 % .
This social dimension cannot be passed over in silence : it exists and must be adequately supported .
I have already overrun my speaking time , Commissioner .
I would simply say , in conclusion , that we shall be equal to the task in terms of vigilance and firmness .
We shall need courage too , but we shall discuss this guidance plan again .
To my mind , it is unacceptable , both with regard to production and the sector as a whole ; we must take more imaginative measures , and certainly give more financial support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to present the European Parliament 's own-initiative report on the situation of the Community fleet in the NAFO zone and , within this context , fisheries relations between the European Union and Canada .
It is well known that since the creation of NAFO in 1978 , the European Union 's fisheries relations with Canada have passed through times of extreme tension .
These relations , especially since 1984 , have been characterized by regular clashes over fishing rights in the waters of the North Atlantic . One of the clearest examples of this - as pointed out by Professor Mallou - is Canada 's achievement in fixing the cod TAC in division 3NO at zero for the years 1995 and 1996 , without any sound scientific data .
The most recent fisheries conflict between the European Union and Canada - and unfortunately the one which perhaps gained the most international attention - was that popularly known as the ' Halibut War ' .
The facts are well known to everyone , but perhaps now is the time - with the benefit of distance - to examine in depth the reasons which led to this conflict .
Firstly , we must look back to the meeting of the NAFO Fisheries Commission of February 1995 , when a TAC of 27 000 tonnes of Greenland halibut was distributed , only 3400 tonnes of which was allocated to the Community fleet , whilst 16 300 tonnes was reserved for Canada .
Parliament expressed its regret in a resolution at the action of the Community delegation , since for the first time a TAC had been established at a level lower than that recommended by the NAFO Scientific Committee , which had proposed an indicative limit of 40 000 tonnes .
Furthermore , it should be remembered that in 1994 , the Canadian Parliament unilaterally adopted a law on the protection of coastal fishing waters , granting powers of control beyond the 200-mile limit . This law was subsequently invoked as the legal basis for making unjustified seizures .
A number of conclusions can be drawn from what I have described .
The first , and Parliament has already criticized this fact , is that the European Union is inadequately represented in NAFO , both in the Scientific Committee - whose composition is extremely unbalanced , since Canada has far more representatives than any other country - and in the Fisheries Commission . In NAFO , as in other international fisheries organizations , there is the problem of the weakness of the European Union , which despite the fact that it represents many states , has only one vote .
This is an objective problem to which attention must be drawn : the stronger the European Union becomes , as new members join , the weaker it becomes in certain international organizations , because it only has one vote .
Secondly , Parliament believes that there is a lack of a genuine Community policy of scientific research within NAFO , and there have been cases in which zero TACs have been adopted without adequate scientific data being provided and without the European Union being able to respond .
Thirdly , the Canadian legislation which allows the authorities to carry out controls and seizures outside the country 's territorial waters continues to remain in force , despite the fact that , following the events which unfolded after the seizure of the ' Estai ' , the NAFO mutual inspection programme , which sets out the obligations of the contracting parties as regards inspection and surveillance , was modified substantially and at great budgetary cost .
Notwithstanding these controversial issues , Parliament takes the view that the prime objective , both for the European Union and for Canada , must be to avoid future clashes and take advantage of the welcome conclusion of the bilateral agreement of April 1995 in order to launch a new phase of understanding and cooperation .
However , there are difficulties which it will not be easy to overcome : firstly , Canada 's retention of its unilateral legislation ; and , secondly , the fact that the bilateral agreement which was negotiated with great difficulty in 1992 - and which Parliament supported , with considerable reservations , because it realized that there was a need for an effort of rapprochement - has still not been ratified by Canada . This creates a serious obstacle at a time when the drawing-up of a comprehensive action plan is being considered , as the Council of Ministers has made clear .
Consequently , the fact that Canada has softened its hostile attitude with a measure limited to opening up its ports is not , in our view , enough to allow a comprehensive framework of normal relations to be established .
We believe that the Community must endeavour to improve these relations , while always remembering that the defence of the Community 's fishing opportunities must be a cornerstone of Community action , and that international relations need to be based on the principles of equality , cooperation and solidarity .
We feel that the agreement on the conservation and management of transzonal fish populations which was adopted on 4 August 1995 in New York will provide a useful framework for improving the situation , as long as it is implemented in an intelligent and balanced way .
We trust in the Commissioner 's ability to ensure that this is so , and that the agreement is ratified in circumstances which make it possible to achieve stability in the Union 's fisheries relations with Canada , so that the incidents of the past are forgotten once and for all , and we can cooperate as the friends we are in a rational and normal commercial environment .
I now have the honour of presenting , on behalf of the Fisheries Committee , the report on conservation measures in the Antarctic .
This report was adopted unanimously by our committee , since the aim of the Commission proposal is to amend the legal provisions in force , clarifying the existing regulation , the clarity of which has undoubtedly been diminished by repeated modifications .
Similarly , the proposal seeks to incorporate into Community legislation the provisions adopted by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources at its meetings in Hobart of 8 November 1994 and 3 November 1995 .
Finally , it sets out , in a Community act , the commitments entered into by the Community as a result of its accession to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources by virtue of the Council decision of 1981 .
Our committee approves the Commission proposal unanimously , but wishes to make a number of observations in this context .
Firstly , once again , it is to be regretted that Parliament was consulted by the Council by means of the letter of 4 December 1995 - seven months , that is , after a number of the proposal 's provisions were due to enter in force for all the contracting parties . In these circumstances , the consultation of Parliament was clearly an absolutely pointless and symbolic exercise , highlighting the need to continue working together to improve the existing procedures , so that Parliament can deliver its opinion in good time and before provisions enter into legal force .
With a view to the future , therefore , the Committee on Fisheries has drawn up an amendment whereby the Commission will be required to inform the European Parliament in advance of the changes it intends to make to the regulation and of the measures taken in order to implement the recommendations adopted by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources .
Secondly , the Committee on Fisheries believes that the ecological balance of the Antarctic - a wilderness which remains virtually unexploited - must be preserved as far as possible .
To this end , we are calling for a report to be drawn up - if budgetary resources allow - on the impact of catches on marine and bird species in the area , as well as requesting the submission of an annual report on the assessment of fishing activities in the Antarctic and the strengthening of surveillance measures .
With these comments , the Committee on Fisheries , as I said before , approves the Commission proposal unanimously .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of establishing the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission in 1974 was to create an institution in which the countries bordering the Baltic Sea could jointly take responsibility for the management of fishery resources in those waters .
Its decisions were to be based on advice from biologists , with the countries ' own biologists also taking part in the IBSFC .
This form of cooperation has worked extremely well , though there were some difficulties during the communist regimes in the Baltic States and Poland .
Conservation policy has been based on the usual principles : an assessment of catches and the state of juvenile stocks , with quotas being allocated accordingly to the various countries .
In addition , of course , there are the other technical measures such as mesh size and so on .
The report which is before the House today concerns the approval or rejection of a decision which was taken last year and applies to 1996 .
In its report , the Committee on Fisheries criticizes the fact that we are being consulted so late in the day .
I hope that the Commissioner will try to ensure in future that these decisions are forwarded to us somewhat earlier .
It would also be a good idea if the Commission were to invite some members of the Committee on Fisheries as observers to the preliminary negotiations which begin in Warsaw in September .
It is naturally not the task of the European Parliament to act as an administrator , but in our consultative role this would surely be a good idea , because Parliament could then have a better basis on which to take the proper legislative decision in due course .
In my report , there are one or two proposals for the forthcoming negotiations in the IBSFC .
What I have tabled in the report are amendments for the future .
Amongst other things , they seek to introduce conservation measures which are different from those used in the past .
Thus I am proposing the introduction of a limit on the engine power of vessels , such as 400 horsepower for vessels fishing cod and salmon .
The reason why I am making the proposal now is that the Commission should be aware that Poland , the Baltic States and Russia are in the process of modernizing their fleets .
If these fleets are modernized to include large vessels which are too effective , it will not be possible for fish stocks in the Baltic to be maintained .
I am also proposing this because the fisheries policy which has been pursued in the Baltic Sea has not produced an increase in fishery resources .
The stocks of cod , for example , are even lower than they were in 1984 .
I also have something to say as regards the quota policy .
This involves a mass of control measures , imposes constraints on fishermen and criminalizes fisheries to some extent .
It is also impossible to produce correct figures on what is not being fished , on what is not being reported under the quotas , so we have no idea how much we are talking about , and the biologists ' models for what quotas should be adopted in the future will not be correct either .
I am therefore proposing that a limit on engine power should be introduced , and if people want to have quotas , then give the large vessels quotas for a certain period and a certain quantity , and let all the other boats under 400 horsepower fish without quotas .
I think I can promise the Commissioner that fish stocks would not fall , but on the contrary would increase .
In this way , the wind and the weather would have an effect on when fishing took place , as opposed to now , when the big vessels fish in all weathers .
So the fish are never left in peace in these areas .
Furthermore , as a suggestion to the Commission , some of the areas should perhaps be protected during the spawning period , so that there is no fishing at that time .
If you are a hunter , you do not hunt game during the breeding season , and the same principle should in fact be introduced in fisheries .
Finally , I should like to say that I hope we can have a debate on how this instrument can be applied .
I am not a supporter of quotas , because they criminalize fishermen , even if the aim of conserving fishery resources is a very good one .
So I do not think that our fisheries policy should be based on the Machiavellian idea that the end justifies the means .
The means cannot be to turn people into criminals .
I should like to thank the Commission and the members of the Committee on Fisheries for their cooperation .
Mr President , today 's debate is an important one and one reason for this is that , on three different issues , we have had the impression - and , I believe , concrete proof - that our own Committee on Fisheries has proposals of its own , having drawn up specific documents and had , for some time now , the real technical capacity to tackle proposals relating to reform of the common fisheries policy .
Well then , Mr President , we need reform of the common fisheries policy , and are very much persuaded that the texts that have been submitted represent a step in that direction .
We are hoping for a reform that takes account of new environmental balances , that seeks to retain employment in the sector and also takes account of the capacity needed to meet consumer requirements .
The Socialist Group will be tabling its own text officially , on Thursday , in this Chamber .
We would take this opportunity to invite the representatives of the Commission to take part in our initiative here , in Strasbourg , on Thursday .
The document put forward by Mrs Péry is a very important one , the product of the substantial experience she has gained in this sector .
It in fact contains a number of very important and innovative elements : firstly , as I said a few moments ago , the fisheries sector must take account of environmental balances but it must also be able to retain an adequate market position .
Production and market have therefore to be substantially integrated , and that can be achieved through technological innovation and the capacity to be able to handle increasingly large transactions which are both of Community origin and guarantee fishermen an adequate price , as a result of the role that the fishermen 's organizations can play to an increasingly greater extent as an important point of reference .
We shall also have to discuss again the consolidated arrangements , so to speak , for fisheries ownership .
We favour an approach here whereby fishermen participate in ownership ; we are therefore also in favour of local multi-ownership experiments which are becoming a point of reference and , in that sense , we are in favour of a form of integrated management between multi-ownership and the local institutions .
We are also very much in favour of involving the local institutions and are also , naturally , persuaded that the fisheries policy should be a common policy but that the regional and local authorities should be associated with it because of the fundamental role they can play , including in relation to the integrated management of coastal fishing .
This also offers a way of eliminating the over-fishing that has occurred in recent years .
From that point of view , we consider that the programming document is important and when we have an opportunity of discussing it in official fora , we shall look at the substance in greater detail .
For the moment , we regret the fact that we have yet to be involved as Members of Parliament .
Mr President , I regard the fact that a substantial debate is taking place this afternoon on the subject of fisheries as a sign of the importance of Europe 's future fisheries policy .
Today 's reports relate to waters from the Baltic Sea through the Atlantic to the Antarctic , showing that the fisheries crisis is a worldwide problem .
It is therefore right that we should take a global approach to the problems and how to solve them .
The way in which we manage our fish stocks will show whether or not we are capable of exploiting worldwide food resources on a sustainable basis .
That is the message which we are receiving from institutions such as the FAO ; it is the unequivocal message coming now from environmental organizations such as the Worldwide Fund for Nature , organizations which have begun to join forces with some of the world 's largest multinational food-producing companies .
The Member States and the fishing industry must heed these authoritative voices .
The seas are being overfished : none of our waters will survive if they continue to be fished so intensively .
There is only one answer - fewer fishing vessels and less fishing effort , and Mrs Péry clearly endorses this approach .
The fishing sector will not emerge from its current crisis unless , on the basis of realistic calculations , the European Union fleets are finally adjusted to match the food resources available in EU waters and beyond .
Restructuring must be accompanied by socio-economic measures .
Even if we cannot offer all fishermen jobs at sea , we should not abandon them .
We must find them alternatives , either in the fishing industry or in another sector .
A team of Community experts , led by the Danish scientist Hans Larsen , has recently made an assessment of fish stocks , and they too have drawn attention to the critical state of affairs .
Mrs Bonino , you have had the courage to present a proposal which is based on a scientific recommendation that the fishing effort should be reduced by 40 % , as Parliament called for back in 1990 .
Since 1990 , the Fisheries Ministers have approved reductions of 20 % , 25 % and even 0 % - depending on the type of fishery , and a further reduction in tonnage is being made between 1992 and 1996 - but not as much as 40 % .
We are calling on the ministers to hold a credible , down-to-earth discussion on the basis of the scientific report and Mrs Bonino 's proposals .
The House has taken the initiative of concentrating on fisheries today , and we have used this opportunity to bring forward some ideas on how to consolidate the common fisheries policy .
Now it is up to the Member States to initiate the action which is required to save the fishing industry in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner , it is timely for the European Parliament to be dealing at the same time with the general fishery crisis and the NAFO zone crisis , which epitomizes the former .
These are issues that must be tackled by implicating the European Union 's political will and clear cooperation by the Member States .
Some European Union countries tend to ignore the real significance of the fishery sector for the whole European economy .
Yet it should be pointed out that in peripheral maritime countries fishery accounts for much economic activity and many jobs .
Take the example of NAFO .
My country has been fishing in that zone since the 15th century , cod in particular , the historic reason for which Portugal is now the world 's biggest market for that fish .
Portugal 's accession to the CFP and the NAFO crisis have lead , in four years , to a 70 % reduction in the fishing fleet and the direct or indirect loss of some 12000 jobs .
I can state here that Portuguese shipowners intend to continue fishing responsibly in order to conserve stocks .
They therefore agree with moves to strengthen taxation and controls carried out by the European Union .
But it is difficult to understand why these controls are not carried out so intensely on ships belonging to nonCommunity countries which have signed the Convention .
Another aspect which we should pay special attention to is that of scientific research which carries out on-going analyses of stocks and changes in their patterns .
It is difficult to see why the European Union should have delegated to Canada scientific research in areas as important as 2J , 3K , 3L and 3NO , knowing full well that the interests of both parties clash over this .
This research should also be extended to Community waters , taking into account information supplied by fishermen and producers .
Take the case of sardines .
When the Commissioner tells us that we must cut catches by 40 % , apparently on the basis of data she was supplied with - possibly by my country - the fishermen say that this decision is unfounded given that the stocks are still healthy and have just moved to other areas .
This can lead to conflicts that affect the credibility of our institutions and the Union itself .
As is stated explicitly in the documents we are discussing , agreements with third countries should continue to deserve the support and full weight of the European Union given their importance for supplies and safeguarding production .
We think , however , that every time that association agreements are concluded with third countries - in which , apart from Community funding fishery products are exempted from customs duties - we should negotiate fishery quotas for Community producers that correspond to the amount of non-received customs duties .
I commend the value of these texts and think that they are a good starting-point for dealing with the whole problem of fishery .
Mr President , when the Commission report on the crisis in the fishing industry came out in 1994 , as Mrs Pery has reminded us so well in her report , it was primarily about prices .
Since then the fishing industry has been far more in crisis because of the biological aspect of depletion of stocks and the failure of the management system of the common fisheries policy to address any of the problems and to work effectively within the industry .
What do we have in terms of a solution ?
First , we have to scrap the common fisheries policy as it stands at the moment .
I am not in favour of renationalizing it .
That would be an extremely bad idea but we need to scrap it as it exists .
We need to make sure that we reduce this constant friction between scientific evidence , the fishing industry , Member States and the Commission .
The only way to do that is to push power downwards , to manage fish stocks around the areas of the fisheries rather than around the states which surround these areas and rather than from an inland city of Belgium centrally managing the whole system .
That will not work .
In the meantime we have to address the matter of quota hopping and , although we have had many discussions with the Commissioner and I welcome her constructive comments , we have to move this matter on .
We cannot get a sensible solution within the current legislative framework .
We have to look to derogations from the Treaty to solve the problem .
In terms of the 40 % cuts we are discussing at the moment , there is no chance of getting this through sensibly and I condemn the Council of Ministers for the way it is treating the matter , without at the same time offering positive alternatives to the industry as part of the solution .
With regard to Canada , I am delighted that in the Committee on Fisheries we made this report less antiCanadian than it had been .
We now have access to ports in Canada .
We need to sign the EU-Canada action plan and we need to make the objection procedure much better .
I welcome Mr Kindermann 's amendments on that as well .
Mr President , with regard to the report on the crisis in the fishing industry , I should like to make a number of comments .
While we were working on this report - and here I would congratulate Mrs Péry on her efforts - the Commission drew up its proposal on the restructuring of the fleet during the period 1997-2002 .
It is true that the fisheries sector is suffering a crisis caused by the scarcity of resources , to which the liberalization of trade , the reduction of tariff protection and the growing difficulty of access to other fishing grounds are not unconnected .
However , we believe that the Commission has drawn up proposals which it is difficult to accept .
The problems affecting the fishing industry cannot be resolved solely by dismantling the Community fleet .
There is a whole series of problems which cannot be ignored , and which in my view are explained quite well in Mrs Péry 's report .
For example , the social dimension of the common fisheries policy has developed favourably in recent times , but is not commensurate with the large-scale adjustments proposed by the Commission under MGP IV .
Also on Mrs Péry 's report , and with many doubts in my mind , I should like to express the following reservations . The report advocates the establishment of ' prices and markets ' instruments and mechanisms similar to those of the common agricultural policy , but I do not feel that these are problems which can be addressed in a mechanical way .
Given the Community 's capacity for self-supply and the present level of tariff protection , application of a prices and markets policy raises difficulties , and could perhaps lead to undesirable effects in terms of the conservation of resources .
As for PESCA , it is an initiative which has produced few results . The problem is that if we wish to apply the LEADER model , access to the alternatives envisaged under that model will perhaps be far more limited .
I say this too with serious doubts in my mind .
Turning to the report by Mr Arias Cañete , we fully support it .
I should just like to underline the weakness of the European Union , which is sometimes the fault of the Union itself , and sometimes the fault of the positions adopted by the different Member States .
And I would say to Mr Kofoed that we understand and agree with his comments concerning quotas .
Mr President , the four reports being discussed today concern fisheries in widely different areas of the globe : the Antarctic , the Baltic Sea , eastern Canada and here in Europe .
This demonstrates the wide extent and influence of EU fleets .
The common theme running through them all is the effect that the excessive amount of fishing capacity has on European fisheries .
The Péry report on the crisis in the fisheries sector quite correctly points out that there are several problems that affect the industry , but surely the most important is the fact that there are too many boats chasing too few fish .
This is probably the most important issue that faces the EU this year as it prepares the multi-annual guidance programme - the fourth one - to reduce the size of the fleets .
It is certainly the most contentious political issue .
Everyone accepts that many of the EU stocks have been over-exploited .
The most effective single action that the European Union can take to resolve this problem is to decrease the size of its fleet .
If this is not done , and done very soon , then the crisis in the sector can only escalate .
The ones who would suffer most would be the small boat owners , those with a small economic base and very little political clout but who , in fact , actually provide the most employment .
The decisions on how to reduce the fleet should consider not just the status of the stocks the fleet fishes but also other impacts of the fleet .
For example , some gears have a higher by-catch than others or inflict more severe damage on the sea bottom .
Environmental impacts of gear are a very important factor .
Similarly , in terms of the employment generated , preference should be given to vessels which provide most jobs relative to the amount of fish they catch .
In summary , the fleet reduction is urgently needed and it must be vigorously implemented .
The Green Group submitted amendments on this issue in committee but they were not accepted so we have re-submitted them to plenary .
I hope that they pass this time .
For unless there is a rigorous programme implemented right away then the next report on the sector may well be its obituary .
I was glad to hear Mrs Péry say that she will vigorously support efforts by the Commission .
So I hope that she will support our amendment now .
The issue regarding the Baltic concerns the adoption of a closed season for salmon .
Whilst stocks of salmon in the Baltic have been decimated by habitat destruction and over-fishing - including the use of long drift nets - the recent Lassen report on fishing capacity in the EU actually recommends the complete closure of the fishery , so a simple seasonal closure is totally insufficient .
The waters east of Canada have seen fishing vessels from Spain , France and England for hundreds of years .
They used to be one of the world 's greatest fishing grounds , which is probably why fishermen went so far under difficult conditions to fish there .
But in the 1980s the bloated size of the European fleets forced the EU to claim unilateral quotas on several stocks there .
It is unacceptable behaviour in a multilateral convention to regulate fishing .
These unilateral quotas contributed to the obliteration of some of the stocks in eastern Canada ; I say ' contributed to ' for the responsibility does not actually lie with the EU alone .
Canada has shown that it can actually wipe out its stocks without any help from anyone else .
But here the European fleets did help .
As regards the Antarctic , the European Union has no real fishing interests , at least on paper .
However , some vessels fishing down there are European vessels flying other flags and established under joint ventures .
So the long arm of the European Union 's excess capacity reaches out even as far as there .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Péry on covering a large amount of ground and putting things very tactfully , but nothing that she says in her tactful way can disguise the scope of the crisis - not just the crisis in stocks and management but also the crisis of confidence of our fishermen right across Europe .
This presents a very real challenge and difficulty for the Commissioner .
I think we should look at ways in which we can bridge the gap .
I congratulate Mrs Péry .
I should also like to associate myself with the points made by Mr Baldarelli , Mrs Langenhagen , Mr Girão Pereira and Mr Teverson .
We are all facing a common problem together .
But we have to find a solution so that we can say to our fishermen : this is a solution ; it is not being imposed on you by Brussels , but it is in your interests .
The key thing is not to talk about imposing 40 % cuts - which everybody can then blame Brussels for - but to say : how would you tackle the problem yourselves ?
That is where the decentralized management which has been proposed by several speakers is absolutely fundamental .
At the moment the fishermen , certainly in Scotland , are terrified that somehow the foreigners will come and take all their fish and then go away again and they will be left with nothing .
Whatever you say , they are apprehensive that they do not really own the fisheries resources off their coast .
Therefore , the way forward - I am quite convinced as are many colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries - is to have a decentralized management system so that the fishermen in the particular sea , whether it is the Baltic , the North Sea , the Adriatic or whatever , whose livelihoods are at stake and whose descendants will benefit if they conserve things , will take responsibility .
At the same time there are things that have to be done right across Europe on an equal basis .
One of the gripes is that inspectors , for example , do not apply the rules universally across Europe .
We have to address that to make sure that the same standard , the same misery , where misery has to be applied , is applied to everybody .
Then people would begin to see some justice in the system and we could address all the other burning questions - such as quota-hopping and so on , which I do not have time to go into - to make sure that we have a common fisheries policy which is sustainable and which will be supported .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Péry on her thorough and discerning analysis of the causes of the serious crisis currently affecting the Community 's fishing industry .
Unfortunately , the Commission communication on which this report is based fails to put forward any proposals commensurate with the scale of the crisis .
It recommends a policy which is more stopgap than imaginative , more resigned than determined .
This policy seems to be based on a fatalistic premise : that the disappearance of the Community fishing fleet , overseen by the CFP , is inevitable .
However , Europe 's fishermen are expecting a different message .
As the elected representative of a maritime region in the west of France , I can assure the House that they are expecting us to send them a message of hope , telling them that the profession they have chosen is not doomed , that it may be suffering a crisis , but that they can trust in its future and that their children will be able to practise it .
That is the message which I propose we send to all the communities throughout Europe which depend on fishing , by adopting the amendments that I have tabled on behalf of my group .
Firstly , all the measures aimed at reducing the size of our fleets are the consequence of the almost total opening-up of the Community market to imports from third countries , whose methods , as the House well knows , are frequently at odds with our legitimate concern to conserve fishery resources .
This issue is not addressed in the Commission communication , although it is a matter of urgency to restore the confidence of our fishermen in the conservation efforts that are required of them , above all by establishing a protective European framework in the face of imports from third countries .
Also , surely the mechanisms of market support should be replaced by a more pro-active policy , for example one which establishes the compulsory levying of a countervailing charge on the import of species found in the Community , amounting to the difference between the import price and the current guide price , which could be used to promote the fishing industry in the developing countries ?
Finally , it also seems essential to me to involve the sector more closely in the management of resources , in particular by giving it responsibility for managing the resources of specific fisheries , on the basis of historical rights , within the framework of decentralized regional conferences .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in her report , Mrs Péry analyses in detail the causes of the crisis in the fishing sector and attempts to provide some solutions . Unfortunately , those solutions are not enough to halt the decline in the French and Community fishing industries .
The diagnosis is correct , but the proposed remedies are quite inadequate to cure such a serious illness .
And the findings are correct , particularly when it comes to condemning the deregulation of the world market without an ounce of security , the serious disturbances resulting from unfair competition , and the global downward pressure on prices .
On the other hand , the solutions proposed are not equal to the challenges to be faced .
Mrs Bonino , as the Commissioner for fisheries , wishes to cut the Community fishing fleet by 40 % , to scrap hundreds of vessels and force thousands of fishermen into retirement .
In a word , she wishes to decommission our fishing fleet in order to leave the field open for predators who use the GATT agreements for their benefit alone .
We are told , rightly or wrongly , that there is overcapacity in the fishing industry , that fish stocks are becoming dramatically scarce , that juveniles are inadequately protected , that the level of marine pollution is alarming , and that the use of certain fishing devices and practices is wrong .
At the same time , however , Mrs Péry considers it essential to modernize the fleet with vessels using more selective fishing gear , and also wishes to dismantle tariff and customs protection .
There is a blatant contradiction here .
As with the CAP , as with the disaster-stricken industries , there is no wish to see the real causes of the crisis or to tackle them .
Who but us will have the courage to say that destructive free-market policies and the globalization of trade desired by GATT and the Europe of Maastricht are placing our fishing fleet at the mercy of third countries which respect no rules and sell their fish at dumping prices , thereby jeopardizing our producers ' organizations ?
In ten years , our dependence on fish imports has increased by 30 % ; and the processing industry depends almost entirely on imported fish .
I wish to stress - because , I too , like my colleague Mr Souchet , am the elected representative of a maritime region in the west of France - that there is now a need to set clear priorities for the entire sector .
What are these priorities ?
The promotion of non-industrial coastal fishing ; the application of minimum import prices ; compensation for fishermen for loss of income in the event of a fall in prices ; and the strengthening of controls , especially on third-country vessels fishing in Community waters .
We should also like to see more low-interest loans and debt-relief for fishermen ; the reduction of port charges ; the amendment of the common customs tariff , which does not allow the principle of Community preference to be guaranteed ; the restoration of quality by means of a labelling policy and better exploitation of fresh fish ; and the improvement of the links between research , training and the profession .
Yes , France 's fishing industry still has a future , but it is not the fourth multiannual guidance programme which will restore confidence to 16 500 French fishermen .
They need to be listened to , supported and defended .
This is the decision that has been taken by our group , whose chairman , it should be remembered , is the son of a fisherman who was killed at sea .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am only speaking about Mr Arias Cañete 's report on the problems of the fisheries sector in the NAFO regulatory zone .
Although this is a very thorough and open-minded report , my group has some difficulties with it , and that is not because it is so openly critical of the Canadians at various points .
In our view , this criticism is mostly justified .
However , the report focuses too narrowly on the maximizing of fishing opportunities and fails to take account of some important aspects which should certainly have been addressed in an own-initiative report of this kind .
I would firstly mention the monitoring arrangements : instead of dismissing the monitoring arrangements contained in the bilateral fisheries agreement of 17 April 1995 between the European Union and Canada as discriminatory and too costly , its innovative aspects should have been given greater prominence .
It is true that the new inspection arrangements are costly , but they are obviously working and have , above all , helped to defuse the situation .
Far fewer infringements have been detected than before , and so the potential for conflict between the parties to the agreement has been much diminished .
It is also questionable whether different arrangements - as called for in the report - really would be more effective , or whether they might ultimately dilute monitoring practice .
To my mind , on-the-spot inspections still remain the most effective way of monitoring catches and the type of gear being used .
Satellite surveillance cannot replace these inspections , but only complement them in order to determine the location of vessels , as is in fact stipulated in the NAFO monitoring arrangements .
The relatively high cost of carrying out such measures should be regarded as the price to be paid for dwindling fish stocks and for past neglect .
In any event , we should like the existing NAFO monitoring arrangements to be recognized as an improvement in terms of the conservation of stocks , thereby helping to safeguard fishing effort in the future .
Another very important aspect which is also omitted from the report concerns the decision-making procedure in the NAFO Fisheries Commission .
Those in the know agree that the main reason for the appalling state of fish stocks in the NAFO zone is the fact that the NAFO decisions on management and conservation measures are not binding .
The scope for raising objections has undermined all the measures , and any party dissatisfied with the catch quota allotted to it has routinely been able to award itself higher catch quotas .
For my group , therefore , the abandonment of this objection procedure is the key to further progress in fisheries management in the NAFO zone .
Unless this happens , in our opinion , there would in fact be little point in putting any of the other demands into effect .
What , for instance , would be the use of the rapporteur 's call for a more balanced composition of the NAFO Scientific Committee , or for a voting system in NAFO which is more satisfactory to the Union , when in a borderline case another party which is outvoted can raise an objection to certain management measures , thereby triggering the next conflict ?
While it is true that my group 's request does not correspond to the currently accepted international principles , it would nevertheless be very appropriate in a report which in several respects takes issue with those principles .
One need only look at the proposals concerning the voting system in international organizations .
Also , our request is by no means out of place , since the UN agreement on the conservation and management of straddling stocks and discrete stocks explicitly obliges coastal states and countries engaged in deep-sea fishing to cooperate in laying down conservation and management measures .
My group has tabled a number of amendments reflecting our concerns , and it is vital for them to be adopted if we are to support the report .
I therefore ask Mr Arias Cañete too to look favourably on these amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , although some Members may think that Mr Arias Cañete 's report is excessively critical of Canada , I personally - having closely followed the European Union 's fisheries relations with that country - wish to congratulate the rapporteur on the even-handedness of his report , which avoids dwelling on the periods of tension which Canada 's stance has forced the Community to endure .
Now it is a question of looking to the future .
In my view , this is another indication of the European Union 's goodwill and readiness for dialogue . However , I am bound to condemn the fact once again that - judging by the latest news - this is not an attitude which is shared by Canada .
It is true that the Canadians have expressed their willingness to open up their ports to the Community fleet - although only in certain cases - and are giving to understand that this is a generous concession on their part . The fact that this is a unilateral decision , however , leads us to fear that it can be revoked at any time .
If Canada really wished to permit access to its ports , it would have signed the bilateral agreement , one of the key points of which concerns precisely the normalized access of the Community fleet to Canadian ports .
However , Canada continues to show great reluctance to ratify the agreement in question .
It is my understanding , moreover , that in the latest round of negotiations between Canada and the European Union , Canada continued to insist that it had a complete right to manage certain stocks exclusively and absolutely - cod , for example - in international waters . This is a fresh sign of its intention to take action outside the 200-mile limit , in violation of the International Law of the Sea .
Consequently , I would call on the Commission once again to defend our fishing rights , since the European Union is just as sovereign as Canada , and to defend Community interests in accordance with the Union 's international weight , which is far greater than the results achieved recently would suggest .
With regard to Mrs Péry 's report on the crisis in the fishing industry , the rapporteur deserves to be congratulated on her efforts to unite positions . On the specific question of markets , however , I should like to call on the Commission to present , in its new draft regulation , a genuine reform which is geared to the challenges of the common fisheries policy .
This time , it must be an in-depth reform , based on non-discriminatory criteria and free of the excessive red tape which is a burden on a sector that needs mechanisms to allow it to respond rapidly , ensuring it a permanent position on the fishery products market .
And with reference to Mrs Péry 's comments concerning the social measures for which there is such a need in the fishing industry , I believe that a good indication that something is amiss is the fact that in the next budget , only ECU 50 000 is earmarked for such social measures , whereas ECU 3 000 000 is set aside for observers in the NAFO zone , for example .
In my opinion , something is not right in this sector .
Mr President , at the outset I want to congratulate all of those who have presented reports here today .
Due to time restrictions I shall concentrate on the Péry report .
The current crisis assailing the Community 's fishing industry is sapping morale from the most important employment sector in peripheral coastal regions in this Community , including my own country of Ireland .
It would surely be considered a great scandal for the Community if , after obtaining control over significant areas of the most productive fishing zones in the world , we were proved incapable of managing fisheries in a coherent and , more important , a practical fashion for the benefit of the Union 's consumers and producers .
There are matters affecting us where short-term decisions could be taken .
What have we done about imports of salmon from Norway .
We have introduced minimum import prices .
They have not worked .
What about quantity restrictions ?
What about the low cost of cod imports ?
Nothing has been done there by the Commission .
I believe Parliament can play an important role in assisting in the restoration of confidence to an industry where morale is at its lowest .
We must point to a more positive future .
Tax and quotas and not GRT or carrying capacity have regulated the landings of various species over the years .
Of course we are looking at technical conservation measures .
We have not been presented with specific measures as yet .
At the same time the Lassen Report is indirectly being presented to us and suggests we should slash the fleet by 40 % .
I would suggest to the Commissioner that is not the answer .
Tax and quotas are the answer .
We are unable to make our boats safer .
It is an indictment of the Member States and the Commission that we were unable to make our boats safer .
If we add to the GRT , we cannot receive permission although we are not adding to the carrying capacity or to the landings of fish .
It makes little sense to me .
There is a crisis and the Commission is adding to the crisis because of the veterinary charges to be introduced later after a short derogation period .
What is Commissioner Bonino doing about that ?
And what are we doing about early retirement ?
It is too horrendous to contemplate what will happen with a drastic reduction .
Finally , I and many of my colleagues speak on behalf of the industry in Ireland , but Ms McKenna does not .
We are not prepared to share the pain .
We have shared too much pain over the years .
We have paid too great a price in Ireland .
We want to ensure that Irish fishermen are fairly treated in the years to come .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with growing demand it is no surprise that the management of fishery stocks should once again be a priority in the common fisheries policy .
But we need to be aware that the problem of balanced stock management should not be the sole responsibility of the European Union but should be done worldwide .
It is also important to point out , in this regard , that some of our current problems are due to the ingenuity of the Commission in its negotiations with third countries .
In fact , only a few years ago we were accepting reductions in our fish quotas but these countries were increasing theirs .
That is unacceptable , because the rules must be the same for everyone .
Having given in in international negotiations , the Commission has now resorted to the draconian management of our waters , proposing reductions in the fishing fleet by up to 40 % , such as for sardine fishing off the Portuguese coasts .
Has the Commission , Madam Commissioner , actually assessed the economic and social effects of an almost 50 % cut in the fishery sector which represents more than 15000 jobs in Portugal ?
If the issue of stocks was so serious , why is it only now that the Commission is acting ?
Who supplied the Commission with these figures ?
What alternatives does the Commission propose to fishermen , industrialists and workers and their families whose livelihood depends on Portuguese fisheries ?
The Péry report - and I congratulate Mrs Péry on its quality - seems to take a balanced look at the main issues of the common fishery policy .
It will therefore win my backing especially since it takes on board some of the amendments tabled by me and approved by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , such as those on international negotiations , the reaching of interprofessional agreements and the possibility of introducing a storage premium to be paid to the industry under certain conditions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner .
For a long time we have been campaigning for conservation of fishery resources , taking all the technological , social , monitoring and taxation measures needed to bolster the industry properly .
However this strategy , albeit vital , has not been very transparent nor has it been applied by everyone , indeed by very many .
First of all because the decisions are very often taken on the basis of at times inadequate or distorted scientific studies which fail to take into account local reality .
Also because these decisions overlook the appropriate and vital intervention of fishermen 's organisations and fail to take account of any preference trade policy for the Community fisheries sector .
All of these and other facts justify and generalise climates of mistrust and conflict among fishermen and ship-owners in the Member States .
On the other hand - as shown by the figures and recent declarations by the Commissioner herself - there are few countries ( like Portugal ) that in recent years have observed ( excessively sometimes ) obediently and scrupulously the decommissioning plans while other countries , unfortunately the majority , have not done so .
Against the background of a crisis in the fisheries sector , non e of this should be forgotten .
Neither the Commission , nor the Member States , nor the government of my country .
As well as conserving stocks , we need more transparency and equal participation in the decision-making processes - e.g. in NAFO , where I must repeat my utter failure to understand the proposals to reduce the TACs without proper scientific grounds - or the case of cod , also in NAFO waters .
We must express our opposition to any reduction proposals which are not the same for all countries and species ( e.g ; sardines ) without taking into account the reduction efforts already made by various countries and not taking into account recent facts which have been to the detriment of Portuguese fisheries , such as the agreement with Morocco and its effects on fish preserves and fisheries in general .
Mr President , our desire to have a modern , large-capacity fleet can easily come into conflict with the need to maintain fish stocks at steady levels , so the Péry report is right to call for stricter controls on the observance of quotas , for the spawning grounds to be protected and for trust to be restored between marine biologists and fishermen .
On this last point , there is the problem that less and less money is being made available for research into fish stocks , which undermines the quality of the data and the fishermen 's confidence in them .
It is therefore essential that adequate funding should be provided for detailed research .
The huge fluctuations in the annual TACs are also very damaging .
The flexibility now brought to the quota regulations through the introduction of a current account system is a step in the right direction , and the Commission should actively pursue the idea of multiannual planning .
I am less enthusiastic about the calls to increase Community price support .
This may limit loss of income in the short term , but in the long run the sector will be better served if the producers ' organisations themselves take measures to regulate the market .
Finally , on the subject of imports from non-Community countries , these are extremely important for the fish processing industry .
Because of the reduced quotas , the European fleet is no longer able to meet demand from the industry , but in order to prevent unfair competition with the European fishermen there should be stricter controls to ensure that products from outside the Union meet the Community 's quality and hygiene requirements .
This is an area in which the Union 's fisheries sector has invested heavily .
Mr President , I want to talk mainly about Mrs Péry 's report , for which congratulations and support .
I fear I shall say some of the things that have already been said .
We have here the views of the Committee on Fisheries on the continuing crisis in the fishing industry .
The basic crisis has been with us for many years and it will be with us for many years more unless we do something radical about it .
In fact , it will probably become hardly worth fishermen putting to sea in many parts of the European Union 's waters .
That has immense consequences , of course , not only for the fishermen but for all those involved on shore and for the consumer .
We have to pay serious attention to this problem , which is a problem accentuated by a lack of political will , by far too much nationalism , and dare I suggest that we should look at the policies of the Norwegians and Icelanders and how they tackle their problems .
The basic reason is , of course , simple : too many boats chasing too few fish .
You can tackle this in two ways , and both need to be tackled .
The first one - too many boats - obviously needs a serious decommissioning scheme .
Now some countries have put decommissioning schemes into practice ; my own country has not been serious about this and therefore is marked down for a 40 % cut .
That is not an acceptable solution for fishermen and for the people who are dependent upon them .
The other side of the problem is too few fish .
Now there is much that we can do here and much that the Commission and the various Member States ' governments could do .
In many cases the research is already there .
Mrs Péry mentions many of the things that could be done : improvements in the gear that is used , to allow many smaller fish to escape ; improvements such as inserting square-mesh panels in nets .
There is a whole range of technical improvements that have been tried and that work .
We obviously need large areas to be closed off for fishing part of the year or , in some cases , permanently or near enough permanently , to allow the stocks to recover and to allow the juvenile stocks to grow .
So we need conservation areas , if you like .
We need to somehow get into being a policy which ends the practice of discards .
I do not know about other areas , but in the North Sea sometimes 50 % and more of the catch of a fishing boat is discarded because it is too small , unmarketable , or whatever .
So we have a whole range of measures on both sides of the equation .
Finally , I must stress that we need a very rigorous evaluation and inspection system and I and many of the fishermen I talk to would prefer it if that was operated by the European Union .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Péry for her report and to say that I agree with her when she implies that the common fisheries policy is just a half-baked policy .
Unlike the common agricultural policy it does not have the confidence or respect either of the producers or the consumers .
In fisheries , the policy always seems to be about reducing the catch .
The European Union is only 50 % selfsufficient and stocks are falling , yet prices continue to go down .
We feel more concern about cheap supplies to processors than about the income of the fishermen whose interests we are supposed to support .
This policy is doing the image of the Union no good either with its own producers or abroad .
The common fisheries policy seems always to be about control but the benefits never seem to come .
The Member States are unwilling to concede to the European Union the full responsibility for a comprehensive policy but are always willing to blame the European Union for the negative factors .
There is one thing about the Commission 's proposals which I would question : why all the emphasis on tonnage if we have a quota policy which is working ?
Why , if quotas are being observed , do we need such emphasis on tonnage ?
Quotas could be policed : with a proper computer system , a proper satellite system and proper import controls we could regulate the amount of fish taken out of the seas and marketed , if we really set ourselves to do so .
If we are serious about supervising landing and if Member States cooperate , then tonnage reduction could actually be on a voluntary basis with compensation .
If we had a policy of maintaining proper prices , then lower quotas would be much more acceptable in the fishing regions .
Some trade restrictions are acceptable in view of the social environmental problems that are so obvious .
If there is a precious and scarce resource , why do we exploit it and give it away at prices that are far below its real value ?
I agree with Allan Macartney when he suggests that the policy needs a fundamental reappraisal and that the disadvantaged areas should be given more control over both the exploitation and the marketing of the resource that is adjacent to them .
Mr President , I should like to say a few words about the Kofoed report on fisheries in the Baltic Sea .
The report has been drafted in response to a Council regulation on salmon fishing entailing the further extension of the closed season in order to protect , above all , wild salmon .
They are good measures even if they do not go far enough in view of the crisis conditions which exist as far as wild salmon in the Baltic is concerned .
In connection with this report the rapporteur has , however , tabled two amendments on cod fishing in the Baltic .
These amendments propose replacing the existing quota system with rules on fishing boat engine power .
I do not think this is an especially good or well-thought-out idea .
The problem with the current system is that certain countries stick to their quotas while others do not do so in the same way ; what is needed therefore is better monitoring .
Another problem is the level of prices for cod caught in the Baltic .
I believe that a change to engine power would instead make it still more difficult to check how much fish is actually caught in the Baltic .
It would also be more difficult to adjust fishing to actual stocks .
I will not vote for the proposals on engine power .
Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner .
It is going to be a pleasant change to hear her views rather than read about them in the Financial Times and the other press .
Fishing in the Communities is a very volatile , very political matter at the moment .
We have too many fishermen chasing too few fish .
Everyone accepts that .
I think it is symptomatic of open competition , which is compounded by the increasing efficiency of our fishing vessels and particularly the gear .
Indeed when I was at school we were told that the United Kingdom was a lump of coal surrounded by a teeming sea of fish .
There is very little coal left in the United Kingdom and if we go on using the gear we are using now then there will be very little fish either .
The Union has got to call a halt to this .
We are , at the moment , in a crisis in the fishing industry in Europe and particularly in the UK where the fishing fleet is the third largest within the European Union .
The government is again preaching the virtues of deregulation .
We have seen in the last few weeks the effects of deregulation on the agriculture industry .
We do not want to transfer the bad practices of BSE into the fishing industry by deregulating everything and believing it is the way ahead .
In an attempt to reduce the number of vessels by the doctrine of laisser faire economics the United Kingdom Government has left the fishing industry in Britain suffering at the hands of market forces .
This is not conducive to promotion of conservation of fish stocks or to security of jobs of local fishermen , or to the livelihood and the thriving of local communities .
It is no wonder , therefore , that local communities which are totally dependent on fishing for their livelihood view the United Kingdom Government and others with suspicion .
The same government began decommissioning vessels as late as 1984 and offered grants in return for surrendering licence .
It is now crying out in outrage about quota-hopping .
Indeed the same government which is crying out about quota-hopping is the government which , at the moment , to popularize its own party is parading its xenophobia and has started blocking European institutions .
We need action on quota-hopping but we must disassociate ourselves from the nationalistic sentiments surrounding it .
There is a solution to the problem of quota hopping : there should be some recognition and licensing done by the Member States , to ensure some control of the quota-hoppers .
The fundamental problem remains that fishing stocks are becoming dangerously scarce ; Europe 's fishermen are going out of business every day ; sustainable conservation needs to be promoted and enforced .
This can be helped by a reduction in the entire fleet capacity of the EU .
The three multi-annual guidance programmes have all failed to allow Member States to reduce their fishing fleets .
In the UK alone it will not be possible to meet the 1996 fleet reduction requirements .
We have to deal with this problem .
We have to come forward with proper methods of conservation and proper methods of supervision .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I should like to welcome the fact that this important joint debate on four reports by the Committee on Fisheries is taking place .
Of these four reports , two relate to the conservation of fishery resources - an issue of concern to the European Union - in two areas : the Baltic and the Antarctic . The latter , incidentally , is an area in which the Community fleet does not have a presence and where , in my view , specific and experimental fishing campaigns should be carried out , with strict respect for the ecological balance .
With regard to Mrs Péry 's report , it sets out the diverse and complex set of problems currently affecting the fishing industry , where I would stress the need for socio-economic and structural flanking measures , given that , as we know , the fishing industry is based in areas which are heavily dependent on this sector .
I also welcome the notable inclusion in the report of a call for the strengthening of fisheries agreements with third countries , both old and new .
Lastly , Mr Arias Cañete 's timely and important report on the problems of the fisheries sector in the NAFO zone makes it clear that major steps still need to be taken in order to balance the fishing effort in this area and ensure that the European Union participates in that effort on an equal footing .
We wish to underline the urgent need to establish a voting system which is in keeping with the European Union 's actual weight ; to modify the composition of the NAFO Scientific Committee ; to increase Community investment in research in this zone ; to improve protection of the Community 's fishing opportunities in this fishing ground ; to reduce the cost of monitoring systems ; and to call on the Canadian authorities to make practical gestures - such as withdrawing the legislation which discriminates against the European Union and ratifying the 1992 bilateral agreement - and to insist that they lift their ban on access to Canadian ports by Community vessels totally and for good .
These measures are vital , Commissioner , for the improvement of the European Union 's relations with Canada in general , and its fisheries relations in particular .
Mr President , there is no doubt in my mind , nor I am sure in colleagues ' or the Commissioner 's minds , that there is a crisis of confidence in the fishing industry at the present time .
In my own country some in the fishing industry are calling for the scrapping of the common fisheries policy .
They conveniently forget what it was like before the common fisheries policy was introduced in 1983 and that at that time there were many international agreements .
Fortunately we now have a policy but we all recognize that it needs to be adapted because it is not working properly .
The 40 % reduction which is being proposed at the present time may be a suggestion which is not properly understood .
People do not understand either that there are fewer and fewer fish in the sea .
But I would suggest that we must work with the fishing industry and make sure that it fully understands the problems .
I welcome the fact that the Commissioner has gone round many of the ports in the Community discussing the issues with the fishermen .
She has raised her own profile and that of the Commission regarding fisheries and that is to be welcomed .
I hope we can look at and address properly the issue of quota hoppers .
I do not believe that quotas and the single market are compatible with each other .
That is something we must look at .
If we are going to have confidence in the industry we cannot allow quota that is allocated to one country to be fished by another country .
That is the major issue we must face .
There are many problems we must solve and I hope we can work with the Commissioner to get the right messages across .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner .
In his report Mr Kofoed deals with the situation of the Baltic salmon in a most creditable way .
With regard to the population of wild salmon the situation is already alarming .
There is a danger that entire salmon stocks will become extinct .
Wild salmon forms only 5-10 % of all the salmon in the Baltic Sea .
By definition wild salmon is a salmon stock from a particular river which goes back to spawn in the same river in order to reproduce .
Finland , for example , now has such salmon stocks in just two rivers , Tornionjoki and Simojoki .
Special action is required to save the wild salmon population .
The most important measures are fishing restrictions both at sea and in the spawning grounds , and the regeneration of fish stocks in order to preserve the genic genotype of wild salmon .
It is very positive that the necessity to regenerate fish stocks , an issue which is not very well known within the European Union , is included in Mr Kofoed 's report .
Another thing worth mentioning is that it is a great waste to catch wild salmon in the sea where it is half-grown , often weighing only a few kilograms .
The price of salmon consequently remains very low compared to the price a fisherman would pay the local authorities for fishing salmon in a river as a sport .
Well looked-after fish stocks are of great importance to tourism in Finnish Lapland .
The strengthening of Tornionjoki 's position as a salmon river is to be regarded as good from the point of view of both regional and environmental policy .
That is why fishing restrictions to protect wild salmon and fish stocks to secure the salmon population are required .
I feel that we are here today on the right track on this issue .
Mr President , I shall concentrate my remarks on the question of fishing in the NAFO zone , and especially on the problems of a fleet which has undergone one of the toughest decommissioning programmes in the European Union over the last few years .
I refer to the Community cod fleet .
I should like to thank the Committee on Fisheries - and in particular Mr Arias Cañete - for adopting my amendments to this report concerning the cod fleet .
Because the fact is that the Community fleet 's fishing opportunities in division 3NO - the ' nose ' of the Terranova Great Bank , which is in international waters - are currently nil , since a zero TAC has been set .
Let us remember that the NAFO Fisheries Commission fixed a TAC of 6000 tonnes for cod in division 3NO for 1994 , 2213 tonnes of which were allocated to the European Union .
But at the beginning of 1994 , Canada called for a meeting to be held in Brussels .
At that meeting , which took place in February , without any new scientific data being put forward to justify the amendment of the TAC for this division , a zero TAC was set which has also been applied in 1995 and 1996 .
Commissioner , you are well acquainted with the crisis afflicting this sector , whose fleet is in some cases confined to port for up to ten months a year .
I would urge you - with your customary firmness , which has brought such good results for the Community fishing industry and other sectors - and the rest of the Commission to play a leading role in securing the amendment of this TAC , the application of which is not based on sound scientific data .
93 % of the Terranova Great Bank lies in Canada 's exclusive economic zone , and the Community fleet , operating in international waters , must not be made to pay for Canada 's mismanagement in this area .
Above all , Commissioner , we cannot continue to let Canada pursue its eternal fisheries strategy : concealing the promotion of economic and commercial interests behind environmental arguments , whilst it destroys and exhausts its own fishery resources .
Mr President , time has proved us right - and not only time , but also the speeches that we have heard in this debate today , in comparison to those that were made in the past .
Furthermore , the scientific and legal analyses have also made it crystal clear that in the ' Halibut War ' , the European Union and Spain were entirely in the right .
As the Commissioner rightly said at the time , the seizure of the ' Estai ' was a case of hijacking , and Canada was violating international law .
Today , the claims to be protecting the environment made by the mercenary Canadian Fisheries Minister at the time are clearly laughable .
However , let us examine the facts - because the facts which gave rise to that conflict still remain : Canada wishes to drive the Community fleet out of international fishing grounds which are not its own ; it has not ratified the bilateral fisheries agreement ; it retains laws which are unacceptable to the European Union ; and it is calling into question access to Canadian ports by Community vessels .
These facts are keeping the tension alive .
Canada is not acting in good faith - far from it - but is maintaining its hostile attitude .
There is a need to demonstrate , even if only once , that the European Union is acting in a coordinated way in the Commission .
It needs to be made clear that there is institutional unity and coherence .
Consequently , if the Commission , as a collegiate body , refers in its programme of work to relations with Canada as an industrialized country , and if it intends to conclude agreements with Canada in the fields of competition and research and development which are in Canada 's interests , then what we must do , logically , is refuse to decouple those agreements from the fisheries dispute .
Commissioner , I would urge you to speak to your colleagues with responsibility for research and development , competition policy and relations with the industrialized countries , and ensure that the conclusion of any agreement with Canada is made conditional on that country genuinely pursuing a policy of good fisheries relations .
We must not isolate the fisheries question .
There must be unity and coherence in this respect .
We are discussing the halibut dispute , which was caused by a bad decision in the allocation of the corresponding TAC quotas .
And the fact that the Spanish fleet had been operating in those fishing grounds since the sixteenth century counted for nothing .
Similarly , I have to say that the Spanish Agriculture and Fisheries Minister was unduly hasty in accepting a quota for scorpion fish which is so small that it reduces the authorized Spanish catch by up to 20 % in comparison with last year .
This readiness to accept intolerable decisions is astonishing .
I shall end by saying , Mr President , that the other occasion on which the Spanish minister in question turned the other cheek concerned the decisions taken on mad cows by mad British ministers .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Pery on her report .
She is right .
There is a crisis in the fishing industry of Europe .
The fishermen I represent in Devon are very unhappy about it .
They are not happy about quota hopping by re-flagging devices .
I welcome the Commissioner 's initiatives in bringing forward ideas to try to solve that problem .
Many are aware of the failure of the quota system to conserve , manage and regenerate our fish stocks , not least because of the high proportion of discards which must be thrown back and are no use for conservation , no use for fishermen 's income and no use for the consumer at home .
The response should be to come forward with better conservation measures , perhaps a ' days-at-sea ' policy which could be honoured by all fishermen throughout the Community , and not more proposals for decommissioning , particularly when our fishermen do not believe there is fair play in the implementation of the decommissioning schemes .
Because of the volume of discards our fishermen believe there are more fish in the sea than the scientists say there are .
There is distrust of scientific advisers in this area .
There is widespread concern about industrial fishing for fishmeal , scooping out immature fish from the sea and damaging the possibilities for regeneration of the stock .
I wonder what the Commissioner has to say about that particular aspect of the industry .
As for the 40 % reduction in fleet capacity , I trust this is an opening bid for debate to catch our attention .
Above all we want to see fair and even-handed implementation of any measures that are agreed upon .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I must first of all congratulate Mrs Pery on her report .
I should then like to develop two or three ideas in respect of the Arias Cañete report .
First of all , I think that this report will be a reference text marking - I am quite certain - the line to be taken by the Union in respect of NAFO .
We want a relationship of mutual respect and cordiality with Canada within the standards of international law but we were right to condemn the conduct of the Canadian authorities motivated by the interest of domestic politics and not backed up scientifically .
Like the rapporteur we agree that the number of votes in NAFO should take into account the number of countries represented by the Union , that the opinion of the Scientific Committee should take prevalence when defining admissible catches , that the Canadian authorities should ratify the bilateral agreement and allow access to Canadian ports by Community ships .
But in this debate and in respect of a discussion which also took place here on the POP IV programme and the debate taking place in my country , I should like to deal with a couple of questions .
First , industrial and deepsea fishing is now at loggerheads with a heightened awareness of ecology , environmental preservation and responsible fish stock management , all of which came about when Portugal and Spain joined the EEC - something that should not be overlooked when fisheries are being discussed , in terms of boats and catches and which does not justify an anti-European or anti-construction discourse .
Secondly , in the European Union and Portugal in particular , the social and political weight of fisheries is far greater than its economic weight , by tradition , history and culture .
Nobody can forget , especially when we are discussing the Multiannual Guidance Programmes 1997-2002 , when we debate the crisis in the sector or thinking beyond the year 2002 .
The Commission must now carry out its duties , dispel mistrust and win over the people .
There can be no fisheries without fish , it is true - but there can be no fisheries without boats and fishermen either .
Mr President , as a representative from Ireland , I wish to express my deep opposition to the Commission 's proposals which we know are aimed at reducing the size of the European fishing fleet by 40 % over the next six years .
Fishing communities by their very nature are located in the most peripheral parts of Europe .
In these areas the only indigenous resources that can be fully utilized are the fish in our waters .
Current policy , however , places limits on the degree to which this resource can be exploited .
Now we all accept that fishing activity must be limited in line with declining resources , but the Commission 's proposals are unfair and contradictory .
They take no account of the size or the age of the boats that ply the European Union waters and it is simply ludicrous to suggest that identical restrictions should apply to a ten-metre boat and to a seventy-metre boat .
Here I call on the Commissioner to target fleets which impose unsustainable pressure on key stocks .
Particular attention must be given to the needs of small , isolated coastal communities that rely exclusively on fish .
I agree with Mrs Pery when she says fishing communities throughout Europe have little confidence in present policy .
In order to rebuild this trust , there has to be a complete crackdown on illegal fishing .
I am glad to say that the Irish presidency intends to make this a priority in its forthcoming term .
Simply setting minimum prices for imports or financial compensation schemes are not sufficient : further action is required .
I therefore welcome the rapporteur 's calls for the improved management of resources , stabilization of incomes , measures to compensate for income losses and the creation of ' SEA LEADER ' programmes .
Mr President , Mrs Péry 's report analyses the different factors in the long-term crisis afflicting the Community fishing industry .
The rapporteur underlines the need for a political priority to be established , that of restoring confidence to the sector , since we must accept the fact that Europe 's fishermen have lost all confidence .
What message is the Commission sending them ?
It is always the same : there is overfishing , and boats must be scrapped .
Certainly , there is overfishing of some species .
Certainly , there are catches of some fish which are too young .
Certainly , it is the Commission 's duty to sound the alarm .
But fishermen are not fools , Commissioner .
They know very well that the survival of their profession depends on managing the resources responsibly .
It is simply that they are obliged to work more , to produce more , because the collapse of fish prices leaves them no alternative , if they wish to survive .
And we are talking about tremendous rates of work , crews who go out to sea for 320 or 340 days a year , ageing vessels which fishermen have neither the time nor the money to maintain , and a single obsession : to fish more in order to avoid bankruptcy .
Contrary to some simplistic ideas , the more the price of fish falls , the more our fishermen increase their catch tonnage in order to balance their books .
It is not just a question of scrapping vessels , but above all of breaking this vicious circle .
The crisis affecting the fishing industry is clearly a market crisis .
The role of the common organization of the market is , in particular , to regulate the conditions of competition between Community producers and to prevent unfair competition from third countries .
However , prices are being undermined from outside as well as inside the Community .
From the outside , they are being undermined in general terms by what are token health controls ; from the inside , they are undermined by unfair competition , caused by monetary and social disparities and encouraged by the Commission , which refuses to take the necessary market organization measures .
When will it be understood that the resources currently available are enough for the existing equipment to be profitable , provided measures are taken to make price stabilization mechanisms compulsory , so as not to encourage overfishing ?
When will it be decided to impose the application of minimum prices - which only make sense if everyone plays by the same rules - on the producers ' organizations ?
I know that this seems to run counter to the sacred dogmas of economic liberalism .
However , Commissioner , this is the reality which must be faced : the reality which means that whilst over the last four years , producer prices have fallen by 25 % , they have done nothing but increase for the consumer !
The consumer is not being made king , but once again taken for a fool .
Today , the Commission is presenting its fourth fisheries guidance plan .
With the commendable aim of conserving resources , this plan provides for further drastic fleet reductions .
If a price regulation mechanism is not implemented at the same time , as Mrs Péry proposes with regard to the role of producers ' organizations , then this plan will not restore the confidence of fishermen , but ensure their lack of support and anger .
The industry will go from crisis to crisis until - and I wonder if this is the Commission 's aim - the total disappearance of the patients will allow the doctor to announce triumphantly that he has eradicated the disease .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you all for taking part in this debate and , above all , thanks to the rapporteurs for the four reports we are discussing , although , naturally enough , the debate has expanded to cover many others aspects of the common fisheries policy , as was bound to happen .
I should like , if I may , to divide what I have to say into two parts : the first providing a specific Commission response to the four reports on the agenda , that is the Péry report , the two Arias Cañete reports and the Kofoed report ; and a second in which I shall attempt to reply to more general issues raised here by many colleagues and many honourable Members .
I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Péry for her report on the crisis in the fisheries sector , particularly because it is always helpful to listen to other ideas , other possible solutions regarding a sector in which no-one - or at least so I hope - can claim to have the complete answer , always at the ready and for all purposes .
At any rate , I believe that the contribution of this debate is very valuable , particularly with a view to the report that is to be considered by the Council .
For instance , you , Mrs Péry , tackle a range of issues on which I am in agreement ; however , when we come to the problem of the market , a problem to which many of you have referred , I have clearly to remind the House that the professional organizations do not fit in with a free market situation - as you , Mrs Péry , are perfectly well aware - and that , consequently , since these bodies represent a departure from the basic rules , membership of professional organizations cannot be made compulsory ; far less , it seems to me , can withdrawal costs be made compulsory for those who do not belong to the professional organizations .
I am afraid therefore that we need to look at the proposal concerning the markets in all its complexity , and it is for that reason that the seminar , dedicated solely to the issue of the markets , that Parliament and the Commission are organizing jointly with the industry for the month of October - in fact I believe that the date has already been set for this single-topic seminar bringing together the Commission and Parliament and the European industry and focusing on the market issue - will help us to produce some ideas . It is in fact common ground that a problem exists , but there are times when the solutions proposed seem frankly to me to be impracticable or counter-productive .
Let me give you an example : if we arrive at a withdrawal price that is too high , or kept high , do we not perhaps risk encouraging purchasers to buy imported fish which is , objectively speaking , less expensive ?
I say that because I believe that some negative effects that we do not wish to see could also occur .
For that reason , although I am not today inclining towards one idea rather than another , I have to say that the seminar with the sector on that one topic may help us take into account all of the constraints , including the fact that it will , in my view , be rather unlikely that we shall ever have the power to change the common organization of the trade or GATT - we may want to believe that but frankly it seems to me to be rather unrealistic , not because I am someone who gives in easily but because , in those terms , the balance of power is , to be honest , overwhelmingly weighted against us .
Moving on to the measures to conserve resources , the Commission endorses many of the principles expressed by the rapporteur .
But I would venture to say that , fundamentally , as far as financial assistance is concerned , what the report is basically proposing is more or less permanent compensation to anyone having to leave the profession .
I have to say that the Commission is encountering huge opposition here , although it has sought - with some success , I believe - to introduce elements of social policy into the common fisheries policy , much against the will of some States , as Mrs Péry is , I imagine perfectly well aware ; this is , moreover , of an optional nature , but now that the possibility is available to them , many Member States , although in favour , are not particularly disposed to make use of it .
At any event , I believe that this debate and those that follow will help us all to reach the stage that we have all to face - and the Commission certainly has to face - namely the 2002 reform , change or time-limit for the common fisheries policy .
And for that , apart from the other reasons , I thank the rapporteur .
Turning now to the other two reports - on NAFO and the Antarctic .
The Commission very much welcomes the report on NAFO , but the rapporteur will allow me to make two points : I have already said on a number of occasions in the House that the conflict whose political objective was , I am afraid , to expel the Community fleet from the NAFO international waters , has for the time being been resolved with the Community fleet which is within the NAFO zone .
In those terms , I consider this a positive aspect at least .
The overall package , which was then made multilateral in relation to all the monitoring measures and so on , has also , I believe , been a positive factor ; like you , I realize that the current situation in relations between the European Union or , rather , the Commission and Canada appears to have improved but is far from satisfactory - quite the reverse .
I therefore believe that we should persist in order to achieve a more balanced outcome , bearing in mind specifically that while things have certainly improved we are still a long way away , in my view , from a balanced and satisfactory state of affairs .
A third factor , however , on which I do not particularly agree , is that of the voting system in NAFO .
I believe - and not just because I believe in the European Union and its importance - that it is better to speak with a single and authoritative voice than with six different voices and the dissonant tones of various Member States .
I say this not just from a political point of view , because I believe that having a common fisheries policy means speaking with a single voice , otherwise it is not a common policy .
I am concerned , particularly in an area as sensitive as fishing , about the differing positions of the various Member States because I am not certain that they are always moving in the same direction : in fact , I seem to recall that there have been occasions , when this was possible , when we took up positions that were not particularly in tune with one another .
As far as the other report is concerned , you Mr Arias Cañete know perfectly well that , currently , there are no Community fishing vessels operating in the Antarctic .
That being so , it is frankly not possible to draw up a report on by-catches because there are no - Community at any rate - fishing vessels fishing in that zone .
The Community has , as you know , been a contracting party to Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources since 1982 , and I believe that , that being so , is already complying with the four amendments that you are proposing .
I have already told you that I am unable to accept Amendments Nos 1 and 3 for the reasons I have already explained , nor can I accept the amendment concerning the programme of scientific observation which has been under way since the early 1990s .
But what the Commission can undertake to do is to transmit the data as rapidly as possible ; in fact , we shall also be able to look into the possibility of collating the data in a uniform manner - that is something we can do but , of course , using data collected by others .
The final report is Mr Kofoed 's report .
The Commission will keep Parliament informed about the measures adopted to safeguard the wild salmon stocks in the Baltic ; it will inform the House of the progress achieved by the various working groups dealing with this issue ; but I cannot accept the amendments proposed to the effect that the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission should consider the possibility of providing for limited fishing of cod on top , as you will be aware , of the introduction of a TAC which is in fact one of the milestones of the common fisheries policy .
As regards the procedure for consulting Parliament , which Mr Kofoed backed , the Commission is quite prepared to inform the House of the deliberations of the different sessions of the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission in real time , that is to say not immediately it receives the official documents .
The Commission undertakes to do that : however , Mr Kofoed is aware that the House can express an opinion only on a formal proposal for a Council regulation that has been put forward , obviously , by the Council itself .
That proposal is not submitted to the Council by the Commission until the 90 day period for raising possible objections has expired , that being the time-scale set down in the Baltic Convention .
I think then that I have explained the procedural issue and the simplification of procedure and have also entered into specific commitments on the provision of information , as far as the Commission is concerned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now that I have made those brief technical comments on the four reports , allow me to make a number of points on certain issues of a more general nature that have been raised in the House , particularly concerning the Commission proposal on POP IV .
Let me begin by reminding you that Mr Arias Cañete had asked me to attend the committee on 29 May , something I could not do because that was the very day that the Commission discussed and approved POP IV : the problem was therefore that of being in two places at once , a problem I am , unfortunately , not yet able to resolve .
Incidentally , on the afternoon of the 26th , the Commission will be taking part , at the chairman 's invitation , in the meeting of the Committee on Fisheries which has on its agenda the elements of POP IV .
At this stage , allow me to mention three things : firstly , we have , clearly , a whole series of misunderstandings and , maybe , inadequate information .
I am sorry , for example , that Ms Malone is not here , but I have no idea where she read that the structure of the fleet is not taken into consideration .
That is not true , nor is it written down anywhere - quite the reverse .
As you know , there is a general proposal to reduce the mortality rate of certain stocks .
This is not a generalized reduction of 40 per cent of the European fleet - that is categorically not the case !
The plan provides for a reduction in the mortality rate of certain stocks whose situation is more desperate , and that reduction can be achieved by cutting the fleet and / or by managing fishing .
That more general decision will be attached to the 13 national plans which the Commission will have to negotiate with the thirteen Member States .
There is therefore an obligation to meet an objective , an obligation to achieve a specific result , to put in legal terms , but the way of achieving the result may be a combination of reducing fishing capacity and / or cutting down on fishing .
The objective of reducing the mortality rate by 40 per cent concerns some stocks whose plight the experts consider to be desperate .
On this occasion , we had two committees of experts : the usual group and the Larsen group .
I would inform the House - which is aware of this - that every Member State is in practice represented in those committees , that the decisions of the committees are taken unanimously and that , in the end , after having consulted two committees of experts , I have to believe someone , I cannot conjure up a third , fourth or fifth committee of experts !
It is clear that , at an international level , there will always be some experts who do not agree with the conclusions of their expert colleagues , but sooner or later a decision will have to be taken on the basis of some data .
The third point : there are then stocks in which mortality rates will fall to a lesser degree because their situation is less serious ; there are stocks for which reductions are not yet needed but in regard to which the Commission is proposing that there should be no increase as a result of improved technology : we have therefore a reduction over six years of 12 % - 2 % annually - to prevent increased fishing as a result of improved technology .
These are arrangements that we are setting in place with the fishermen .
I would point out that , before we submitted POP IV , we held 38 regional conferences with the fisheries sector .
I repeat : thirty-eight .
That proposal did not then come out of the blue : it , along with various other issues , was discussed in 38 regional conferences .
But it may be said that that is not enough : of course , 50 is a larger number than 38 but there comes a point at which 38 seems to me in itself to represent a great effort .
In addition , we set up meetings between the experts and the fishermen so that they could talk to each other , given that one of the objections is always that the fishermen do not believe the experts .
Certainly , it is difficult to set up ten committees of experts !
Small-scale fisheries , which provide more jobs , are excluded from this programme .
Non-industrial fishing is not therefore part of the programme specifically because the Commission does not consider itself a ' Super-Larsen ' , that is having to deal with biological issues only ; the Commission takes the view that it also has responsibility for mediation at a social level , to take account of the social impact .
Therefore , small-scale fisheries , which provide more jobs , are not covered by the proposed reduction .
But clearly , ladies and gentlemen , we shall , if you wish , discuss all of this again on the 26th .
As far as the gallineta is concerned , I can inform the honourable Member that that type of fish , which could be fished freely , has never been fished by the Spanish fleet .
It began to fish scorpion fish - gallineta in Spanish - in November and December of 1995 , no earlier .
If I have to propose a TAC and a quota then I have to take into consideration a specific period and , as in the case of NAFO , the chosen period is five years .
The honourable Member will allow that a fleet that began fishing two months ago cannot have the same quota as a fleet from another Member State that has been fishing that type of fish for years .
I therefore think that a degree of reasonableness would really help everyone to act a little more responsibly .
A final point , ladies and gentlemen : I do not enjoy proposing cuts in the fishing effort , that is plain ; I would rather be managing a sector in expansion .
It may be self-evident but that is how it is .
I urge you to believe that the proposed measures are the minimum needed to secure a future for that sector .
It will be for the governments to take a decision : unanimously they can also reject the Commission proposal .
But they know that , in terms of democratic transparency , we have all to shoulder our own responsibility .
It is true that we must give the sector a sign of confidence , but ladies and gentlemen , we must be aware of the distinction between conveying confidence and conveying an illusion !
There is a future for the sector , but on certain conditions : that it is able to modernize , that it is able to change , that it is able to meet challenges , including that of the globalization of the market and of technological change .
We all have a responsibility to say this , because we can all do at least one thing , both you and I and the fishermen : increase the number of fish .
That is just what we are not doing !
And if there are no fish , then there is no sector for an industry which is one of your concerns , ladies and gentlemen , but - believe me , is one of mine too !
I must thank the Commissioner for the information she has given us but my question remains unanswered .
My question was : who gave the Commission the information used as the basis for the proposal for a 40 % cut in Portuguese sardine catches ?
Mr President , I would ask Mrs Bonino to read the transcript of my speech , where she will see that I did not refer to her at any time , and I am quite sure that she has fulfilled her duties as a Commissioner .
I referred to a Spanish minister , criticizing the fact that she accepted a 20 % reduction of the scorpion fish quota at the start of the negotiations .
I said that this was a clear mistake on the part of the minister in question , but I did not refer to the Commissioner at all .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner if she would reply to the safety factor which is all-important .
Safety should be the prime objective of the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
There is a very serious situation in Ireland .
If fishermen want to make their boats safer they are prevented from doing so because it is suggested by the Irish authorities and by the Commission that they are adding to the capacity .
This is totally untrue .
They are making them safer .
They are not increasing the capacity of the vessel .
They are not increasing the carrying capacity .
They may be increasing the tonnage but there is no relationship between one and the other and Commissioner Bonino should take this matter on board and try to ensure that the boats are safer .
We have an ageing fleet and this should be taken into consideration .
Mr President , I do not like to speak in the European Parliament on domestic policy issues , but since a Spanish socialist Member has made some personal remarks about a Spanish minister , I think I have a duty to explain the problem to her .
It is not a question of a mistake by our minister .
The fact is that for years , during the time of the socialist government , the Spanish fleet asked the Spanish Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries for permission to fish for scorpion fish in the NAFO zone .
The former socialist minister repeatedly refused that request .
Now , with the establishment of a TAC and quotas based on historical rights , the problem is that unfortunately our fleet does not have historical rights in that fishery .
That is the problem , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo . And it is not the fault of our minister , but of the former socialist government .
Mr President , as usual , this debate on the fishing industry has aroused a great deal of interest .
Please forgive me , but many questions were asked which I was unable to answer individually , although we shall be seeing each other again on 26 June .
With regard to the report containing the scientific data on sardines , this data has twice been passed to the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea , a body which brings together the leading scientists in this field , including those from Portugal .
I described the situation concerning sardines - notably in Portuguese waters - in the House last year .
The problem is not a new one , therefore .
As for the question on safety , MGP IV in fact provides for the establishment of facilities to increase safety at sea , provided these are compatible with the need to conserve resources .
In accordance with Article 10 of Regulation No 3699 , modernization of the fishing fleet , in particular for occupational health and safety reasons or with a view to the use of more selective gear , continues to be a priority of the structural programmes .
This must not lead to developments which conflict with the aims of revising fishing capacity .
It is therefore possible to achieve this goal , even under MGP IV .
I hope that this answers the question .
I shall not go over the national issues again , except to confirm that this is the first time that a TAC for this type of fishery has been established .
I would add that after a long debate , the Commission and the Member States have shown themselves to be reasonable and understood perfectly well who had historic rights and who did not .
I have no wish to restart the debate , but I should simply like to clarify the Commission 's proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the four reports will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Practice of the profession of lawyer
The next item is the report ( A4-0146 / 96 ) by Mrs Fontaine , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive ( COM ( 94 ) 0572 - C4-0125 / 95-94 / 0299 ( COD ) ) to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report which I have the honour of presenting to the House , on behalf of Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , concerns the freedom of establishment of lawyers .
This is a subject which we need have no hesitation in describing as thorny , given the intense debate , not to say controversy , to which it has given rise within the profession in question over the last few months .
Now , thankfully , the mood is one of conciliation , and it is against a more serene background , therefore , that I shall try to answer some of the basic questions that certain Members , at one time or another , will have quite legitimately asked themselves .
Firstly , why is a special directive for lawyers necessary , when respect for subsidiarity naturally remains a key principle ?
Quite simply because the Treaty has given us the task of ensuring the freedom of establishment of all the regulated professions in the countries of the European Union ; and also because , for the last four years , the entire profession , with the sole exception of the lawyers of Luxembourg - a country which , as we know , is particularly exposed to the freedom of non-nationals to practise their profession - has been calling for this directive .
We asked them why , and I well remember our colleague Jean-Pierre Cot questioning the chairman of the Consultative Committee of European Bars .
Their answer was that experience had revealed the shortcomings , limitations and inadequacies , as far as the profession of lawyer is concerned , of the general directive which Parliament approved in 1989 , and which has been in force since 1991 .
Thus the aptitude test for joining the bar of a country other than one 's own has frequently been used as an effective protectionist barrier .
Similarly , the right of lawyers to practise their profession permanently , under the professional title of their home country , on a basis other than the restricted and temporary context of the provision of services , is still being disputed .
And while their freedom of establishment is subtly hindered in this way , the Union 's lawyers are forced to watch powerlessly the proliferation in their own countries of large , multidisciplinary practices , of American or Japanese origin or inspiration , which are able to circumvent the obstacles and tap the European legal market .
The Commission heeded this call .
It produced a proposal for a directive , which it submitted to Parliament in March 1995 .
In the very difficult circumstances of which the House is aware , this draft directive provided us with an initial working document , on the basis of which we have tried to square the circle , as it were .
What does that mean ?
Although , as I have said , the desire for this directive amongst the profession was almost unanimous , opinions on what the directive should contain were sharply divided .
Some wished the aptitude test for joining the bar of a host country to be retained and the permanent practice of the profession under the home-country professional title to be authorized .
Others , conversely , wished the aptitude test to be eliminated and the practice of the profession under the home-country professional title to be restricted to a certain length of time .
If we have succeeded in this impossible task - and I have no wish , of course , to anticipate the result of tomorrow morning 's vote in plenary - if we have succeeded in reconciling the irreconcilable , in securing the support of a large majority for the broad outlines of a consensus , then I have to say that it is thanks to the tremendous sense of responsibility demonstrated by every member of our committee .
We were guided by two imperatives : the need to listen carefully to the profession ; and the need to respect the spirit and the letter of the Treaty , as clarified by the case law of the recent Gebhard judgment .
And we were guided , I would add , by a common political will to achieve a result .
I should like to tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that I appreciated this cooperation greatly .
Things were not easy for any of you : neither for our German colleagues , nor our British colleagues , nor our Spanish colleagues , nor for your rapporteur , particularly in view of the fact that she is a national of one of the - let us say - more reticent Member States with regard to this issue .
We all knew that concessions had to be mutual and that , at the end of the day , no one could be entirely satisfied with the result .
I should also like to pay tribute to the very great political awareness of Commissioner Monti , who understood and accepted the necessary amendments that we proposed to him .
You accompanied us , Mr Monti , with a great deal of attention and political intelligence , down a road which was nevertheless full of pitfalls .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I thank you .
I sincerely believe that the compromise that we have adopted is well balanced .
Integration into the host-country bar is facilitated by the elimination of the aptitude test .
However , the competent authority of the host Member State will be able to verify that the lawyer in question has been practising seriously and effectively for the requisite amount of time .
The right to practise without a time restriction under the home-country professional title has been accepted , but a Community national who declines to join the host-country bar and chooses to practise under his home-country professional title alone will be subject to the same professional and ethical rules as his counterpart in the host-country bar .
In this context , I should be grateful if Commissioner Monti would clarify this important guarantee for us .
Finally , provision has been made for joint practice , but we have taken care to protect lawyers from any danger of unfair takeovers by other professions .
If tomorrow , as I hope , the House votes in favour of this compromise , I trust that it will help to dispel , once and for all , both the fears and the whiff of protectionism which may persist in some quarters .
Because it is a matter of urgency for the European legal profession to organize itself in order to adapt to the inescapable reality of the globalization of world trade .
It is a matter of urgency for the Union 's lawyers - taking advantage of the new freedom offered by this directive - to forge organic links between their practices and set up European practices which are capable of resisting the competition of large firms from outside the Community .
Finally , it is a matter of urgency for them to build a European partnership , so as to be able to raise the level of their services further still and meet the challenges that will face this especially noble profession in the coming years , which is so eminently symbolic of European democracy .
Mr President , I should like to begin by complimenting Mrs Fontaine on her diligence and care in drawing up this document , and on her cooperative spirit , which has ultimately led to an excellent result .
I would appeal to Commissioner Monti : we really did not take this matter lightly , and we have , I believe , achieved a very good result .
The legal profession needs this directive , and I hope that the Commission will soon express an opinion on this matter and follow Parliament 's proposals if at all possible .
Things are moving at last in the European legal profession .
The internal market has given rise to a good deal of cross-border economic activity : the creation of companies , mergers , subsidiaries and partnerships .
In addition , people are engaging to a growing extent in cross-border activities which are not merely economic .
Lawyers have seen themselves for too long as a part of their own national judicial system , and not as consultants whose services are also needed across borders .
I am extremely grateful to the CCBE , the association of European lawyers : it has made a major contribution to a fresh understanding of legal practice , and has been arguing for more than a decade in favour of facilitating the freedom of establishment for lawyers in other Member States .
Without the persistence and the helpful suggestions of the CCBE on the proposal for a directive which is now under discussion , we would not have reached this stage .
In the mid-1970s , in its landmark judgment in the Reyners case , the European Court of Justice ruled that legal practice was covered by the freedom to provide services and the freedom of establishment .
Twenty years later , we are at last making this principle of primary Community law a reality , at least in respect of the right of establishment .
After the 1977 directive on the provision of services and the 1988 directive on the recognition of higher education qualifications , the results of which - as the Commission has acknowledged - have not been satisfactory in practice , we now finally have a proposal for a directive to facilitate the establishment of lawyers .
This directive is a necessary one : firstly , it makes it clear that lawyers can establish themselves permanently in another Member State and practise the law of the host country , under the home-country title .
This did need clarifying , because despite the Court of Justice ruling of 30 November 1995 in the Gebhard case , doubt is still being cast on this right .
I would therefore draw attention to what is probably the most important sentence in that judgment : membership of a professional body cannot be regarded as a constitutive element of establishment .
Secondly , the integration of lawyers wishing to join the bar of the host country is to be facilitated .
They will no longer be expected to sit an aptitude test under the directive on the recognition of qualifications , but will be able to prove their aptitude by practising the profession for three years .
I would stress that this arrangement is in line with the case law of the Court of Justice , which made an important judgment in the Vlassopoulou case in 1981 , at the time when the directive on the recognition of higher education qualifications had just been transposed .
This judgment obliges the Member States to take account of the title acquired by the lawyer in the home country to practise the same profession .
Should the knowledge and skills of the lawyer not correspond to the specific knowledge required in the host country , that country can demand that it be acquired differently , for example through practice .
This judgment therefore entitles lawyers to prove their ability by means of successful practice .
Thus the Vlassopoulou case forms the basis of the provisions for integration into the bar of the host country , as proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights .
The arrangement proposed by that committee , approved by a large majority of its members , is a fair and liberal one .
It is also courageous .
It demonstrates that European spirit which is so often lacking nowadays .
And since I have just said that the committee 's proposal is a courageous one , I should now like to thank Mrs Fontaine not only for her diligence and her care , but also for her courage !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I really do believe that the directive being discussed today at first reading is a very important one .
There still remain a number of professions within the European Union - albeit not many - to which the rights of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services , as laid down in the Treaty , have not so far been applied .
Lawyers have until now belonged to this category , since there have naturally been restrictions on the practice of the legal profession because of the differences between legal systems .
I therefore warmly welcome the presentation of a directive which will solve precisely this problem , and will in principle grant lawyers the rights enjoyed by all other European citizens in the practice of their professions in Europe .
These provisions are long overdue , and represent a major step forward .
And that is no doubt why the vast majority of lawyers have expressed support for such a directive becoming European law in the near future .
It is , however , only natural - and what else could one expect of lawyers ? - for there to be disagreement as to what should be included in this directive , and how the problems should be solved .
Within the legal profession , there has been some dispute about how , but not whether , to proceed .
It has therefore been the task of the committee , and tomorrow it will be that of the House , to resolve this dispute over the approach .
I believe that thanks to the help and the willingness to compromise of everyone concerned throughout the discussions , in particular the rapporteur , the Legal Affairs Committee has produced what is a truly viable compromise .
There were two main points at issue : firstly , whether or not to retain an aptitude test .
Our view here was that in principle a test can be dispensed with , if a lawyer can provide evidence of sufficient practical experience in the country to which he moves .
This was a courageous decision , and one which runs counter to what is to some extent a majority view among both the legal profession and the governments involved , whose opinions will be sought again in the course of the legislative procedure .
The second point was the question of so-called compulsory integration .
Here the Commission originally proposed that after the expiry of a certain period of time , the lawyer must have an opportunity to decide either to become a full member of the local bar or to return home .
The committee decided to abandon this principle of compulsory integration , simply because it was our unanimous view that this is not in keeping with the principle of proportionality .
It is illogical to allow a lawyer to practise in a foreign country for a certain period of time and then , merely because a certain period has elapsed , to tell him that he may not do so any longer unless he applies formally for membership of the bar .
The committee proposes that the House should take a decision on this important point as well .
My group and I believe that it should be possible to find a compromise in the Council on the proposals contained in this report , and that after everything we have heard today from the legal profession throughout Europe , they should be broadly acceptable in principle .
I would therefore appeal to the Council not to block - by failing to act - an important decision in the interest of this group of professionals , but to carry forward this draft legislation in the Council on the lines which I hope will be approved here tomorrow by an overwhelming majority , and to adopt an appropriate common position on this proposal .
In the light of our discussions with the Commission , I take it that the Commission is likely to accept in principle the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights , even though it has not yet stated its views officially .
But it will no doubt do so over the next few days , or indeed at our sitting today or tomorrow .
All things considered , the PPE Group supports this report in the amended form produced by the Legal Affairs Committee .
The amendments represent a broad compromise between national interests , the interests of lawyers , and also between the different views of the political groups .
Mr President , I am very glad to see our rapporteur in this role , as we have just had an eventful time together in a conciliation procedure , but now I can contradict her a little in the open .
Mr President , the rapporteur talked about squaring the circle and finding an acceptable compromise with which everyone could be happy , because it ultimately gives everyone freedom of establishment .
But for the Liberals this is not enough , because we do not believe that there is any reason why there should be different rules for lawyers from those which give any other professional group freedom of establishment in the European Union .
Why can doctors , who deal with life and death , move from one Member State to another and look after patients there , whereas lawyers cannot ?
I simply do not understand it .
But the answer is , of course , as it has always been : professional groups tend to wish to protect themselves from outsiders and adopt protectionist practices .
And unfortunately there are still traces of this protectionism here in this directive in the form of the equivalence test , just like in the Cassis de Dijon case , rather than relying on mutual trust .
There is still only a limited right of establishment for people to practise under the home-country title , and we wish to see equal treatment for everyone throughout the Union .
We have tabled a number of amendments on this subject , and we hope that the rapporteur and the House will respond favourably to them .
The debate is adjourned and will resume after the evening suspension .
The next item is Question Time .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0566 / 96 ) .
Question No 40 by Mark Killilea ( H-0435 / 96 )
Subject : Termination of the EU 's Helios programme
Will the Commission confirm that the EU 's HELIOS Programme for the disabled is to wind up at the end of this year ?
Can it confirm that the staff in the HELIOS Brussels office have already been told that they are to be let go by the end of the year ?
Will it also confirm that it does not intend to renew the programme for a further 4 years , and that there is no comparable programme being put forward to replace it ?
Given that there will be no successor HELIOS Programme for the foreseeable future , will the Commission formally and extensively consult disability groups on what action they want for follow-up programme ?
Why has there been no consultation on these proposals ?
Disability is the first programme to be abandoned by the Commission because of the problems with Article 235 .
Is this an indication that disability is a low priority with the Commission ?
The Commission has been active for many years in promoting better living and working conditions for people with disabilities .
As has been clearly indicated in its White Paper on the future of social policy and its rolling social action plan , the Commission is committed to a continued strengthening of the Community 's contribution in this field .
Already the potential of the structural funds in supporting people with disabilities has been enhanced .
In addition to the HORIZON employment initiative , significant resources are also targeted on people with disabilities through the mainstream structural fund programmes .
Quite clearly therefore it is the structural funds , and in a very special way the European Social Fund , which constitute the most important financial instruments at Community level for improving the situation of people with disabilities and the Commission is anxious to build on this .
As far as HELIOS is concerned , the Council decision on 25 February 1993 establishing the HELIOS II programme provided that the programme was to be carried out in the period 1 January 1993 to 31 December 1996 .
Consequently , the contracts with outside experts assisting the Commission in implementing the programme will finish at the same time as the programme itself .
The final evaluation report on the implementation and results of HELIOS II will not be available until the middle of 1997 .
Pending that evaluation it would be premature to propose any further programme of the HELIOS type .
In the meantime , however , the experience of , and the lessons learned to date from , HELIOS II are being actively considered by the Commission in the context of a review of its overall strategy in this field .
Although , as I have already mentioned , the final evaluation report of HELIOS II will not be available until well into next year , it is already possible to set out the overall strategy to provide both continuity and reinforcement of its action .
The Commission recognizes that the European Parliament , the NGOs and , most importantly , disabled people themselves have high expectations of continuity of effort in this regard .
Accordingly , a communication setting out the main lines of its strategy will be issued by the Commission in the near future .
Finally , with regard to consultation of groups representing the concerns of disabled people , the Commission fully recognizes the value of the communications , practices and the experiences developed within the HELIOS programme , and by the NGOs and the European networks dealing with disability issues .
The Commission intends to consolidate and further develop its links with these in a common endeavour to encourage the development of better policies and the implementation of better practices throughout the European Community .
In this context the House may be assured that future strategy and any new initiatives will be discussed with the disability groups and , in particular , with the European Disability Forum .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I want to compliment him on the wonderful work he has done to help the disabled since he came into office and also on the recent statement in Mayo concerning the funds that should and could be spent by national governments for the disabled .
I have a few points .
Is it not rather odd that it takes until the end of the HELIOS programme before an assessment is made ?
Could it not have been made to coincide with the ending of the HELIOS programme ?
Then perhaps , in a different form but with the emphasis on the same strategy , the HELIOS could be applied under a new name in the mainline programme which is to be announced by the Commission in the very near future as outlined by the Commissioner .
I would make the following suggestion .
It is fundamental in the allocation of structural funds or other major programmes that the amount of money available for the physically disabled should be identified .
( The President urged the speaker to conclude ) I am sorry , Mr President , but I am sure you , unlike the Council , can allow a few moments for the disabled and less well-off in our society .
I thank the honourable Member for his interest in this matter .
I can assure him that it is a shared interest .
He will be aware that the programme runs out at the end of December .
The full evaluation will take place some months after that .
It was not possible of course to carry out the evaluation until the programme was finally completed .
I must tell Mr Killilea that we have an interim evaluation on the HELIOS II programme which was carried out by independent experts .
They highlighted a number of problems .
Consequently , I think it is much better that we have a really dedicated programme on the next occasion so as to take full advantage of that evaluation and the further details in the final evaluation .
As regards finance , the HELIOS II programme was designed to co-finance the exchange of ideas simultaneously right across the Union and so it nicely complements the European Social Fund which cofinances innovative action in the Member States .
I am trying to get a better understanding between the cofinancing for the international networks and the co-financing at Member State initiative level .
As you know , in the preliminary draft budget some ECU 6m has been allowed under heading B 34102 for 1997 .
That is a proposal for the preliminary draft budget .
It has been adopted by the Commission as a whole but it does not commit the budgetary authority .
The budgetary competence for non-compulsory expenditure rests with Parliament and it can take its own decision in that regard .
I am more confused now that I have heard the Commissioner than I was before .
Could he answer some simple questions .
Is there going to be a comparable programme in the future ?
Is disability a priority of the Commission ?
Will there be continuity from the HELIOS II programme ?
It sounds to me as if HELIOS II is going to come to an end , the Commission is going to think about what it might do in the future and then it hopes the issue will disappear .
Is there going to be continuity ?
Is it a priority of the Commission ?
Will there be comparable programmes in the future ?
Let there be no confusion on this matter .
The question of disability and what can be done to help people with disabilities is of the highest priority for the Commission .
Let that be clearly understood by everybody .
It is certainly our intention to have another programme .
There will be continuity of understanding and consultation with the people with disabilities themselves .
We do not want to go into the next programme until we have completed evaluation of the existing one .
That is why we are taking some time to consider what is the best way forward and to get the best synergy possible .
It is the highest priority and because it is the highest priority we are not just allowing a follow-on of what has been done heretofore because some uncertainties have been identified in the interim report .
I also wish to join in the thanks to the Commissioner for his work in the area of disability and in particular to welcome his commitment to involve the NGOs in the area , especially the European Disability Forum .
He mentioned that it is a priority within the Commission .
I think everybody accepts that as true .
In his discussions with the Italian presidency and the incoming Irish presidency , has he had any commitments from them that it will also be a priority for the Council ?
Secondly , is it possible to remove the blockages which have been put in place because of dependence on Article 235 by Member States , particularly in programmes that relate directly to alleviating the poverty traps which disabled people have fallen into because of the lack of work at national level ?
If not , then what are the proposals from the Council - especially the incoming Irish presidency if it has any - with regard to implementing a new article to ensure that these social action programmes can be undertaken ?
Firstly , I should confirm here that I have heard nothing to suggest that any less priority would be given to people with disabilities and to what can be done for them by either the Italian presidency or the incoming Irish presidency .
On the contrary , I have only heard very positive remarks at all times concerning what can be done .
There is the continuing situation with regard to Article 235 , as the honourable Member has mentioned , and I have to say that Article 235 is the only possible legal base for the actions that are carried out under the current Helios programme .
The House knows very well the difficulty we have been having concerning some of the social programmes insofar as the use of Article 235 is concerned .
It should be stated here that the Council 's Legal Service has confirmed the principle of using Article 235 to achieve Treaty objectives where there is no specific legal base .
We might also note that the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights made a similar recommendation when we talked about the programme for the elderly and that there was no other adequate legal alternative .
So I was perfectly satisfied that Article 235 is quite sufficient and proper in these circumstances .
You can rest assured that everything will be done to promote this matter as effectively as possible under the Irish presidency .
Question No 41 by Ivar Virgin ( H-0412 / 96 )
Subject : Closure of nuclear power plants in the EU on safety grounds
Have all nuclear reactors in the EU been fitted with pressure-reducing filter systems so that even major accidents do not pose risks to the public ?
Do grounds exist for shutting down any reactor in the EU as a result of safety requirements not having been complied with ?
Is there any safety-related evidence which is giving the Commission cause to consider recommending that a reactor be shut down in any country ?
There are various kinds of safety measures , systems and procedures which are needed to limit the effect of a serious accident on the reactor shield , depending on the type of reactor and the national legislation in this sector .
Such measures are provided for at all the nuclear power plants in the Community where there could be a risk of excess pressure within the shield .
The national nuclear safety authorities ensure that the safety standards in their countries are complied with .
All those Member States with nuclear power plants also have qualified , independent nuclear safety authorities which issue operating licences and , if necessary , order plants to be shut down .
At present , the Commission therefore has no plans to recommend the closure of any nuclear power plants in the Community .
Thank you for your answer .
The background to my question is the fact that it was decided , in connection with the very intensive debate we had in Sweden at the beginning of the 1980s after the Harrisburg accident , to invest in safety measures of the kind I mentioned in my question , namely pressurereducing filter systems .
As the question undeniably is of more than national significance I believe it would be reasonable for the Commission to take an active interest in these issues .
I should therefore like to ask if the Commission actively supports plans to make this kind of safety investment in other countries .
My judgement of the matter is that , precisely as a result of these safety investments , the Swedish public have a confidence in nuclear power which they would not have had , or would have been unlikely to have , if the investments had not been made .
I agree with the questioner that it is important , when it comes to the development of nuclear power , that the population should have confidence in what is being done , and there is no doubt that safety measures play a very significant role .
The Commission therefore also supports the safety measures taken by the Member States .
The situation is that under the Euratom Treaty , the Commission does not have the authority to intervene and introduce common safety standards for the Member States , but through the various resolutions which have subsequently been adopted , we have been given scope for cooperating with them to secure mutual recognition of the various national standards .
This means that in many areas , a common stance has been formalized to some extent on these important safety-related matters .
Question No 42 by Anita Pollack ( H-0448 / 96 )
Subject : Potential trade war between Italy and the USA
What is the Commission doing about the USA threat to stop importing all fish products from Italy by 28 July unless Italy stops all illegal driftnetting ?
On 28 March 1996 , following a ruling by the United States Court of International Trade , the United States identified Italy as a country engaged in large-scale driftnet fishing in international waters .
As a result sanctions may be introduced against Italy .
The timing of US internal procedures allows 30 days from 28 March for consultations between the United States and Italy , with a further 90 days to reach agreement .
In the absence of agreement the United States has 45 days in which to apply sanctions , which would take the timetable of the procedure to early September .
The Commission sent a diplomatic démarche to the United States State Department on this issue , which states that the Community shares US concern over the incidental death or serious injury to marine mammals caught through drift-net fishing whether large-scale or not , but reiterates Community opposition to the extra-territorial application of US jurisdiction .
The Community also stresses that such unilateral trade sanctions contravene the basic principles of the WTO and the United States ' obligations within that organization .
The Community reserves its rights under the WTO should such trade sanctions be introduced by the United States .
I thank the Commissioner for his fairly predictable reply .
I wonder if the Commissioner would have come to Parliament about this issue if we had not asked the question first ?
We have about US $ 1 billion worth of products involved here , including jewellery and perfume as well as fish products .
We really need to know what the implications are for multilateral trade agreements .
Does the Commission think it might be useful to try to persuade Italy to stop using illegal drift-nets ?
While we have EU rules which limit drift-nets to a maximum of 2.5 kilometres in length , is the Commission aware that the Italian swordfish fleet uses nets as long as 20 kilometres ?
Scientific studies show that less than 1 / 5 of the targeted species that are caught in the nets are actually used , while the rest of the catch is often thrown back dead .
So what is the Commission going to do to persuade Italy to put a stop to this very sorry state of affairs ?
The Commission has started infringement procedures against Italy as provided for under Article 169 of the Treaty .
The issue will soon be raised again with the Italian authorities .
I hope that a satisfactory outcome can be achieved without delay .
If that is not the case , then the Commission will proceed with the case to the Court of Justice in the normal way .
As Mrs Pollack has already indicated , there is a clear risk to the Community fish market in connection with this issue , since the amounts at stake in a ban on the import of fish products into the United States would be in excess of PTA 100 000 million .
It should also be borne in mind that the same organization which brought this matter before the US Court of International Trade is also investigating the activities of the fishing fleets of other Member States using drift nets in the Atlantic .
Consequently , should not the Commission take this matter seriously and consider that the way to avoid these possible sanctions , which may have a serious impact on the Community fish market , is to ban the use of these nets , the illegal use of which may cause substantial damage to the entire Community fish market ?
The position is that under United States ' legislation , if the matter is not resolved , the United States would and could introduce sanctions against marine products from the Member State concerned , that is from Italy .
We do not regard that as justifiable for the reasons that I have given and reserve the right to take action in the World Trade Organization to deal with that situation should it arise , although it has not arisen .
I hope it will not arise because we also take the view that the action that has taken place is contrary to Community law and it is for exactly that reason that we have started infringement procedures against Italy .
I share the concern expressed about the infringement of the law and , therefore , I very much hope that the issue can be resolved by Italy causing the necessary action to be taken for the procedure not to need to go forward and therefore , of course , the United States ' sanctions also not to proceed .
Question No 43 by Wolfgang Nußbaumer ( H-0446 / 96 )
Subject : Standards and regulations on certification
What is the Commission 's assessment of the effect on competitiveness of the numerous and different standards and regulations on certification within the European Union and what measures does the Commission intend to take in this connection ?
How does the Commission guarantee that a standard which does not meet the fundamental requirements provided for in directives , but which is referred to in the Official Journal , conforms to Community provisions ?
Mr President , standards are in the first instance private norms , in that they are drawn up by standardization organizations but do not generally have a binding effect .
They can of course become binding if the Commission makes them mandatory and incorporates them into safety provisions , but that only happens in exceptional cases .
The existence of different private norms alongside one another is of course damaging , and that is why we set up the three standardization organizations CEN , CENELEC and ETSI , whose workload has increased substantially .
At first , the formulation of these European standards , which replace a multitude of national standards , made a slow start .
After all , every standard requires technical preparation .
More recently , however , these bodies have been working very effectively : over 1000 European standards per year are currently being produced , which means more than four standards every working day , and that is a considerable number in view of the sometimes difficult technical preparatory work .
It is not too many , though , because these standards do replace a whole multitude of national standards . Cooperation with national standardization bodies is also very good .
The CE mark , which is not a quality standard , but simply confirms that a product meets the European standards , is being used increasingly , and is also having an impact on the certification procedures serving the needs of the internal market .
In principle , the standards drawn up by these organizations have no technical flaws , and this is ensured by the fact that they are checked by independent experts from outside these bodies .
However , should a standard exceptionally fail to meet the relevant basic requirements in full , it is withdrawn by the Commission , once its shortcomings have been noted and after the appropriate consultation procedure has been followed .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
I am always being told that many SMEs are deterred from patenting their inventions by major procedural and , above all , financial obstacles put in their way by the relevant authorities .
How can the Commission encourage the Member States to reduce their red tape , thus removing the competitive disadvantages suffered by European firms , especially in relation to American and Japanese companies , and giving them an incentive to develop new processes and products ?
First of all , to my mind , one must distinguish between standards and patents .
It is of course very much to the advantage of small and medium-sized firms to apply standards , so as to offset to some extent the disadvantages which they suffer in calls for tender because of their size .
In order to make smaller firms more aware of standards and facilitate their application , we are working closely with an association created by small and medium-sized enterprises , whose brief is to ensure that these standards are known and complied with during the production process .
I believe that , as a result , more and more small firms will begin to apply standards .
Patents are of course something quite different .
I do not know whether that was a slip of the tongue , because patents have nothing to do with standards .
Naturally , a patent must be registered in accordance with certain procedures .
This is done either nationally or through the European Patent Office , which is increasingly taking over the work of the national patent offices .
It is true that the fees charged are sometimes fairly high , which in the case of the European Patent Office - where we have a certain amount of influence - is due to the fact that the Office is funded entirely from these fees .
The European Parliament itself regards it as essential that such authorities and agencies should be funded out of their own revenue , and clearly this is a financial burden which we cannot reduce .
Commissioner , to what extent does European standardization go hand in hand with international standardization , given the fact that over 40 % of European standards have already been recognized internationally ?
Is it not our duty to respect not only the three standardization bodies in Europe , but also the worldwide standardization network , for example in the telecommunications sector ?
The honourable Member is absolutely right .
What you say is indeed logical , and ideally standards would be applicable internationally .
In many sectors , we already have a global market , and you rightly mention telecommunications .
Together with the European standardization organizations , therefore , we are attempting to ensure that these standards apply worldwide .
In practice , there are two ways of doing this : the first is to participate in the work of the international standardization bodies which already exist .
Here we are more active than anyone else : for example , almost 80 % of the work leading to such international standards - and , incidentally , of the financial resources too - is provided by the European Union .
I myself would not have thought this massive percentage possible , but at a meeting with our American friends , who have always accused us of seeking to use our European standards as a form of protectionism , we looked into who does what in the international standardization bodies .
The Europeans carry out the bulk of this work .
Secondly , there is a method which is very effective once a standard has already made an impact on the market .
The best example of this is GSM , the technical standard for mobile communications .
Once such a standard has made its impact on the market , this impact spreads to the global market , and we hope that many of the standards which we are drawing up in this new sector - telecommunications - will have a global impact .
Question No 44 has been withdrawn .
Question No 45 by Allan Macartney ( H-0336 / 96 )
Subject : Commission policy and criteria with regard to the need for NGOs to have expatriate presence in the countries where they work
Many NGOs work through local organizations in developing countries , in recognition and support of the experience and capacity that exists in those countries .
In the past , the Commission has supported this approach and encouraged European development NGOs to work with local counterparts .
In the fields of food aid , rehabilitation and longer-term development , the Commission has on numerous occasions stressed the importance of civil society and private initiatives in developing countries .
Yet , on other occasions , Commission services have turned down applications by European development NGOs on the grounds that those organizations do not have sufficient expatriate presence in the country concerned .
What criteria do the Commission apply in determining whether there is a need for European NGOs to have an expatriate presence in a particular country ?
What are the advantages for the Commission and for the NGO programmes of the use of expatriate European staff as opposed to staff of local organizations ?
Does the Commission agree that , in the light of its discussions on the linkages between emergency aid , rehabilitation and long-term development , there is added value in strengthening local organizations by working through them ?
Mr President , the Commission entirely agrees with Mr Macartney that it is important to strengthen local organizations and enhance their role in guaranteeing the linkages between emergency aid , rehabilitation and development .
The importance of this aspect was especially highlighted in the recent Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on this very issue .
Generally speaking , the Commission bears in mind , as far as possible , the need to strengthen and implicate local partners in the execution of the various financial instruments .
Against this background , as far as possible , NGOs must resort to local staffing , as mentioned in the very conditions of co-funding for executing structural development projects .
It is obvious that this approach must be adapted according to the specific aims of the different budget rubrics and in situ conditions .
When assessing requirements for an expatriate presence for a given project , the Commission bears in mind the objective of the given project , the country 's logistic and technical capacity in terms of the planned action , the experience and financial management capacity of the beneficiaries .
As a result in emergency situations and / or during the rehabilitation stage in countries which have just undergone serious crises and whose political , economic and social structure has suffered profound upheaval , it may be necessary to resort to a greater expatriate presence than , for example , in normal development stages .
Resorting to expatriate aid workers is usually done so along with a unit of training staff to teach the local people so that the project 's viability in the medium or long term can be guaranteed once the foreign staff have left .
I do not know whether to be reassured or otherwise by the Commissioner 's response .
He seemed to be saying all the right things .
If I could just clarify it a bit , did I correctly understand him to say that , other things being equal , he would prefer to rely on local staff in NGOs rather than having Europeans acting to some extent as minders , which I take it could well be the perception ?
The reason I ask that is because , after many years of decolonization , there is still an impression in some countries that the European Union has not changed its basic mentality .
I hope I am wrong and perhaps he could confirm that I am wrong in that regard .
Let me reassure you that you are right in your concerns but wrong in your subsequent conjectures .
In fact , in 1995 , of the 67 projects which we financed under the budget lines that are mainly concerned with rehabilitation and crisis management , only seven of those projects fell into the category to which you referred in your question , in which reinforcement of European personnel was required .
The reason was that the administration was in a shambles and it really was not possible to carry out some essential projects if we did not contribute some expertise of our own .
But the principle is that unless there is a local partner - we always try to be the main force in the project - we simply do not finance the European NGOs .
This is a very strong principle .
You will see that in the report we are presenting to the Council and Parliament at the beginning of next year that this is set out as one of our main objectives .
Thank you for the question because it is an important one .
Question No 46 by Marianne Eriksson ( H-0461 / 96 )
Subject : Development aid policy
An increasingly small proportion of EU aid goes to the world 's poorest countries , most of which are sub-Saharan ACP countries .
The EU 's insistence on giving priority to aid to Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean region is being pursued at the expense of the very poorest countries .
What is the Commission 's position on this problem ?
Does it intend to endeavour to change this state of affairs and , if so , how ?
Mr President , European Union aid to sub-Saharan Africa is comprised , as you know , of resources earmarked in the Union 's budget and the European Development Fund which , as you know , too , is currently and against the will of the Commission not yet receiving European budget funding because of the Council 's refusal .
The authorizations granted in the framework of the European Development Fund have continuously increased .
Under the VIth Fund the funding levels reached 7.5 billion ECU rising to 10.9 for the VIIth and 12.8 for the VIIIth .
In other words , the funding for the EDF has gone up by almost 20 % .
The share of g overseas aid taken up by the Fund has remained steady since 1991 , around 45 % of all Community overseas aid .
This is important and especially so since of the 48 least developed countries identified by the UN , 40 of them belong to the ACP and are funded in terms of overseas aid by the European Development Fund .
As far as the Union budget is concerned , the importance attributed to the ACP countries and especially the poorest ones in the framework of aid and cooperation policies has likewise not gone down over recent years .
Indeed the Cannes summit set a share-out of aid among various geographical groups , namely the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , the Mediterranean , ACP countries , Asia , Latin America , the former Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia .
This share-out will remain in effect until 1999 and nothing suggests that it will be changed to the detriment of resources earmarked for the ACP countries .
European Union aid to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is indeed important and has steadily increased since 1990 .
Resources for the Mediterranean region will also increase substantially given our new Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
But I should like to emphasize that none of this has bene to the detriment of the ACP countries .
I have given some figures but I should like to emphasize that translated into dollars , the currency usually used for development aid cooperation , the increase from the VIIth to the VIIIth EDF budget was almost 50 % .
When translated into local currencies - i.e. purchasing power on the ground - the increase is far greater than 50 % .
In other words , ladies and gentlemen , I can say with some certainty that the number of projects which the European Union will be able to fund under the VIIIth EDF will probably will half as much again as those funded under the VIIth Fund .

I should like to thank you for your answer .
What you said was not unexpected , I must admit .
One of the reasons I asked the question is that the Swedish government has now decided to make cuts in aid in Sweden , partly on account of the EU aid programme .
I have examined EU aid with this in mind .
Even though I can agree with the Commissioner that in ready money the changes are not so large , it is clear that it is emergency aid which the European Union has agreed to which is also at the expense of more long-term development projects .
I therefore believe that my question still requires an answer .
Am I making a correct interpretation , does the Commission share it and if so , how does the Commission intend to work to improve things for the 20 poorest countries in the world today ?
Overall public expenditure on aid by the international community has decreased over the last decade , not because the European Union and its Member States have decreased it - on the contrary , we have increased it - but because some of the major donors , namely the United States of America , have dramatically decreased their contribution and also because the Japanese , who were one of the major contributors , decided after the Kobe earthquake to reduce their aid commitment .
The second aspect which I would like to underline is that the multilateral approach is not a substitute for some of the bilateral approaches .
In that regard I have been urging Member States that we should coordinate our efforts and find ways of working together and that there should be no decrease in the bilateral effort which has been crucial in many countries and places for many different reasons .
The Nordic countries especially have set an example of very good cooperation , especially in ACP countries and through some of the best NGOs we have working in the ACP countries .
I therefore hope that Sweden , as one of the main countries that has pursued that policy , will continue to do so in future .
A second aspect concerns the poorest countries .
The Commission has decided that the funds provisionally earmarked for the next five years should allow for a greater increase for the poorest countries - the poorest of the poor .
Therefore we established a system that means that of the poorest countries no-one will get less than a 25 % increase in their EDF funding .
Most probably they will receive 50 % more in the five years to come as regards the EDF financial envelope .
Why have we done this ?
Among other reasons , because we have two tranches in EDF spending .
In principle the poorest countries will be less able to absorb it and therefore it will be the better off that will get some extra money in the distribution of the second tranche .
In creating this imbalance in favour of the poorest countries at the beginning , we have tried to make sure that the overall balance is not destroyed at the end of the next EDF .
Nowadays not only the quantity of resources available is crucial but also the coordination .
That is the reason why the Commission is now engaged in a very intensive coordination effort with Member States and other international donors , namely the World Bank which , as we know , is one of the main donors , and also United Nations agencies such as UNCTAD , UNIDO , UNICEF , FAO and others .
It is a deliberate policy which is already paying off .
I will be able to come back in September after a seminar we are holding with the World Bank to report on the common action that we have decided to undertake in order to maximize the resources available for assistance to the ACP countries .
Question No 47 by Graham Watson ( H-0317 / 96 )
Subject : Microsoft monopoly
Is the Commission aware that Microsoft is exploiting its monopolistic position in the computer software market to the detriment of European suppliers and users ?
Having secured around 80 % of the market in this sort of software , Microsoft enjoys an unrivalled domination in the sector .
According to the magazine ' Personal Computer World ' , the computer software giant sells copies of Microsoft Office to US suppliers for only $ 80 whilst charging UK and presumably other European competitors £ 140 , almost twice the US rate for exactly the same package .
High levels of demand for the Microsoft Office , which includes WORD wordprocessor and EXCEL spreadsheet , amongst consumers limits UK , and hence European , suppliers ' competitive ability and diverts business to the US .
What action does the Commission intend to take to end such a blatant example of predatory pricing which clearly breaches the spirit of GATT negotiations ?
The Commission shares the honourable Member 's concern about the behaviour of dominant firms and we are particularly concerned where abusive behaviour by a dominant firm may be impairing the ability of its European customers to compete .
The extent to which Microsoft , which appears to be a dominant supplier , can charge different prices to different customers and other aspects of their licence contracts with computer manufacturers are currently being discussed with Microsoft ' s management .
I am grateful for that information from the Commissioner that this is being discussed because this strikes me as a blatant example of predatory pricing which clearly breaches the spirit of the GATT negotiations .
If the allegations contained in the magazine , Personal Computer World , are true - they are certainly reported very bravely in view of the possible loss of advertising - they suggest that this practice is more wide-spread than it should be .
Indeed it is possible that this is not the only case of predatory pricing by this particular company .
I do not believe that there is any way in which we can prevent what is a very good product being the standard for office software in Europe .
All attempts to promote alternatives to it from Europe will probably be a waste of money because it is a very good product and very successful with consumers .
But pressure , adverse publicity and perhaps financial penalties for predatory pricing are more likely to be successful .
Any assurance that you can give the House that action could be taken if this is discovered to be true would be gratefully received .
As I said , we are discussing this with the management of Microsoft .
Before coming to conclusions one must be very much aware of the fact that first of all , the pricing information we have is of a confidential nature .
But on the other hand , we have already seen a range of licence fees .
They are very different .
It is not appropriate to jump to a conclusion now .
I must be aware of very different situations which need to be looked into more closely .
On the other hand one should not forget , again before jumping to conclusions , that there are different fees for different services .
Comparing only two amounts if not good enough .
I want to stress that point .
Therefore please accept that I cannot be more specific today .
But I confirm that the Commission is discussing this with the necessary confidentiality and with determination to find out what is really happening .
Question No 48 by Pat Gallagher ( H-0390 / 96 )
Subject : Tendering procedures for mobile phone licences
With regard to the awarding of a second mobile phone licence in Ireland , can the Commission confirm the accuracy of the statement made by the Irish Minister for Transport , Energy and Communications in the Dáil Eireann on 22 November 1995 regarding the European Commission 's involvement in the award of the second mobile phone licence , including the following comment by the Minister , ' A cap of £ 15 million was put on the licence fee in the context that Eircell would also pay £ 10 million .
That led to the approval in advance of the selection process by the Commission ' ?
What is the view of the Commission regarding the content of letters sent by the Irish Department of Transport and Energy and Communications , in June and on 5 July 1995 to the bidders for the second mobile phone licence process , to the effect that the EU and the Department of Transport , Energy and Communications had fixed a £ 15 million ' entrance fee ' for the new operator ?
To understand the involvement of the Commission in the Irish tender procedure , it is necessary to recall that the Commission opened a formal proceeding regarding the maintenance of the GSM monopoly in Ireland in May 1994 .
On 8 March 1995 Minister Lowry confirmed that all the preparatory work for the opening up of the GSM market to competition was completed .
By letter of 27 April 1995 the Commission had to draw the attention of the minister to certain conditions of the call for tender which could appear to be discriminatory .
The main issue was the amount the applicants were invited to pay for the right to the licence under clause 19 .
It was explained that such an option resulting in a fee which is only imposed on the second operator can significantly distort competition and favour the extension of the current dominant position of the incumbent telecommunications organization .
At the same time it was stressed by the Commission that it was not entirely clear from the competition documentation submitted by the Irish authorities whether Telecom Eireann which already offered its own GSM service would also have to pay the same amount as the new competitor .
The Commission letter also mentioned that such an initial payment would lead to higher tariffs to recoup the money paid thus rendering the mobile service less affordable and restricting consumer access to the market contrary to the objective behind Council Recommendation 87 / 378 .
Subsequent to this letter , the representatives of the Irish Government during a bilateral meeting held in Brussels suggested to cap the initial payment and to impose a similar payment on Telecom Eireann .
The Commission considered that if such an approach were followed , together with additional measures such as the right to establish own infrastructure , there would be no grounds for further action under Article 90 ( 1 ) in conjunction with Article 86 irrespective of the option fee imposed on the second operator .
The role of the Commission is not to choose a given approach but to ensure that the approach chosen is in conformity with the rules of the Treaty .
During these bilateral talks , the bidding procedure was suspended until the official confirmation of the Commission on 14 July 1995 .
After that date the Commission was not involved in any of the subsequent stages of the selection process .
The Commission was not consulted on the letters of June and 5 July 1995 mentioned in the honourable Member 's question .
I thank the Commissioner for his detailed reply .
I would say to him that there is concern in Ireland over the allocation of the second mobile phone licence .
This is a key element in our telecommunications strategy .
There was confusion as to the role of the Commission and I am pleased that has been clarified by the Commissioner this afternoon in view of the correspondence from the Irish authorities indicating that the Commission was responsible for the delay in expediting the process .
I should like to ask the Commissioner if it is customary for the Commission to become involved in the capping of fees as was the impression given by the Irish authorities .
This evening 's reply is important in the light of the political and media speculation in Ireland over the last few months .
Could he confirm if the Commission could be involved in any way in the delay in expediting the process ?
Well , first of all let me recall that it is our policy to try to convince the governments not to impose a fee for a new operator .
But if a government does so - which was not only the case in Ireland , it was also the case in Belgium , Italy and Spain - then the Commission obviously asks the authorities to be even-handed and to impose the same fee on the incumbent operator , who is usually already on the market .
But that is the second-best choice because , at the end of the day , the consumer has to pay the bill .
Again , if the government chooses another approach , then it should be an even-handed one .
In the light of our remarks , the Irish Government was willing to cap the fee .
That was an attempt to limit - to put it in this way - the bill to be paid by the consumer , because our first concern is to have competition and by having competition also to serve the consumer best and to have the most attractive tariff .
Question No 49 by Anne Van Lancker ( H-0392 / 96 )
Subject : Implementation of the guidelines on aid to employment
On 12 December 1995 the Official Journal published the guidelines on aid to employment .
These guidelines provide for a number of derogations from the rules of competition and the rules relating to state aid to firms for the benefit of certain groups of workers and unemployed persons who are difficult to place .
Can the Commission say to what extent Member States ( and regions ) have been availing themselves of these opportunities and announced or taken measures to support employment for specific categories of workers ?
Which Member States have done so ?
Do firms in the social economy sector ( such as those described in the Commission 's communication on local initiatives ) and sheltered workshops qualify ?
Is the Commission considering an initiative aimed at encouraging the various authorities to take advantage of these measures ?
The Commission has tried to make its policy on this subject rather more transparent and to define the rules and practice as clearly as possible for the various national and other authorities which are likely to be providing state aid for employment .
There are , of course , a number of practices and instruments in use .
The guidelines to which the honourable Member has referred are designed to make it clear which general measures do not come under the rules on state aid or , if they do come under these rules , when the Commission has no objection to them , such as when aid is provided for certain categories of workers who are difficult to place : the long-term unemployed , unemployed young people and female workers .
The Commission has now gone a little further in its interpretation , and as you know there have recently been a few cases where it has applied this in practice . I am thinking here of what is being done in France to help cities with extremely poor areas , for which extra aid can be provided without us seeing this as contravening the rules on state aid , because the effects are purely local and thus cannot be regarded as distorting competition .
In the context of the guidelines , two governments have notified us of their intention to take certain measures - I think this was what the honourable Member wished to know - in Sweden , where the measures were ones which had already been taken earlier and we are now discussing with the authorities how they can be adapted to comply fully with the rules , and in Spain , where we considered that there was no reason to raise any objection at all .
I can also assure the honourable Member that there is never any problem with purely local initiatives , since they can never be regarded as distorting trans-frontier competition .
There is no reason why they should not go ahead .
What we cannot allow are measures specifically designed to distort competition with neighbouring countries in particular , or measures which are claimed to be aid to employment , but which are really also designed to give firms an advantage in a given sector .
The Commission has no choice but to oppose these .
For the rest , you know how seriously the Commission takes the problem of unemployment , you are familiar with the White Paper , you know about the initiatives which President Santer and the Commission have proposed .
I do not think anyone could accuse the Commission of not being militant here , if I may use the word , but we also have to try to maintain a proper balance and ensure that such measures do not result in distortions of competition .
My thanks to the Commissioner for his detailed reply .
It clearly proves that social principles can still be observed even when competition rules are applied , and I am very pleased to see it .
I think far too few people realize that this is possible .
I would just like to ask the Commissioner whether I can conclude from this that social clauses may be included in public invitations to tender , provided that they do not give an advantage to a particular firm , but simply seek to create opportunities for a particular social group which faces difficulties on the labour market ?
I do not wish to give a specific answer on this , because I feel that it is something that should be dealt with by the Commissioner responsible for the internal market .
Clearly , we have no objection to governments providing aid for special categories of workers who have difficulties in accessing and staying on the labour market , or for bodies dealing with such workers , for example .
But where the measures affect competition and have a cross-border impact , then we naturally have to impose certain limits .
We try to interpret the concept of permitted state aid for employment as broadly as possible , provided that the governments or authorities are not trying to use this to gain an unfair advantage over one another .
One thing we do hope is that , as the White Paper recommends , we can gradually bring labour costs down - not what people actually earn , but the additional related costs , so that labour is less severely penalized than it is today .
Question No 50 by Jörn Svensson ( H-0460 / 96 )
Subject : Competition rules
A company called Danisco has a monopoly over the sugar market in Scandinavia .
It has decided to close down a profitable sugar refinery on the Swedish island of Gotland and is putting obstacles in the way of someone who is interested in taking over the refinery .
Current legislation does not prevent such tactics .
Does the Commission intend to take steps to tighten up the rules of competition so that such situations cannot arise ?
Since the matter raised by the honourable Member has not been referred to the Commission under the EC competition rules and the Commission does not have all the relevant information at its disposal , it is not in a position to comment on the merits of the case as such .
In principle , the Commission would not , on the basis of the competition rules , oppose operations whereby a company , even in a dominant position on a national market , for reasons of restructuring aimed at rationalization of production , moves production from one production unit to another within this market .
This is happening every day .
Obviously , when a company in a dominant position is abusing its position , for instance , by behaving in such a way as to keep other competitors out of that market at any price or buying other companies to close them down to limit potential competition , there might be a problem .
But in this specific case we have not been received any specific complaint or any information .
Therefore , I cannot be more specific .
Mr President , thank you Commissioner for your answer , even though it was by its nature rather vague .
We shall perhaps return to this question and I will then try to produce more concrete information on the case as such .
What we are talking about is in the first instance to all intents and purposes a monopoly ; no sugar is sold in Sweden that does not come from this particular company .
I consider that this in itself is a situation which should call for steps to be taken .
Secondly , this company is preventing the establishment of an alternative on the island of Gotland , which is important from the point of view of regional policy and where the sugar industry plays a major role .
A small follow-up question : what attitude would the Commission adopt towards stricter Swedish legislation to prevent monopolistic behaviour in the sugar industry of the kind we are seeing today ?
Since Sweden has only recently become a Member of the European Union , some of the problems which might arise and monopoly situations which are there have to be tolerated for the time being .
In this respect I would ask national competition authorities if necessary to perform their own function .
But if it is a question of a dominant company or monopoly abusing its position then that must be established .
You must have evidence to show that .
If you say that the company in question is trying to prevent another competitor from buying that company and wants to close it down in order to avoid competition and if you have the evidence , you can send this to the Commission or the competitor could file a complaint .
That is why we have competition rules and a competition authority which , as you know , is the Commission .
As long as we do not have a complaint and as long as there is no evidence , the honourable Member will understand that the Commission has no reason to act .
Question No 51 by Mikko Rönnholm ( H-0493 / 96 )
Subject : Business concentrations in Finland
Finland is in a strange position at present as regards competition policy : banking and insurance activities and the retail trade have been concentrated in the 1990s into ever fewer hands .
In 1991 the market share of the two largest banks taken together was 55 % , whereas in 1995 it was almost 80 % .
The corresponding figures for the retail trade were some 60 % in 1985 and nearly 90 % in 1995 .
The emergence of business concentrations particularly since Finland 's membership of the EU is causing surprise among Finns , because it results in rising costs and a falling level of services .
Does the Commission regard the current competition situation in Finland as contrary to the Union 's competition policy , and if so , what has the Commission done and what does it propose doing to remedy this situation and prevent the wrong picture being given in Finland of the effects of EU membership ?
It is not surprising that when countries join a big single market such as the one we have there is also a movement of concentration , mergers and acquisition .
This is part of the game and is happening every day everywhere in Europe .
Obviously , and fortunately I would say , there are rules of the game .
We have had the merger regulation since 1989 .
In the most important cases the Commission has the exclusive right to vet the mergers and the acquisitions .
By the way , since 1988 we have had to vet more than 400 cases of big mergers and acquisitions .
Everyone would agree that it has been a rather successful policy and in several cases we had to impose conditions on such mergers and acquisitions .
In Finland there was the merger between Kymmene and Repola .
We imposed some conditions on that .
In some other cases the Commission went as far as giving a red light and did not allow a merger or acquisition to go ahead .
That is the rule of the game .
The basic rule is that acquiring a dominant position by merger or by acquisition is not allowed .
This is a real guarantee against too big mergers and certainly against the creation of dominant positions by means of mergers and acquisitions .
I should also tell you that we have another instrument , namely Article 86 .
No-one should point the finger at a company which acquires a dominant position by virtue of its own strength rather than by merger or acquisition .
But if it is abusing that position , the Commission can act and possibly impose heavy fines and this occasionally has been done .
We have rules and if there are cases which the Commission should know about or where competitors think they have a case , they should file complaints with the Commission .
Not that I am asking for extra work .
Last year there was an increase of one-third in the number of cases , more than 30 % of the number of cases in the competition field , and this was only partly because of enlargement .
Mr President , as pointed out in my question , the situation looks serious to the Finns , since the business concentration in question has taken place since we joined the Union . I would therefore once more request the Commission to underline the importance of competition , and to make its opinion known on the present situation , where acquisitions in the retail trade clearly have been made at a price considerably higher than the market price .
This , I believe , demonstrates that it is a question of preventing competition , and not of rationalization or any other radical restructuring .
Let me just say one thing .
First of all , as you probably already know , the Commission wants to reduce the thresholds for the implementation of the merger regulation , because we are only competent with regard to big mergers , that means beyond ECU 5 billion for the companies concerned , which is really a large amount of money .
We would like to reduce that threshold to ECU 2 bn , which would already give more scope for the Commission to look into that kind of merger .
This might well apply in the case of Finland .
There is the so-called Dutch clause - Article 22 of the merger regulation - which allows national authorities to take a case before the Commission even if the figure does not reach the threshold .
So the government can send a case to us and the Commission will scrutinize it and if appropriate take a decision .
So it is already possible for a national government to take that step .
Although this clause is rarely used , it could well be used very soon in Finland , if I am well informed .
I cannot be more specific but as far as I know the Finnish authorities are rather in favour of that kind of cooperation .
Question No 56 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0422 / 96 )
Subject : Tobacco farming in the EU
What prospects does the Commissioner for agriculture envisage for tobacco farming in the EU in general and in Spain in particular ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can tell the honourable Member that , as provided for in the basic Council regulation on tobacco , the Commission will shortly be presenting a proposal on the future tobacco regime , to apply from the 1998 harvest onwards .
The reform of the tobacco sector , carried out in 1992 , will be reviewed at the same time .
This review is not yet complete , and I therefore regret that at present , I am unable to make any detailed comments .
With regard to Spain , however , I would make the point that , as in other less-favoured regions of the European Union , tobacco growing represents practically the only source of income for many small farmers there .
Your answer was not a very specific one , Commissioner .
However , I am grateful for the information you have given us concerning tobacco farming in the European Union in general , and in Spain in particular .
I had hoped that this question would provide an opportunity to set out some specific guidelines for the future for the many small tobacco farmers in southern Europe - Greece , Italy , Spain and Portugal - and , more specifically , in the north of the province of Cáceres , Extremadura , which is the area that I am familiar with on a daily basis .
You will be aware , Commissioner , that these farmers and their families are concerned for their future , since tobacco farming is an activity of great social importance which creates and supports a large number of jobs in the regions concerned .
And I am sure that it is quite clear to the Commissioner that what must never occur is a drastic reduction in tobacco farming without prior provision for farming of an alternative , substitute crop with the same characteristics in terms of socio-economic benefits .
This consideration must be taken into account , I believe , in the proposals for 1998 , to which the Commissioner has just referred .
Since the honourable Member is well acquainted with the procedure in the House , you will know that - once the Commission has completed its report - there will obviously be an opportunity for Parliament to discuss the issues you have raised .
I am well aware how important tobacco growing is for many small farmers in the European Union .
According to our estimates , some 400 000 jobs throughout the Union depend on it .
Question No 57 by Ulf Holm ( H-0428 / 96 )
Subject : Subsidies to tobacco growers
About ECU 1 billion is paid to tobacco growers in the Union every year , whilst the smoking of tobacco causes diseases and human suffering .
The provision of medical care for smokers costs vast amounts of money every year in the Member States .
EU and national health programmes are aimed at reducing smoking as a way of combating cancer and other diseases .
Does the Commission intend to cut aid to tobacco growers in future , in order to achieve consistency with its health-related objectives ?
Does it intend to introduce measures to help tobacco growers switch over to growing other products which satisfy more basic human needs ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question is now being put the other way round , as it were .
The questioner asserts that aid for tobacco growing leads to an increase in smoking , thereby compounding the health risks .
But if you look at the state of the international market in tobacco , you will note that all that would increase , if the European Union were to discontinue its aid for tobacco growing , is imports on the one hand and unemployment on the other .
People would be unlikely to smoke either more or less .
After all , we do not subsidize the cost of cigarettes or cigars or any other smoking materials ; all we try to do is enable European tobacco growers to operate cultivation methods and structures which can keep pace with world market prices for tobacco .
Thank you for your answer , Mr Fischler .
In view of the damage which tobacco causes and the health programmes run by both the Union and the individual Member States it is of the utmost importance that we should reduce smoking .
There is naturally a conflict here and this is why I asked my second question about whether the Commission has any proposals on how to change production over from tobacco cultivation to the cultivation of some product which is more humane and more geared to good health .
This is the answer I was really after in that the question you answered earlier mentioned that a great many small farmers continue to cultivate tobacco .
How does the Commission intend to deal with this problem and find a new crop for these small farmers to grow ?
I would repeat that even if we were to give these small farmers an opportunity to grow different crops , that is no reason to expect people in Europe to smoke less .
The two things are completely separate , and must be kept apart .
In any event , I think it would be premature to hold a detailed discussion today .
I can assure you that our report , soon to be presented , will also ask what would happen if aid for tobacco growing were discontinued , so that you too will be able to assess the likely results and consequences of such an option .
Some Members of the House - including the last questioner - have drawn attention to the importance of retaining this aid and preserving jobs in tobacco growing .
We shall be able to discuss this with one another .
Commissioner , I must say that I tend to take Mr Holm 's line and I am glad that he has tabled the question , because it is the inconsistency of Community expenditure that worries many of us in this House .
When I last looked at this issue , I discovered that 80 % of the value of the product is in fact Community subsidy to tobacco growers - 80 % - and that is not very helpful .
The annual payment that some of the tobacco growers get is , in fact , more than the value of the land that tobacco is grown on .
So , again , there is a huge inconsistency in what the Commission is trying to achieve .
I tend to agree with alternative production , but some of these growers are very small growers indeed .
Therefore , Commissioner , I would like to suggest to you that what we should do to try and get consistency in Community expenditure is , in fact , to decouple the payment from the product .
I have a good deal of sympathy for what you say , but you should realize that you have at the same time given evidence of the fact that tobacco cannot be grown profitably in the European Union without subsidies .
So a decision has to be made : either not to provide aid , but that then means no tobacco growing ; or to keep the door open for tobacco growing , and that can only be done by granting aid .
As to whether aid to tobacco growers is currently being provided in the best possible way , that is open to discussion , and will likewise be addressed in my report .
I therefore do not wish to embark on a full discussion here and now .
I wish to point out that subsidies for tobacco production not only go to the very poorest Members of the European Union but also to countries like France , Germany and Austria , which have among the highest income per head within the Union .
Surely we should not be subsidizing very rich countries to produce what you have just said is a very unprofitable crop when there is absolutely no economic reason for doing so ?
We should do away with that completely and help , through structural funds , those countries where there is a real economic problem and help them to develop alternative crops .
Mrs Hardstaff , with the best will in the world , I cannot go along with your assertion that there are simply poor countries with poor farmers , and then rich countries with rich farmers who are not deserving of support .
Unfortunately , because of the structures which exist - even in the country with the best structures in the European Union , namely the United Kingdom - some farmers are experiencing real income problems .
It cannot , I am afraid , be inferred from the fact there are many wealthy farmers in the UK that those who do have problems there deserve no support .
We cannot discuss the matter on this basis .
Question No 58 by Gerard Collins ( H-0427 / 96 )
Subject : Emergency aid for Nyre Valley sheep farmers
Has the Commission been made aware of the freak snow storms in the Nyre Valley , Co . Waterford , Ireland last March which resulted in large scale losses of sheep and has the Commission been requested by the Irish Government to make emergency aid available to the Nyre Valley farmers ?
Will the Commission now bring forward proposals to aid the many farmers who have had to endure large scale losses as a result of the abnormal weather conditions ?
Mr President , the Commission is aware of the difficulties referred to in the question , which were caused by this snow storm and the freak weather conditions in the Nyre Valley in Ireland .
However , I can tell you that the Irish authorities have not sought assistance from the Commission .
The reason is very simple : as you know , the Community is not responsible for disaster relief and protection , which is the responsibility of the Member States . Support measures or emergency aid in the case of adversities caused by the weather can therefore only be provided at national level .
As the author is not present Question No 59 lapses .
Question No 60 by Christine Crawley ( H-0453 / 96 )
Subject : Job losses in agricultural industries
What does the Commission estimate is the number of jobs lost and under threat in the European Union , in agriculture-related industries as a result of the BSE crisis and subsequent export bans ?
What mechanisms for monitoring the effect on jobs has the Commission put into place , and what support will the Commission be making available to those people and industries affected by the BSE crisis ?
The Commission has no precise statistics on how many jobs have been lost , or are at risk , in the processing industry , in slaughterhouses or in the cattle trade , as a result of the BSE crisis .
We do not possess such information .
It goes without saying , however , that the Commission is well aware of the problems and has begun to consider how they can best be minimized .
One of the most important short-term measures which we have taken in this context is of course intervention .
If , with the aid of intervention , we can compensate to some extent for the current slackness of the market and hasten a return to more normal market conditions , then that is the best thing we can do for those employed in this sector .
Over and above that , to my mind , it is chiefly a matter of seeking to adopt longer-term confidence-building measures to boost the consumption of beef .
Here the Commission is of course trying to help find solutions to overcome these serious difficulties and to restore consumer confidence .
Also of relevance in this context - and this has major implications in terms of employment - are the measures agreed for animals over 30 months old which have recently been put into effect in the United Kingdom .
The same applies to the measures , still to be agreed , which are intended to accelerate the eradication of the BSE disease .
I believe that all these measures , taken together , do provide some relief in these difficult circumstances .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
I find it disappointing given the scale of the crisis that we have with BSE that the Commission has not yet asked for figures or started to look at the monitoring of the situation as far as jobs are concerned beyond the measures that the Commissioner has spoken about such as intervention and confidence-building .
It is the Commission 's responsibility to produce an annual employment report in the European Union and therefore I would suggest that it is very important that the Commission actually starts some scheme of monitoring the jobs and the sectors that are under threat in this crisis .
I know anecdotally , as an individual Member of the European Parliament , that there are thousands of jobs under threat across the European Union because of the BSE crisis , not only in my own constituency , but in many of the European Union countries outside the United Kingdom .
So I believe that it is important for the Commission to take this very seriously .
I would ask what steps the Commission intends to take to ask for figures from the Member States on the threat to jobs and jobs that have already disappeared because of the BSE crisis ?

Perhaps I might add that certain programmes are being implemented on a continuing basis : there are , for example , the Structural Fund resources , which can be used to assist Objective 5b or 5a areas , and which could be applied to support the restructuring of the rendering industry in the United Kingdom , for instance , or to promote investment .
Other initiatives can also be taken under the Objective 3 and Objective 4 measures ; these offer very specific support .
With statistics alone , we cannot help anyone .
However , if you think it important to have precise figures on the employment situation in this sector , I shall gladly pass the matter on to my colleague Mr Flynn , who is the Commissioner responsible .
We could perhaps carry out a detailed survey , or else obtain information from the UK authorities .
Mrs Crawley 's question was about people in associated industries , the people who lost their jobs as a result of the ban , who work in the road haulage industry , the slaughterhouses , the meat-processing industry .
I asked the Scottish Office if there are any programmes we can use to help , for example Objective 5 ( a ) or Objective 5 ( b ) .
The Earl of Lindsay tells me that there are quite insurmountable obstacles in using EC structural funds .
There are detailed legal obligations which cover these measures and it is not possible to set aside these provisions .
But Objective 5 ( a ) concerns grants for marketing and processing of agricultural products .
If people are prevented from marketing or processing agricultural products , could we not use Objective 5 ( a ) funds to assist them with this particular problem that we have at the moment ?
I think we actually need to look at the scale of what is involved here .
If you think that intervention costs are lower , I would point out that across the EU , the total amount in intervention has reached 150 000 tonnes .
The cost of intervention for 100 000 tonnes is ECU 240 million .
This means that we have already spent ECU 360 m on these measures alone , to enable the animals to be slaughtered immediately , because ultimately this boosts employment in slaughterhouses .
If they are then stored in refrigerated warehouses , people are employed there too , and so on .
If you now consider that an additional 25 000 animals per week are currently being slaughtered , under the provisions on animals over 30 months old , you will get some idea of the effect this is having on employment .
I therefore believe that these large-scale measures are in fact the most important contribution in terms of employment .
Moreover , I would draw your attention to the fact that the volume of turnover is significantly greater in the United Kingdom than in many other Member States .
Although prices to farmers are low , the turnover of slaughterhouses is higher than in other Member States .
The question of employment can certainly not be seen merely in the UK context .
I should like to come back to Objective 5 ( a ) and particularly budget line 886 .
I understand that from the period from 1994 to 1999 , ECU 226.487 million were available to the UK to use for marketing and processing .
In fact I understand that the UK Government is only wanting ECU 51 million of that , therefore not taking up ECU 175.304 million .
For me that is a massive dimension of funding which could very well be invested in the UK economy to help those people in the industry .
If you were to have a request from the UK Government to reinstate that ECU 175 million to use to solve the crisis and help the workers in the industry , would you be prepared to look at that favourably and would you be prepared to released those monies to the UK ?
The figures which you have given tally exactly with my own figures .
It goes without saying that the Commission is prepared to take decisions on measures under any directive , but we do need a request from the government responsible .
As you will see from the footnote , the Commission has asked if we could take Question No 94 from Mrs Crepaz on basic foodstuffs - consumer protection .
Question No 94 by Irene Crepaz ( H-0465 / 96 / rev. 1 )

Subject : Basic foodstuffs - consumer protection
Which final products are directly or indirectly affected by the lifting of the ban on gelatine , tallow and bull semen ?
What measures have been taken to inform and protect consumers ( certificates , labelling , information campaigns ) ?
What is the Commission 's attitude to the statement made in the context of the BSE crisis that producers of basic foodstuffs should take responsibility for these ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in addition to bull semen , the final products covered by Decision 96 / 362 include products containing gelatine and tallow , which in the United Kingdom are manufactured strictly in accordance with the requirements of that decision .
Under the decision , the raw material used to manufacture these products must originate from cattle under 30 months old that are not infected with BSE or suspected of infection .
In addition , only tissue from types of raw material in which the virus has never been detected may be used .
The raw material must be processed under veterinary supervision and in accordance with the procedures laid down in the annex to the decision , whereby an independent laboratory must certify that any infectious residue which may have been present in the original materials has been rendered inactive .
The products listed in the annex must be labelled , or otherwise marked , with details of the manufacturer and the manufacturing process , and must bear a certificate of fitness for consumption issued by a veterinary official .
The composition of the final products is visible to the consumer from the list of ingredients , which must appear on the label pursuant to Directive 79 / 112 on the labelling of foodstuffs .
The Commission will consider the question of extending the rules on product liability to primary producers in the context of its current work on preparing a green paper on food legislation .
Thank you for your comprehensive reply , Commissioner .
I just have a brief supplementary question . The health of consumers really should be our overriding concern , and with regard to final products we now know , for example , that gelatine is contained in cake glazes and in jelly-babies , which are so popular with children .
Can you assure me , with a clear conscience , that these do not contain any pathogens , and that they represent absolutely no health risk to consumers ?
And with regard to bull semen , can you state with a clear conscience that no disease can be transmitted through it ?
In reply to your last question concerning bull semen , I can say the following : we based our decision on the view of the experts on the Scientific Veterinary Committee , according to whom there is no risk associated with bull semen .
As far as gelatine and tallow are concerned , perhaps I might describe the present situation once again : firstly , we asked the scientists to define a procedure which ensures that any possible trace of the BSE virus is inactivated , in other words destroyed .
Secondly , we have stipulated that every manufacturer of gelatine and tallow in the United Kingdom must obtain a licence from the British Government .
Thirdly , we have ensured that only certain specific products may be used to manufacture gelatine and tallow , namely those which I have already described .
Only such tissue may be used .
Fourth , the British Government is obliged to inform the Commission as soon as it awards a licence to an industrial company .
Fifth , the Commission carries out an inspection in the UK - and invites all the other Member States to join it - and only once all these matters have been resolved to our satisfaction will the Commission formally decide that a particular British company may once again place gelatine or tallow on the market .
Even then , every consignment must be accompanied by a certificate from the veterinary official , stating that all the rules have been complied with during the production process , and indicating the frequency of inspections carried out in that company by the veterinary official .
In effect , this means that we now have a blueprint for the future , and it is now up to the British Government - and of course the industry in Britain - to see how rapidly they can adapt their procedures so as to meet the requirements for safe production and enable these inspections to be carried out .
No one can say at present when exports of gelatine will in fact be resumed .
Question No 61 by Roy Perry ( H-0474 / 96 )
Subject : BSE
The significant difference between the large number of cases of BSE in the United Kingdom and the declared cases of BSE in other Member States has been partly attributed to the United Kingdom 's greater vigilance and understanding of this disease .
BSE has only recently become a notifiable disease , and it is evident that this disease has not been as closely monitored in other Member States in comparison with the United Kingdom .
Does the Commission consider the statistical evidence of BSE to be both accurate and equivalent for all Member States , and has it set up a mechanism whereby cases of BSE can be accurately monitored and confirmed throughout the EU ?
Mr President , according to the latest information , the most likely cause of the BSE epidemic is the feeding of cattle with meat and bone meal derived from processed materials containing sheep carcasses affected by scrapie .
The unusually high incidence of BSE in the United Kingdom , compared with the other Member States , can be attributed to various factors .
A risk assessment of these factors has revealed that the circumstances which can cause such a high incidence of the disease , and also a high prevalence of scrapie - a change in the method of processing carcasses and a high proportion of meat and bone meal in feed - exist to this extent only in the UK .
BSE became a notifiable disease throughout the Community under Decision 90 / 130 / EEC , in the context of Council Directive 89 / 894 .
Commission Decision 94 / 474 / EC stipulates that where carcass inspections reveal clinical signs of BSE , such animals must be confiscated and their brains examined for BSE .
The Commission has arranged training courses for national experts on issues relating to the detection of BSE , so as to ensure that all the Member States are adequately equipped to diagnose it .
The Scientific Veterinary Committee , having examined the question of disease monitoring by means of sample checks , concluded that such a procedure would be unlikely to contribute significantly to detection of the small amounts of the BSE virus which might exist in the Member States .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply but I have to say that farmers in my constituency say to me they have grave doubts about the validity of statistics in other countries of the European Union which are very low compared with the United Kingdom .
Only this weekend there are reports from scientists in such places as the Dutch Institute of Science and Health and Tübingen University , which throw grave doubts on the figures coming from other European countries .
Between 1985 and 1989 57 , 000 cattle from the United Kingdom were exported to countries in the European Union .
Had they remained in Britain those scientists would have expected something like 1 , 600 cases of BSE to be declared .
In reality only 30 cases have been declared and I repeat the question : does the Commission have any system at all for monitoring and validating the statistics that are coming from these other countries ?
Has he any comments on these reports now coming from European scientific foundations ?
Mr President , the Commission keeps the scientists informed continuously both of the detailed statistics and the most recent history of the disease , and frequent discussions also take place in meetings of the BSE subcommittee of the Scientific Veterinary Committee .
The fact that , to date , 99 % of cases have occurred in the United Kingdom and only around one per cent in all the other countries of the world is not attributable to other countries being less meticulous as regards the obligation to notify the disease .
This disease is notifiable in all countries , and we can therefore assume that the Member States are fulfilling their responsibilities in this respect .
It would also be very useful in future - although a good deal of research is still needed - if we could find out not just after an animal has been stricken with BSE that the sickness has occurred , but could also test for the disease , as it were .
That is why I have asked the so-called Weissmann Group to propose some research projects , so that such tests might become a reality as soon as possible .
That would considerably facilitate the handling of this disease .
That concludes Question Time . Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.27 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Practice of the profession of lawyer ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0146 / 96 ) by Mrs Fontaine , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive ( COM ( 94 ) 0572 - C4-0125 / 95-94 / 0299 ( COD ) ) to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained .
Mr President , the draft directive which is the subject of this debate has two objectives : on the one hand , to give effect to the freedom of establishment of lawyers within the European Union by means of a specific directive ; and , on the other , to facilitate the participation of legal experts in crossborder commercial operations in which , by virtue of the very nature of the internal market , international , Community and national legislation are increasingly overlapping .
There is no reason why these two objectives should conflict , but nor are they are necessarily complementary , as this draft directive makes clear .
Indeed , certain safeguards built into the draft directive , and which can be seen as an attempt to ensure expert advice in cross-border operations , do themselves represent obstacles to the freedom of establishment , such as the restriction of the practice period and the retention of aptitude tests .
These restrictions , if applied , would give rise to different conditions for the practice of the profession in a host Member State for migrant lawyers and lawyers who are nationals of that Member State , and this would obviously be a violation of the right of establishment , which is based on the principle of equal conditions .
Certainly , it is not all negative .
The draft directive has some positive aspects which I have no difficulty in recognizing , such as the satisfactory solution to the question of professional and ethical rules ; the establishment of the possibility of group practice ; and the completion , in spite of the restrictions I have referred to , of the Community legal framework for the freedom of establishment of lawyers .
However , the amendments proposed by the rapporteur - which , as she herself said , are the product of a compromise - markedly improve the draft directive , especially those aimed at guaranteeing the right to maintain more than one place of work within the Community , strengthening consumer protection and safeguarding the independence of the legal profession and the right to practise independently .
Finally , I am obliged to say that we should have taken liberalization much further and deleted all references to temporal restrictions , including the requirement of three years ' regular pursuit of an activity involving the law , which I regard as a lesser evil .
In these restrictions , certain features of the type of corporatism which I reject survive , although a reasonable effort to achieve a compromise has been made . Naturally , on behalf of my group , I support that effort .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the peculiarities of the British legal system , with the division of the legal profession into solicitors and barristers , and the peculiarities of the Romano-Germanic legal systems which apply in the majority of the other Member States , have too often resulted in a total lack of reciprocity in the freedom of lawyers to exercise their profession in another Member State .
Mrs Fontaine 's report concerns the interests of the legal profession as a whole .
It deals in particular with the question of the right of migrant lawyers to practise their profession permanently under their home-country professional title in another Member State .
The National Front and the Group of the European Right support the original position of the French bar , which was in favour of the automatic integration of migrant lawyers into the host-country bar and the adoption of the host-country professional title following a period of practice in that country .
Like many lawyers in France and other Member States , we have reservations as regards the possibility of practising permanently under the home-country professional title , without any limit of time .
And like the French bar , we are opposed to the absence of genuine controls and restrictions on the activities of migrant lawyers in host Member States .
We also wish to protect the interests of citizens subject to the law , and we are calling for genuine and de facto equal treatment of lawyers registered in France , for example , and migrant lawyers .
In particular , fiscal and public service constraints must not be a burden on host-country lawyers alone .
The French bar expressed its opposition to the first draft of this report , which it considered to be prejudicial to the profession .
Mrs Fontaine and her colleagues in the Legal Affairs Committee have finally drawn up a compromise text .
We pay tribute to the rapporteur 's considerable efforts , but we are not entirely satisfied with the resulting text , in which , against all the odds and with a great deal of perseverance , she has managed to combine a variety of points of view .
It is for this reason that we are reserving our position on the report and the draft directive .
Mr President , the draft directive on the practice of the profession of lawyer is the outcome of fruitful cooperation between the Commission , Parliament and the profession concerned , aimed at achieving a balanced text which effectively ensures the freedom of establishment , whilst retaining certain essential safeguards .
Following the adoption of the general directive on the mutual recognition of qualifications , the bars of Europe - with the exception of the Luxembourg bar , which bowed out from the start - took the view that there was a need for a specific directive to give full effect to the 1988 directive , and not to restrict its scope , as Mr Wijsenbeek seems to believe , if I understood him correctly .
The profession , as represented by the Consultative Committee of the Bars and Law Societies of the European Community , worked hard on this project for a number of years .
The CCBE made sufficient progress to convince the Commission of the need to submit a proposal for a directive , but not to achieve the very broad consensus necessary for the adoption of the text .
We undoubtedly owe it to the authority , patience and persistence of Mrs Fontaine that it was possible for the profession and the European Parliament to overcome the remaining obstacles and reach agreement on the text submitted to us .
I should like to make two comments concerning this text .
Firstly , the debate has understandably centred on the remaining obstacles : aptitude tests , and the right to practise under the home-country professional title .
However , this should not lead us to forget the other important provisions of the text .
I am thinking in particular of those concerning joint practice , which should enable our bars to compete on an equal footing with large-scale United States and Japanese practices , which have never needed directives in order to cream off the legal market in Europe by playing on our divisions .
My second comment concerns the particular question of the right to practise under the home-country professional title , an issue on which , as was pointed out a few moments ago , the French bar is especially sensitive .
I believe that the proposed text gives the necessary assurances .
It clearly makes migrant lawyers practising under their home-country title subject to the regulations , codes of conduct and disciplines of the bars of host Member States .
Lastly , Amendment No 35 , which provides a useful clarification of the integration mechanism that is being established , will meet the expectations expressed by a number of bars , including in particular the Paris bar .
It now remains for the Council to put the finishing touches to the text , with the help of Mr Monti .
Is it being overoptimistic to hope that it will do so quickly ?
The adoption of this directive has been dragging on for some ten years now - if not for the 17 or 18 years of other directives .
In any event , it is undoubtedly desirable to consolidate the consensus which has been achieved on Mrs Fontaine 's report without delay .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive which we are discussing today is undoubtedly one of those measures which , to paraphrase Robert Schuman , strengthen the building of Europe .
And this measure , like so many others , bears the hallmark of men and women who have proved capable of overcoming national fears and prejudices in the interests of a European vision of Europe , as Carl J. Friedrich says in his book ' Europa : Das Entstehen einer Nation ' .
Besides your own name , Commissioner - and I wish to echo the praise of previous speakers - that of the rapporteur , Nicole Fontaine , a French and European lawyer , whose good offices will for ever be associated with this directive , stands out on this list .
And I should also like to place on record , in the report of Parliament 's proceedings , the efforts of another lawyer , this time European and German - Hans Weil , who from his position as chairman of the CCBE , the legal profession 's representative body in the European Union , illuminated the debate with his intellectual honesty and rigour .
Tomorrow 's vote will therefore have the particular importance of setting out the future of Europe 's legal profession .
At the same time , however , it will be of general importance , since the issue under discussion goes beyond the strictly professional domain to encompass European society as a whole , and to encompass the citizens whom this Parliament represents - because indeed , we lawyers are the ' voices of the law ' , to use the fortunate expression coined by Alfonso X , Spanish and European king , in his compilation of the laws of Castile .
The debate on this directive in committee brought to the surface the most obscure national fears and the most deep-seated mistrust between those of us who are called upon to pursue this common project of social , cultural and political integration , based on the rule of law .
In the face of such mean-spirited and short-sighted attitudes , the Committee on Legal Affairs , led by the rapporteur , has managed to achieve through the amendments a comprehensive solution which is both prudent and courageous - as Mr Rothley rightly pointed out - and which I am sure will receive the overwhelming support of the House tomorrow .
For let no one doubt the fact : European integration must be based on the rule of law .
Europe will be a Community of law , or it will be nothing - in other words , it will rapidly return to being what , strictly speaking , it has never ceased to be : a single market governed by the prevailing economic forces .
Europe will be a Community of law , or it will be nothing .
And this project will only be consolidated if professionals in the legal arts , especially lawyers , become aware of their social function and prove capable of rising above the particularities of national legal systems , to build Europe on the acquis communautaire represented by the general principles of the law , as refined by our legal history and embodied in the Union 's founding treaties .
For if lawyers are not capable of ensuring that the general takes precedence over the particular , of emphasizing that which unites over that which divides , can we realistically expect this attitude from those who are not specialists in the law , which is the art of integration par excellence ?
Lawyers must prove capable of recognizing the fact that the principle which ultimately governs acceptance of a case is the ethical obligation not to participate in a lawsuit , not to give advice , without sufficient knowledge .
And this rule requires a Spanish lawyer , for example , not to take part in a case involving the statutory provisions of a Catalan will , although his professional title formally permits him to do so , in exactly the same way as it requires him not to participate in a case involving German inheritance law .
It should not be forgotten that what prevents him from taking part in these cases is the responsibility imposed by his professional code of conduct not to participate without sufficient technical knowledge .
I am coming to the end , Mr President .
I referred to the social function of lawyers .
The legal profession is faced with the exciting challenge of combining the inevitably commercial aspects of the practice of the law with its social function .
Because its ultimate raison d 'être , beyond any other consideration , is to defend our citizens , our fundamental rights and public freedoms , and the spiritual heritage which constitutes the foundations of European civilization .
Clearly , the creation of an area of freedom and security is everyone 's joint task .
But lawyers will play a particularly important role in this respect .
As the voices of the law , they must speak out clearly and firmly in defence of the law and justice , and in defence of Europe , in order to ensure that the European Union provides a reference point and an incentive in a world of turmoil .
Mr President , following a virtually unanimous request put forward by lawyers , the Commission has presented a proposal for a directive , which we are now discussing .
The general directive from 1988 on the acknowledgement of qualifications with respect to this sector has proved poor and inadequate , since most Member States of the EU have chosen an alternative permitted by the directive involving the introduction of a compulsory aptitude test for professional practice , which in reality has hindered the free practice of the profession of lawyer .
It is regrettable that despite the experience gained from the regulations in force and from the practice of the European Court of Justice , the Commission has not presented an amended proposal to this general directive nor a proposal which would at least make the free movement of lawyers possible .
I consider this free movement to include not only the free movement of practising lawyers , but also the actual freedom to offer one 's services .
The Commission has however chosen to give a special sectoral directive and to maintain the principle on a restrictive aptitude test .
Today the Committee on Legal Affairs is proposing 27 amendments , by which fundamental changes are made to the Commission 's proposal .
The purpose of these amendments is to increase the opportunities for a lawyer of one Member State to establish himself in another Member State .
The committee proposes that it would be possible to practise the profession of lawyer in all Member States provided that the lawyer permanently uses the professional title from his own country .
The group that I represent is not certain whether the proposal put forward by the Committee on Legal Affairs in principle is consistent and logical .
We have therefore presented amendments with the purpose of emphasizing that each lawyer has the right to move to a Member State other than where he has qualified for the profession and to practise the profession in accordance with the regulations of the host Member State .
May I ask the Commission to give its view in detail on the amendments put forward by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the group that I represent .
Finally I would like to congratulate Mrs Fontaine on an excellent report .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Fontaine on her excellent report , on which there are a number of comments I wish to make .
With this report , we are at something of a crossroads .
The legal professions , of which lawyers are one of several - business trustees , notaries and the like - are of course based on their national legal systems .
In recent years , however , there has been a growing need within the European Union for these professions - to which I myself belong - to look beyond national borders .
This has obviously made it necessary to get to grips with other legal systems .
I am not in favour of compartmentalizing this profession by erecting an artificial barrier to access , and the report says the same thing .
On the other hand , the legal safety of the citizens in our countries is at stake .
That means devising a system which will serve two purposes : on the one hand , free access to the profession must be guaranteed , in any country of the European Union ; and , on the other , a lawyer must have sufficient knowledge of the legal system concerned to ensure that clients and companies receive the best possible advice .
I believe that the Commission 's proposal - to lay down a clear definition of this professional title throughout Europe - is a very good one ; the discussion about whether lawyers can operate in joint practice , or in companies with share capital or partnerships , is also very welcome , because I think that this question will be of particular relevance to the profession in the future .
The functions of lawyers should not , in my opinion , be seen in narrow terms , but they should also be regarded as business advisers .
In the future , it will certainly be necessary to do this .
If these directives and the debate on them open up such a prospect , then the report is a good starting-point for a very fruitful discussion .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Fontaine and colleagues on the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for their considered and intelligent discussion of this topic .
This is an important plank in the freedom to establish services and the completion of the single market .
It gives room for recognition of the fact that lawyers can practice under home title in other countries .
It is particularly important for lawyers in England and Wales as English law is an international commercial law .
It is particularly important in the areas of shipping contracts , i.e. charter parties , commercial contracts , insurance , reinsurance , banking contracts and rescheduling of debts , which often specify English law as a law-governing contract even though neither of the parties is of English origin .
I would like to flag up one linguistic problem .
Amendments Nos 25 and 35 should state ' public interest ' and not ' public order ' as has been translated .
In conclusion , this is the usual understated , erudite competence which we expect and usually find from Mrs Fontaine .
Mr President , the report that we are scrutinizing today is a compromise .
A compromise which embraces various approaches and attempts to indicate ways forward on the important issue of the practice of the profession of lawyer in a country other than that in which the qualification was obtained .
However , Mr President , I do not think that it matters very much that the result of so much time-consuming hard work , which has been overwhelmingly approved in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the plenary and accepted by the great majority of the administrative councils of the Bars and Law Societies of the European Community , is a compromise .
Of much greater importance , in my view , is the quality of the compromise , and in that regard Mrs Nicole Fontaine deserves all our congratulations .
Because this compromise , as set out in her report , leads in the right direction .
It gives real meaning to freedom of establishment .
It constitutes an advance for the Union and for Europe .
We are getting rid of provisions which , essentially , have perpetuated protectionism and cast doubt on our reason - how else could the imposition of examinations on professionals who have practised their profession for years be explained . So I think that we should all accept that Mrs Fontaine 's compromise is a good step forward .
On such a subject it is only natural that many people should have had reservations and objections .
We in Greece , too , have had a lot of difficulties .
Just as an example , I can mention the problem of the establishment of law firms in Greece via a particular method and with elements that are not applicable in other European countries .
Of course , we all had to surmount those problems rather than persist with reservations which would have worked against the solutions put forward today by Mrs Fontaine .
I followed at close hand the first stage of this substantial and lengthy endeavour of hers which has led to today 's outcome , and I think that both she and the Committee on Legal Affairs , and , from tomorrow , the whole of Parliament , will be able to feel well-satisfied with the new prospect that has been opened up .
Mr President , firstly , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , on this report on the proposal for a directive on the practice of the profession of lawyer .
I believe that ensuring the freedom to practise the profession of lawyer throughout the European Union represents a further step towards achieving the political integration of the Union and guaranteeing the democratic rights of all its citizens .
We must interpret the rules concerning access to the professional title of a host Member State , whereby automatic entry to the bar is prevented and a period of practice in the host country is required , as a positive step which in the short term will enable the system to function and , in the long term , may be adapted to new circumstances .
The current problems may well be simply the kind of temporary difficulties which are characteristic of an adaptation period - a period which will pave the way for the proper functioning of the system in the future .
Furthermore , I welcome Amendment No 7 to Article 1 , which provides for the establishment of the professional title ' lawyer ' in all the official languages of the Spanish state . It is a good thing that this recognition of all Spain 's official languages should appear in a text concerning the profession of lawyer , since lawyers are traditionally the most important defenders of human rights and the collective rights of peoples .
Mr President , I should firstly like to congratulate Mrs Fontaine on her excellent report and thank her for the understanding that she has shown throughout her work for Luxembourg 's special circumstances .
The Luxembourg bar currently has 620 lawyers , 27 % of whom are non-nationals .
This is clearly proof that the free movement of lawyers is a reality in Luxembourg .
Furthermore , national and non-national lawyers in Luxembourg coexist in a harmonious and collegiate way , and the user of legal services - the citizen - has confidence in lawyers registered with the Luxembourg bar , whatever their nationality , because he has the assurance - since all these lawyers have received specific training in Luxembourg law , which is different from French , Belgian , German or any other law - of being properly defended before the courts by lawyers who know both their job and Luxembourg law , as well as the specific jurisprudence of the country .
If this new directive is applied , what is in danger of happening ?
Firstly , the user of legal services will no longer know where he stands .
Will the lawyer he chooses be familiar with Luxembourg law or not ?
There will be a risk of being poorly defended before the courts , and this will lead consumers to choose their lawyers according to nationality , something which at present does not happen in Luxembourg .
Consequently , instead of promoting the free movement of lawyers , the new directive is in danger of hindering it .
Furthermore , there will also be discrimination between national and non-national lawyers who have taken the supplementary courses in Luxembourg law and their colleagues who are admitted to the profession without having undergone the same process .
In order to protect the users of Luxembourg 's legal services , without jeopardizing the freedom of movement , and to defend the interests of lawyers of all nationalities registered with the Luxembourg bar , I have tabled two amendments . The first concerns the obligation to know the law of the host Member State , and the second concerns the requirement to be familiar with the languages legally recognized as judicial languages in the host Member State .
I should like to thank in advance all those Members who are kind enough to support these amendments .
Mr President , I too extend my congratulations to the rapporteur , especially for the compromise text that she has produced , with which I find myself overwhelmingly in agreement .
There was one very important point that I made at the committee stage which , I regret to say , has not been taken up by the services : that is to point out that Article 10 ( 3 ) should be correctly translated into English as ' public interest ' , not ' public order ' .
As colleagues are aware - particularly those who follow football and other sporting events where public disorder is very much the order of the day - it is important that the text should read correctly in all languages .
I would like your assurance that tonight the services will take this on board and that Article 10 ( 3 ) will now read ' public interest ' , and not ' public order ' .
This problem has already been dealt with by the relevant services .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to join the ranks of those congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , on her tremendous feat of having produced this excellent report .
I also welcome the objective of this report - to improve freedom of movement for lawyers by means of this specific supplementary directive - especially as the general directive fails to clarify the question of the right to practise on a permanent basis under the so-called home title , and because the aptitude test laid down in Directive 89 / 48 has often been a real obstacle to the freedom of establishment of lawyers .
Personally , however , I wonder whether the approach of the Fontaine report to solving these problems will find favour with the professional groups concerned and , more generally , if it will meet the needs of people seeking legal advice .
Guided by the Community-spirited principle of mutual trust between the Member States , Mrs Fontaine , you have drawn up a very far-reaching proposal .
Through your exemplary work , you have managed to align the position of the European Parliament with that of lawyers in many areas .
The amendments to Articles 2 and 5 of the Commission proposal , on the practice of the profession and home titles , address comprehensively what is a pressing concern of lawyers .
However , the crux of this directive is the provision in Article 10 which eases the existing requirement of an aptitude test .
This certainly goes too far : to my mind , it is not enough to guarantee automatic , complete integration after three years of effective and unbroken activity in the law of the host country , without any formal criteria .
I suggest taking up the proposal of the CCBE that an interview , rather than an examination as such , should be held .
That would , I believe , be a thoroughly fair compromise , which would in particular suit the smaller Member States .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
Satellite personal communications services
The next item is the report ( A4-0179 / 96 ) by Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision ( COM ( 95 ) 0529 - C4-0517 / 95-95 / 0274 ( COD ) ) on an action at Union level in the field of satellite personal communications services in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when Ronald Reagan launched his Strategic Defence Initiative - known as ' Star Wars ' - in the early 1980s , the general reaction was to regard it as a piece of science fiction .
The plan was for a network of satellites to monitor the entire planet in real time in order to detect enemy missiles and knock them off course , possibly using lasers .
Although the project is more than likely to be mothballed indefinitely , it had a spin-off in terms of research - initially subsidized research - into satellite technologies .
That is why America is now the leader in the field .
The main practical uses of these satellites are in telecommunications and broadcasting , services that we use very intensively .
Most telecommunications or broadcasting satellites currently in use are geostationary , orbiting at a height of 36 000 km , and of course they need to have a ' footprint ' on the earth 's surface , which is a relatively cumbersome and unwieldy arrangement .
For that reason , development work began on new technologies using satellites at lower orbits .
Some of these are at a height of 10 355 km , but there are also some in the range 7001400 km , the so-called LEOs - low earth orbit satellites - which are the subject of our debate today .
I believe there has been a lack of awareness among Europeans in recent years as regards the development and use of these new technologies .
The leaders in the field are American companies which are able to obtain licences in America but then seek to operate throughout the world .
In Europe , we have failed to give European companies a stake in this area of development .
We are merely passengers in these sectors , trying to hitch a ride without knowing exactly where we want to go or who is in the driving seat .
That is why it is vital for the industry in Europe to wake up and play a part in shaping satellite development , and in particular to have some structural involvement so that we can also then keep pace in terms of jobs .
No matter how many white papers on employment we produce , we shall never make up for any missed opportunities in this field .
The Commission has responded in the right way by stating that it has a responsibility to spur the Member States of the European Union into action .
We must keep reminding them that this particular area of satellite technology is one in which new markets will develop .
The Commission has done a good job in this respect .
Unfortunately , however , the Member States of the European Union were caught napping again at the ITU conference in Geneva last year , and allowed Bill Gates and his new company to reserve all the frequencies in individual countries throughout the world for data transmission through a system of 840 orbiting satellites .
This means that terrestrial frequencies may face new competition in a form over which Europeans no longer have any influence .
A considerable number of launchers will also be needed to put 844 satellites into orbit .
That will cost money and that is added value - and we may miss out on our share of it .
In this proposal , the Commission has asked to be involved in issuing licences and in international negotiations with third countries .
The Member States - who are not our main concern in this debate , although as rapporteur I had to bear them in mind in order to achieve a practicable result - are naturally also involved , because they are responsible for allocating frequencies .
Here in Parliament , therefore , we have proposed that in the event of a failure to agree on frequency allocation , or in international negotiations on the issue , the Commission should be given a mandate .
I hope that the Council will recognize the pragmatic nature of what we are asking for , and will not interpret it as weakness on the part of Parliament .
I am sure that the Commission will assert its rights in negotiations with the Council , so that a sensible outcome can be achieved for European companies .
I am also sure that the Commission will continue to press for a mandate from European companies and the Member States , because only recently , at the WTO conference , the Americans tried to have the whole satellite system excluded from the agreement on telecommunications .
What they were up to there is not clear .
We must be vigilant in this area , and I am sure that the Commission too will continue to take a lively interest in it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to make a number of points that I put forward in the Committee on Energy , Research and Technology , that were mentioned in my opinion and follow on quite naturally from what has just been said by the rapporteur on the substance , Mr Hoppenstedt .
There is an important difference between satellite telephone services and multimedia services via satellite .
In the case of the former , the reference is to mobile terminals whose main purpose is planet-roaming , the possibility then of travelling all around the world with just one telephone terminal .
The technology is there , the international consortia have been set up - and European industries are also involved in them - and the pilot projects are ready to get under way .
In contrast , the multimedia satellite service sector , Teledesic - that of Bill Gates , let us be clear about this - is still at the stage of technological development , particularly as regards onboard satellite processing in which interesting possibilities of technological competition between the United States and Europe remain .
Furthermore , the content of the services and the actual operators have yet to be clearly identified .
That being so , I have suggested that a clearer distinction be made in the Commission proposal for a decision between the approach to the former and the latter .
As regards satellite telephone services , given the very small number of potential operators and the relatively limited interest in Europe for that service as compared with the cellular service , GSM , there seems to be no justification for the Commission setting up a new selection procedure which would delay bringing the new services into operation .
Moreover , the fact that there are several operators means that competition is secured .
I agree with the rapporteur , however , on the need to harmonize the procedures for the award of licences , but I do not think that the role of the Commission can extend beyond that segment .
I have spoken on other occasions in the House - and Commissioner Bangemann will remember this - in favour of a ' European Federal Communication Commission ' .
I am therefore in favour of the European Union having a regulatory function but I do not believe that this dossier justifies the Commission being given responsibility for selection .
Through Amendment No 11 , however , I am suggesting that we increase research into , the promotion and regulation of multimedia satellite services , the other category in fact .
It is in that sector that the future of the information society is being played out and it will be important that Europe is not caught unprepared .
To conclude : there has been substantial agreement with the views of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the rapporteur , Mr Hoppenstedt , whom I congratulate on an excellent piece of work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Hoppenstedt has explained with his customary skill and great clarity , we are examining this evening a proposal for a decision on an action at a Union level in the field of satellite personal communications services .
In fact , a network of satellites covering the whole planet in real time already exists .
It is the bastard offspring - so to speak - of President Reagan 's ' Star Wars ' project .
This network makes possible the creation of satellite personal communications systems , which will offer the equivalent of cellular phones with a world coverage - although , of course , at a far higher cost - and will therefore be used in sparsely populated regions which are not served by cellular networks .
Substantial investment will be necessary to achieve this goal , and this opens up some interesting prospects for the European space industry .
Furthermore , it should not be forgotten that this project also covers fields other than telephony , notably multimedia communication .
A project of this importance undoubtedly requires a coordinated approach at international , and especially European level .
And it is in this context that the Commission is envisaging the adoption of a single Community procedure for selecting operators and granting licences to them .
Whilst I understand the Commission 's thinking , I have to say that , on the whole , I do not support its proposal for a decision , an attitude which is very much in line with that of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Besides the problem of the Member States ' sovereignty , which is largely ignored in the Commission proposal , there are other considerations which disturb us .
Indeed , given the small number of potential global competitors , who are bound to reach agreement on the distribution of the available spectrum , we feel that it is pointless to impose the selection of operators .
Moreover , the proposal does not seem to take account of the requirements of the draft ' licences ' directive regarding harmonization and the possibility of obtaining an authorization which is valid throughout the Community from a single regulatory body .
Even if this directive does not concern individual licences , it could provide a framework for discussions which the Commission should try to complement .
Like the rapporteur , I approve the Commission 's concern to establish a harmonized Community approach to the issue as soon as possible .
Finally , we believe that prior to any international negotiations , Community cooperation should be promoted , with a view to establishing a single position which the Commission can then defend in international forums .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Hoppenstedt 's excellent report brings us up to date on the implementation of an information infrastructure project of which the least that can be said is that it is truly global .
The strategic implications of the systems and services involved are considerable , and very important to the European market and European industry , especially in view of the global consequences of the transfers of technology from the military to the civilian sector , in particular in the United States .
At international level , the question of satellite personal communications systems and services recently took a new turn when , in the multilateral negotiations on telecommunications in the WTO , the United States decided to adopt a more intransigent attitude , threatening to exclude this sector from any future agreement . At present , therefore , there is no guarantee that satellite systems will be included in the final commitment that the United States will make at the end of the negotiations .
Furthermore , the fact that a mechanism exists in the United States for granting space segment licences will give rise to discrimination against systems of non-US origin .
The Commission 's initial draft has provoked strong opposition from a number of Member States . This is mainly for institutional reasons , since it provides for implementing procedures which are difficult to accept - especially as regards the powers attributed to the Commission - and give rise to serious doubts as to their conformity with the Treaty .
In view of the new situation created by the state of the negotiations in the WTO , it is essential to harmonize the negotiating positions within the Council as soon as possible , and to refer to the mechanisms provided for in the draft directive on licences when it comes to matters concerning the harmonization of authorization conditions and the content of terrestrial segment licences .
The amendments adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , at the instigation of Mr Malerba in particular , make some important improvements in this respect , for example the removal of the questionable mechanism for the selection of space segment operators by the Commission .
Another step in the right direction is the proposed integration of the rules on the terrestrial infrastructure for satellite personal communications services into the harmonized system of licences and authorizations .
In the view of the UPE Group , the proposed amendments in the international section also help to improve the draft decision , except for the possibility of giving the Commission a mandate to negotiate the allocation of frequencies within the ITU , in place of the Member States .
There does not appear to be any good reason for such a delegation of authority , which would also seem to be incompatible with the current statutes of that organization .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Hoppenstedt , but also take the opportunity of making the following comment of my own : when will the Commission finally submit a framework directive that will allow us to debate the basic outline conditions for liberalization of the telecommunications sector and the preconditions in terms of social policy ?
And when will the common framework for general authorizations and individual licences - which the Commission has already submitted - make its progress through the legislative procedure ?
I should also like to raise some questions which , while they may be naive , concern what I regard as fundamental issues .
Firstly , there are the conditions for harmonizing selection , as referred to in the reports and by previous speakers .
I think it is clear that the Commission has consciously chosen not to make a sharp distinction between satellite-based personal communications on the one hand and broadband multimedia services on the other , in order to have an instrument that will allow it effective involvement in selection decisions in the latter area .
That is by no means an unwise move , if one recalls the saga of satellite broadcasting and the key role that it played in the establishment of private television channels .
My second point is that a market is being talked about here , and at the same time we are being told that there are currently three providers operating across the world .
I cannot help recalling the words of the great John Locke , the founder of modern liberal thinking , on the question of what constitutes a market : ' Being but two they could not agree ' .
Does this mean that if they had been three , it would have been possible to set up mutual relations based on the exchange of equivalents ? If there is anyone here who believes that , I will buy them a drink !
I should like to begin by thanking the House , and in particular Mr Hoppenstedt , for the swift response to our proposal , since in spite of all the differences between your position and ours which came across clearly in the debate , there can be no disagreement on one point , namely that if we do not act quickly , no solution will be achievable - whether it is the one proposed by the House , that sought by the Commission or a compromise between the two - because what Mr Hoppenstedt said was true : our competitors , especially in the USA , are wide awake !
They scored a partial success at the ITU conference .
They are going to invite European companies to take part in the venture , indeed they are already making moves in that direction , but Mr Hoppenstedt was also right to say that the European firms are likely to end up as passengers .
Their share will not be enough to give them a decisive role , and they will certainly not be able to determine the course of events .
There are many possible definitions of a market .
Where there is only one operator , however , there is no market , but rather a monopoly .
The problem with satellite communications , for whatever purpose they are used , is that in place of the public monopolies which existed in Member States in the past , there will now be a private monopoly .
Parliament has repeatedly warned us that while deregulation might break up public monopolies , it could open the way for private ones .
I am genuinely at a loss to understand the tone of the debate . On the one hand , while we are to remain vigilant , there is thought to be relatively little chance of our competitors turning their lead into actual monopoly positions ; on the other , our proposals are dismissed as an understandable but basically unacceptable attempt by the Commission to acquire new powers .
That is certainly not what we are doing , and the selection procedure , which has attracted various comments in the debate , must definitely not be the norm .
It may even be that it is the exception , and we go so far as to assume that that will be the case .
To that extent , we do not regard the arguments which have been put forward here in favour of the amendments as being conclusive .
Of course the House was right to make the point in the debate that satellite personal communications will come under the general ' licences ' directive which is soon to be approved .
However , that directive does not address issues of harmonization - which are certainly not covered by individual licences - and nor are there any plans for the coordination of decisions by the individual countries in good time , and that is the crucial factor .
I have always had the greatest respect for Mr Hoppenstedt 's contribution in this area , even before I took over this portfolio on behalf of the Commission , but I must be absolutely frank about one thing , and Mr Hoppenstedt knows that it is a point of difference between us .
What Parliament is proposing here with these amendments may well be the position which eventually emerges as a compromise from the Council .
That is quite possible , and we can only hope that a compromise does emerge .
But in terms of tactics and strategy , I think it is illadvised to open discussions with the Council from such a position , and that is why we are against allowing individual national licences which would merely be coordinated .
Such a system will not be in place in time and it will not work , quite apart from the fact that in some cases , Mr Caudron , there are inherent anomalies , for example if every Member State has to issue individual satellite licences .
Luxembourg is a country for which I have the very greatest respect , but I have to query the idea of one or more satellites intended for use in satellite personal communications in the European Union having to be authorized in Luxembourg .
I can adapt to many things , but you must forgive me if I have some difficulties with that .
What I am saying is that we agree with the House on the need for action .
However , I am not sure that the Council will move sufficiently on the basis of what Parliament is proposing here .
Nor do I see why a distinction should be made between systems that use the frequencies assigned to mobile telephony services and broadband multimedia systems , which also operate on higher frequencies .
In terms of regulatory policy , the two categories are quite comparable , and I do not think the difference in use is a justification for separating them .
Let me end by saying that I have felt during this debate as if I was arguing with the Council .
I will leave it to the House to decide whether or not that is a compliment .
Thank you very much , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Two or three-wheel motor vehicles
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0199 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C40149 / 96-00 / 0470 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on certain components or characteristics of two or three-wheel motor vehicles ( rapporteur : Mr Barton ) .
Mr President , firstly I should like to congratulate all the individuals and organisations who have contributed to creating the compromise package before Parliament on the future of two- and threewheel vehicles .
I give particular praise to individual bikers who have directly lobbied their Members in all Member States and in a very responsible manner argued for measures which will improve safety , reduce pollution and tackle the very real problems created by an irresponsible minority of bikers who ride bikes with very noisy exhaust systems .
The European Union as a whole needs to learn the lessons pioneered by the European Parliament ; that good legislation is only made possible when you have constructive dialogue with the citizens who are directly affected .
This exercise has been made possible in this case because of the work of national and international bikers ' rights organisations coordinated by the Federation of European Motorcyclists , or FEM .
I should pay a special tribute to their secretary-general , Simon Millward .
This process stands as a classic example of how to connect the citizen to the workings of Europe .
The Council must now take this backing seriously , unlike when it responded at first reading .
It is simply not acceptable for the Council to ignore practical proposals such as the one that would make it unlawful to trade in illegal , noisy exhaust systems .
These are the systems that create the greatest nuisance and give biking in general a bad name .
Nor can we allow manufacturers to brand specify replacement parts such as tyres .
The customer must be allowed to choose from a range of suitable replacement parts as long as they meet the relevant technical and safety specifications .
By way of an example , a manufacturer such as BMW cannot require that only , say , Pirelli tyres could be fitted as a replacement when , for example , Dunlop or other manufacturers had made perfectly suitable and possibly , in some cases , superior alternative tyres .
Parliament 's package requires that before we agree the next stage of controls on noise and emissions joint research should be done with riders ' organisations and manufacturers to ensure that realistic and practical proposals are forthcoming .
If the Council 's position on anti-tampering was not amended , riders would be discouraged from the maintenance periodically needed to minimize pollution levels .
After all , it would be ironic if such proposals were by default to jeopardize the future of two- and three-wheel vehicles .
Motorbikes have a positive role to play in providing an economical as well as an enjoyable form of personalized transport , causing far less congestion and pollution than their four-wheel counterparts .
I urge Parliament to approve en bloc all the amendments tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy with the exception of Amendment No 3 , which hopefully will be replaced by a new compromise amendment , Amendment No 20 .
Sadly it seems inevitable that the Council will not immediately embrace our amendments .
Nevertheless there is one message that it must understand : if the European Union is to be connected with the everyday concerns of its citizens on biking or , for that matter , any other subject it can only do so in dialogue with the people directly affected .
Parliament has conducted a meaningful dialogue on this item and we will not take kindly to that work being ignored by ministerial officials meeting in secret .
A very important democratic principle is at stake .
Mr President , we could have a very interesting discussion on what Mr Barton has said about the people concerned by this directive .
This is precisely what I wish to talk about .
For those who view motorcycle noise from the other side , the non-bikers who mainly see only the negative aspects of biking , this has been a very difficult debate , because when one interest group makes itself heard as loudly as those representing the heavy bikers , it is difficult for Parliament not to side with them .
Given that the representatives of the non-bikers have not made themselves heard at all , I think that we in the House have actually done quite a reasonable job .
Exhaust emission requirements are to be tightened up and the possibilities for tampering with engines drastically curtailed .
However , when it comes to noise , major concessions have been made compared with , for example , a voluntary directive which has been in force in the Netherlands and Germany since 1978 .
What Parliament is now proposing is much less strict on noise levels and the measuring methods used .
Personally , I think this sends out entirely the wrong signal both to users and the industry .
All motorcycles sold in the Netherlands and Germany already meet strict standards , measured using even stricter methods .
The main argument put forward by the biking lobby , that these stricter standards will mean the end of air-cooled engines , is manifestly wrong if you look at which models are sold in the Netherlands and Germany .
The real argument is probably that less noise will mean less engine capacity , which leads me to suspect that the lobby we have been talking to mainly involved ' superbikers ' .
But the Council also has no room to talk .
The real problem is with souped-up engines and illegal exhaust systems , but up to now it has rejected every compromise proposed by those who take the noise problem seriously .
This fortunately includes the rapporteur and many bikers themselves , who have called for steps to be taken to enforce greater compliance with existing noise limits .
I sincerely hope that the negotiations that we will certainly have to hold with the Council and the Commission will produce satisfactory solutions to the problems of noise and the use of illegal exhaust systems .
Mr President , I think we need to go for the conciliation procedure .
The Council has refused to incorporate our amendments from the first reading in the common position , so I think Parliament now needs to show that it means business . We must be sure that we get the 314 votes we need tomorrow , but they must be votes based on the facts of the issue , not used as a negotiating tactic , which is the approach the Council seems to be taking .
And I would bet a good European motorbike that we win , Commissioner , then we can both ride on it .
The Council is playing a strange kind of game .
On the one hand we have the 80 decibel limit , but since the first reading the Council has come up with the idea of using the highest result of the four measurements instead of the average , which actually brings it down to 78 decibels in practice .
Terribly environmentally-friendly , do you not think ?
In fact , it is not .
As Mr Metten has already said , the Council is refusing to deal with the problem of illegal exhaust systems , so all this is just window-dressing really .
Not even the rules as they stand at the moment are being obeyed , and the police , for example in Amsterdam , are sitting with their hands in their pockets .
So simply tightening up the rules will not achieve anything .
I would ask Mr Bangemann whether the proposed measuring system has been influenced in any way by pressure from the Germans , whose technical skills could give BMW a major competitive advantage .
We need to have standards that are realistic and likely to gain public support .
So we should go for 82 decibels and a total ban on the production and sale of illegal exhaust systems , because they are the root of the problem , not the decibel level .
Anti-tampering is only useful in this context to prevent category-hopping .
What the Council means is upgrading a moped to a small motorbike , and a small motorbike to a large one .
But it has missed the point here , because all marking and plating does , even for larger bikes , is to create more red tape .
The idea of using shear-bolts too will mean an enormous increase in costs for European bikers , who already find it expensive enough to maintain their machines .
Finally , let us make an appeal to the bikers themselves .
82 decibels and an average measurement result are fine , but be strict with yourselves and with others .
Do not allow those who spoil things for everyone and flout the rules to get away with it .
Help the police to take effective action against offenders .
Cooperate with the police .
Then there will be no need to change the rules in 2001 , as Amendment No 20 calls for .
I am looking up at the public gallery when I say : the ball is in your court .
Mr President , in my opinion the Council has given way to Parliament on a number of issues .
Parliament seems intent on pandering to the bikers , so that as far as the House is concerned they can go on making as much noise and creating as much pollution as they like .
A very sad state of affairs , in my opinion .
As Mr Metten said , on the one hand we have the bikers , who seem to revel in noise , fumes and dirt , and on the other we have the powerlessness of those who , as far as Parliament is concerned , simply have to accept that these young people have the right to come and disturb them .
I would invite the rapporteur , the Commissioner and all the Council ministers to visit our river dykes and listen to the noise of the hundreds of motorbikes that come to shatter the peace of the local inhabitants from Ascension Day onwards and throughout the summer .
I cannot understand why we have to protect the bikers ' interests , and not the interests of these poor people .
Why should they have to stay inside with their doors and windows shut ?
I find it both incomprehensible and disgraceful .
The possibilities for technical progress which Parliament usually regards as so important when it comes to environmental issues are being completely ignored here .
The rapporteur is under pressure from the bikers ' lobby to which he himself belongs and which is still not content .
Mr Barton has tried to sink any attempt to tighten up the regulations .
The vast majority of my group remain totally opposed to giving any ground on harmful emissions or noise at second reading .
I really cannot understand what is happening here , and I can only hope that the Council will stick to its guns in the next round .
Mr President , on a point of order , it was mentioned that I was part of the bikers ' lobby .
As an elected Member for all citizens in my constituency I take great exception to being considered part of the bikers ' lobby .
I will work with the bikers ' lobby and I will work with all responsible lobbies but I really resent being called part of the bikers ' lobby .
That is not true .
Mr President , the European Parliament can be quite content .
The Council has incorporated almost all its amendments from the first reading in the common position , except on the permitted noise levels , where it would not accept Parliament 's rather curious wishes .
And rightly so , in my opinion , because the noise limits originally proposed by the Commission were included in the second phase of the directive as long ago as 1987 .
The House would lose all credibility if it decided to relax the noise limits now .
Amendment No 11 would be a slap in the face for the innovative motorbike manufacturers who have voluntarily kept to the existing limits , only to be told in 1995 that they must now meet stricter requirements .
This sort of ungentlemanly conduct is not acceptable .
The bikers ' lobby argues that it is not the requirements that need to be tightened up , but how they are monitored .
They see maintenance as the problem and feel that emphasis should be laid on preventing mopeds and motorbikes from being tuned up , by banning the sale of tuning kits .
In fact , we must cover both .
Bikers who make too much noise not only spoil things for others who are out enjoying themselves , they also spoil things for other bikers who behave in a more socially responsible and environmentally-friendly way .
The anti-tampering measures are absolutely essential , as are the stricter noise limits .
But we should not be thinking of simply keeping the 1987 noise levels in force until 2006 , as Amendment No 3 proposes .
Anyone who believes that this will put us in the best possible starting position for the conciliation procedure is entirely mistaken .
In negotiations , it is extremely important that your opponent takes you seriously , which is hardly likely to be the case here .
Mr President , I should first of all like to commend all the many people , not least in Denmark , who have campaigned actively for this proposal .
There has been effective lobbying by the motorcycling population , not only members of the well-known groups , but also ordinary office workers who ride their bikes on Sunday .
They have helped to persuade the European Parliament that the positive aspects of motorcyclists ' outdoor life should be supported .
Clearly , there can be situations where motorcycle noise may be a nuisance , but the point at issue here is not whether people are sensitive to noise , and I disagree strongly with the Greens , but they are still too much under the influence of cyclists .
The point here is that the Commission has once again had its technical experts produce some fairly absurd regulations , without any regard for common sense or the realities of the outside world .
The standards for noise should match the actual situation .
And there are in fact not many people who can tell whether the noise level is higher than 82 decibels .
The Commission should concentrate instead on ensuring that the motorcycles produced in Europe do not suffer from unfair competition .
After all , unemployment is one of the worst problems in Europe today , so it cannot be of any help if we make it impossible to keep jobs in Europe by imposing unreasonable requirements on our own workplaces in the Union .
I very much welcome the substantial amount of work which Mr Barton has done on this issue , and there have been a number of creative attempts to bring the points involved home to the Commission .
Indeed , even Mr Bangemann has been for a motorcycle ride with Mr Barton to find out that Parliament 's proposals were on the right lines .
Motorcyclists are people who like the outdoor life and the quality of life , and for goodness ' sake let us stop spoiling this with stupid limits which cannot be measured .
So I would say finally to the Greens once again : this may have been a brave attempt to do something for cyclists , but I am an active cyclist myself , and I think you should stop producing such ideas , because it will end up with people selling their bicycle and buying a motorcycle instead .
Mr President , this is a strange evening .
In the previous debate , I heard the kind of arguments which I normally encounter only in the Council , and now I am listening to myself .


What I said two years ago has been said by almost every speaker except Mr Blak - and another thing , Mr Blak , I have not yet taken a motorcycle ride with Mr Barton , but I have done so with Mrs Larive and that was , if anything , more enjoyable than with Mr Barton .

However , I am also prepared to go for a ride with Mr Barton , I have no difficulty with that .
Of course I understand - and I say this to Mr Barton - that when an elected representative has a special relationship with a particular section of the population or of his electorate , he can sometimes become a mouthpiece for ideas of this kind , and that is quite legitimate , it is part of his function .
However , I cannot accept the way in which Mr Barton has sought to exceed that process today , implying that he represented the people , whilst Commissioner Bangemann represented who-knows-what .
In any event , it is not industry that I represent in this case .
I have in fact tended to assume the role of my colleague Mrs Bjerregaard .
It has always been my position that motorcycles should be subject to the same standards which Parliament applies to cars , light commercial vehicles and heavy goods vehicles .
It is not often that I agree with Mr Metten , but I was really impressed by his speech this evening .
It could have come from my own lips , and I can only congratulate him on it .

Incidentally , I found it amusing that England beat Holland 4-1 this evening , but four Dutchmen spoke after Mr Barton , so that redressed the balance .
What course of action is open to us as things stand now ?
I would say that since the Council has adopted a good many of Parliament 's amendments , we should finally bring this process to a close .
The file has now run to 657 pages !
I would therefore ask you to appreciate that I cannot accept those amendments which seek to improve on elements already agreed by the Council .
Parliament will be doing itself a favour if it decides to accept in essence what the Council has already accepted .
That is substantially more than the motorcycle lobby could have expected at the outset .
There is nothing wrong with lobbying , and of course people have to defend their interests , but motorcyclists are by no means the only people involved here .
There are also those who suffer from the activities of motorcyclists .
Mrs van Dijk reminded us of that .
I would add that you have no need to invite me to measure noise levels - invite Mr Barton and other Members of the House !
I would not wish to imply that your invitation is in any way threatening - please feel free to invite me , but not so that I can listen to motorcycle noise .
There is no need for that . From the start , I have said that we should treat this issue just as you would any other .
I am , however , prepared to accept the position previously established by Parliament , and to that extent I too am part of this democratic process and I can accept that , even if it is hard for me to swallow at times .
I would therefore propose that we should accept nine of the 20 remaining amendments , namely Nos 6 and 7 and Nos 13 to 19 .
The latter are all concerned with the procedure for measuring noise levels , and their purpose is to reinstate the text originally proposed by the Commission .
The common position made the procedure more rigorous , effectively introducing more stringent limit values .
I would point out that the measures to counter noise pollution are already tightened up considerably in the Commission 's original proposal , because we are making the optional limit values binding .
With our proposal , we are therefore roughly midway between what the Council is seeking - which is even tougher - and the significantly less stringent proposals from Parliament .
We cannot accept the remaining 11 amendments , for the following reasons : Nos 1 , 4 and 5 are at odds with the prohibition on introducing to the market equipment that does not comply with the provisions of the directive .
We have already stated that quite clearly in Article 15 of the framework directive .
We cannot accept Amendment No 2 because trailers are definitely not covered by these provisions .
Amendment No 3 seeks to postpone the date on which the limit values come into force .
If we wish to postpone the whole thing until the year 2006 , then we can let this go too .
Why not , Mrs van Dijk , seek a postponement until 2026 ?
I wonder how that would be received ?
The amendment tabled yesterday on the same subject is likewise unacceptable and would create substantial delay .
Amendments Nos 8 to 11 are intended to delete various provisions relating to anti-tampering measures .
We need to consider for a moment what is meant by anti-tampering measures - we are not concerned with DIY enthusiasts , Mr Barton , or young men who buy themselves a motorbike and then make alterations to it in an attempt to give it more power , all of which is perfectly understandable .
But with these amendments you would seek to permit , for example , any illegal modifications to motorcycles above a certain cubic capacity , in other words to big bikes .
Do I see you shaking your head ?
This is something which we really cannot accept , therefore , and for that reason we have to reject , in this context , these measures whose only purpose is to allow performance-enhancing modifications with a minimum of risk .
I would note in passing that these amendments refer to the Commission 's original text which was not queried by the Council in its common position , nor by the House at first reading ; in other words , from a purely formal point of view , the amendments are in a state of limbo , as it were , because they refer to something that has neither been proposed by the Commission nor adopted by the Council in its common position .
We are unable to accept Amendment No 12 on sound level limits .
Measures which have already been considerably diluted , because their application is to be optional , are being watered down further still , and I would say to Mrs Larive who wondered at the Council 's attitude : I wonder not at the Council on this issue , but at Parliament .
In every other area , you find fault with us .
Today we approved a programme on motor oils and its impact on emission levels for cars , a joint proposal by my colleagues Mrs Bjerregaard and Mr Papoutsis and myself , and I have no doubt that Mr Barton will tear it to shreds .
He will ask how we came to set such low limit values .
Wait and see .
Section 7 , paragraph 4 , contains the following note : ' L 'inclusion du point 4 ' .
It is in French , Mr Barton , if you would please bear with me .
France had a victory tonight too , so ...
The inclusion of paragraph 4 , ' Provisions concerning the branding of components ' , in paragraph 3 implies that the provisions concerning branding will only apply to mopeds and light motorcycles .
In that case , mediumweight and heavy motorcycles would be completely excluded from the scope of the anti-tampering measures .
( DE ) Imagine such a situation , if you would !
Caught between motorcyclists on the one hand and a group of decent people on the other , Parliament has to find a way of remaining consistent .
You must stick to the line that you have taken - and things have come to a pretty pass when you need an Industry Commissioner to tell you that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Leghold traps and pelts
The next item is the report ( A4-0151 / 96 ) by Mr Pimenta , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 95 ) 0737 - C4-0105 / 96-95 / 0357 ( SYN ) ) amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3254 / 91 prohibiting the use of leghold traps in the Community and the introduction into the Community of pelts and manufactured goods of certain wild animal species originating in countries which catch them by means of leghold traps or trapping methods which do not meet international humane trapping standards .
Mr President , the reason we have this report from Mr Pimenta today is that the Commission has back-tracked on legislation properly carried by the European Parliament and approved by the Council of Ministers .
There really is a serious problem of lack of democracy here , which we have to continue to pursue .
When the regulation of 1991 was approved it was agreed that imports of fur into the European Union from countries which had not banned this barbaric and cruel leghold trap would cease in 1995 .
We had the debate about the substantive issue back in 1990 , withstanding ferocious lobbying in the process , and we won the argument .
It is a little unfair that we have Commissioner Bjerregaard here tonight to take the flak rather than Sir Leon Brittan .
But of course this is the price of so-called collective culpability , unfortunately .
So I am sorry for Commissioner Bjerregaard .
But the collective Commission decided to operate a let-out clause and to wait for a fairy tale , which was the hope that an international committee in Geneva would come up with a humane leghold trap , thereby letting off the hook the major fur trapping countries .
So it extended the deadline for a year until 1996 .
There is and there will be no such humane trap .
So the impossible dream did not materialize and towards the end of last year the Commission started to get nervous in the face of threats from Canada to take the European Union to the WTO under GATT .
There is an available solution for the fur-trapping nations and that is to ban this leghold trap and to use some of the different kinds of methods which are available .
But let us face it ; the Canadian Government is making huge amounts of money from an industry designed for rich people to wear fur coats .
It is on quicksand as far as its arguments are concerned on this issue .
Anyone with a grain of backbone would have been able to face up to this threat .
It is perfectly clear that we have plenty of GATT clauses for legal people to argue under : Article 20 is one that comes to mind .
But the Commission decided in its infinite and arrogant wisdom that a possible and dodgy threat from a foreign government with a big vested interest in making a lot of money out of its exploited indigenous people was more important than democracy , more important than the European Union 's own law , duly enacted , more important than the interests of 350 million citizens and consumers and more important than animal welfare .
One could go on for hours about this sorry saga .
There are facts and figures that could be argued well into the night , but the essence is that the Socialist Group and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and this Parliament are outraged that the Commission sees fit to flout the democratic process of the European Union in this way .
We will not stand for it .
There is no case for the pathetic and weakkneed new proposal from the Commission , belated though it is , and it knows it .
We fully support the excellent report by Mr Pimenta which we know is based on very carefully researched facts .
There is only one way forward for democracy , for animal welfare and for a citizens ' Europe and that is to implement the original regulation and to ban imports of fur from countries which are continuing to use the leghold trap .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of the so-called leghold trap regulation is a never-ending saga : this is episode five , if we are counting in years .
Why is that ?
Could it be that we took the wrong approach in trying to exert indirect influence , through legislation , on activities which quite justifiably meet with our disapproval ?
Events would seem to support that conclusion .
Since 1991 , it has been the position that the regulation was to enter into force on 1 January 1996 .
That should have allowed sufficient time to work out the implementing provisions .
Although I was not a Member of the House in 1991 , I would point out that the aim was to see more humane trapping standards applied .
In particular , the use of leghold traps was no longer to be permitted , and rightly so .
But the regulation has failed to meet its objective in this respect .
Of course , there are various reasons why it has failed and I shall go on to analyse those reasons briefly , one of which I have mentioned already .
A dilemma then arose .
By the end of the year , no implementing provisions had been drawn up , so they could not be applied .
At this stage , the Commission submitted a fresh proposal .
It is my view that this proposal cannot possibly be approved , for a number of reasons .
For a start , both the timeframe and the objectives are very vague .
On the basis of such a regulation or proposal , negotiations could go on forever and I think that cannot be in our interest .
What is presented in this regulation is an over-simplification .
Mr Pimenta , who courageously and quite rightly chose a different approach , therefore has my best wishes .
This is an approach that we can support , although I make no secret of the fact that we have different views and expectations on certain points .
Let us consider the situation of the native peoples , especially in Canada .
Mr Pimenta does indeed mention the figure of 1045 people , the fact that wages are low , and so on .
But there is another point that we must bear in mind : in the areas where these people work and hunt , there are no species which are threatened with extinction .
There are no problems with conservation and the environment .
The people are adamant that their areas should be preserved and protected from so-called ' industrial progress ' .
Now we come to the anomaly in our approach : we are creating a situation in which a people who strongly defend the causes of animal and environmental protection - causes which we support - are suffering because of us , and may lose their livelihood .
We therefore have a duty to take account of the native peoples and what they require to make their living .
The regulation does take account of these factors to some extent , and we have tabled some amendments which should improve the position .
I hope that they will also have the support of the House .
We do not agree with the rapporteur , however , that the implementing provisions themselves should be included in the regulation .
That is the Commission 's task , which is for it to perform .
So we would remove the items in question , but I have to stress that this does not mean that we disagree with the way they have been formulated .
Basically , all the Commission has to do is copy them out .
However , we believe that their inclusion here would require the House to consider every change in detail , and we do not have the time .
We ought to bear that in mind .
It is a job for the executive , and in principle that means the Commission .
If we bear that in mind , we may find the best way to proceed .
The working party is still seeking to establish standards , and however illusory these may be , they have not yet been ruled out .
Where do you draw the line between humane and inhumane methods ?
Perhaps the working party will eventually come up with an answer to that question .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is important that we succeed in laying down international rules to enable us to reach a framework agreement on catching wild animals using traps or methods that do not involve cruelty .
The availability or otherwise of any type of trap , be it the kind that kills or the kind that restrains animals , should in any event be based on standards agreed between the States of the Union , third countries and the indigenous population , with professional trappers , those who study wild animals and veterinary experts being consulted .
The negotiations currently under way for the definition of standards for more humane traps are going well and represent a first step towards an international agreement founded on scientific knowledge and the concern better to protect animals .
That being the case , even if a final agreement has not been reached by 31 December of this year , it will be appropriate to assess the progress achieved by that point in time but not to place a radical ban on imports of pelts obtained from wild animals caught in traps .
We have , however , to bear in mind that an important part of the way of life of some indigenous peoples - the Inuit , for example - is based , for environmental reasons , on hunting and fishing which currently still represent an important economic resource .
If , on the one hand then , it is vital that a framework agreement is reached on rules on trapping without cruelty , it is also necessary that those same rules should safeguard the interests of the indigenous population .
The entry into force of the rules must also allow the countries which produce the pelts of wild animals to adapt to the legislation by guaranteeing , as requested , that the methods of capture using traps which they employ for the species contained in the list comply with the standards adopted : immediate or premature entry into force would thwart the efforts so far made to facilitate methods of capture or practices which are not cruel , but would above all put at risk the livelihood of 200 , 000 people involved in the pelt processing industry and employed in the Union .
That is a risk that we cannot accept and which can be avoided by adopting a reasonable time-scale for the entry into force of the rules .
We should bear in mind that combating unemployment is a priority not only of the individual Member States but also of the Union as a whole .
Finally , one last point : on issues of interest such as this , it would be helpful if the Commission consulted Parliament in good time and not at the last moment as has happened in this instance .
Mr President , there is really no need to go through all this again .
In 1991 , the European Environment Ministers decided to ban the import of pelts from countries where leghold traps are still used .
The ban was to come into force on 1 January 1996 , one year after leghold traps were banned in the countries of the European Union .
We were therefore totally taken aback when , at the end of last year , the Commission proposed that the import ban should be postponed indefinitely .
The Commission has yielded to pressure from the fur trade and the threat from the United States and Canada that they would fight the ban on the basis of the WTO rules .
The interests of trade are apparently more important to the Commission than democratic decisions to reduce the suffering of animals .
The European Parliament must not make the same mistake .
What happened at the end of 1995 was that Commissioner Bjerregaard lost out to Commissioner Brittan , and I think she should be ashamed that things were allowed to go so far .
The European Parliament must reverse the Commission 's decision .
I can only agree with Mr Pimenta when he says that once legislation has been proposed , the result can never be that no legislation is adopted , since this would set a precedent that would undermine the credibility of the Commission and of the whole Community decision-making process .
That would be completely unacceptable for us .
We all know that leghold traps deliberately condemn animals to a slow and lingering death , which is what makes the pelts such good quality and brings the best prices .
Leghold traps are extremely brutal instruments and must be banned .
There must be more humane trapping methods , but we in the House must not allow ourselves to be blackmailed by postponements and other tactics into delaying the approval of these methods .
Throughout the whole debate , the importance of leghold traps for native peoples has been deliberately exaggerated .
The Commission wants to introduce an automatic exemption from the import ban for native peoples , but such an exemption would undermine the whole directive .
I entirely agree with the rules proposed by Mr Pimenta on the subject .
We should give Mr Pimenta 's very detailed report our fullest support , but we also wish to see some immediate action .
One of the things the Commission must do now is to publish the list of countries which do not use leghold traps .
It should be required do this within the next month , otherwise Parliament will take it to the Court of Justice .
I should like to ask the Commission whether it intends to publish this list in the immediate future ?
Mr President , Commissioner , if we agree that leghold traps are a cruel and inhumane means of trapping animals , and if the European Union has banned their use within its territory , it is surprising that the import of pelts from third countries in which animals are caught by means of these traps should be accepted .
The successive postponements of the entry into force of Regulation No 3254 cast doubt on the Commission 's political will to comply with Community law , when it should be setting an example in this respect to the Member States .
The Commission knows that the talks between Canada , the United States , the European Union and Russia aimed at establishing humane standards may go on for ever ; it is extremely difficult to determine these standards .
Mr Pimenta 's proposals include the necessary implementing provisions , take account - in various amendments - of the social and economic implications of the regulation for the indigenous peoples , and bear in mind the responsibility of the Member States to help improve those peoples ' living and working conditions .
They provide for the ban on imports to be lifted once credible rules , including a reasonable implementation period , have been agreed .
Commissioner , we all know that without clear rules and specific deadlines it is very difficult to ensure compliance with Community law .
We have seen this with regard to the legislation on the substances that are destroying the ozone layer and on CO2 levels , and we are seeing it with regard to this regulation . This regulation must be implemented , if we wish to ensure respect for , and the credibility of , the Community 's institutions .
Mr President , this is lunacy !
Here we have a five-year-old regulation - a piece of legislation adopted by the Council - and the Commission simply digs its heels in and fails to put through the implementing provisions .
Is this what we can expect to see in future ?
Along comes a lobby group - in this instance the Canadian , American and Russian fur industry - and kicks up a big fuss , and we are left with nothing .
If that is the shape of things to come , then we can save ourselves a great deal of work .
I think it is outrageous !
Even more outrageous - and I shall not mince my words here - is the fact that virtually no notice will be taken of the amendments and proposals in Mr Pimenta 's report , although they are excellent and have our full support .
And where will we be then ?
We might as well shut up shop for half the week , because half our work is not being taken seriously by the Commission .
What exactly do they think they are doing ?
I shall tell you another thing .
Over the next year , there are to be talks on humane trapping methods , and humane traps are to be developed .
What rubbish !
There are no such things as humane traps .
Whether or not there is a bit of padding on the teeth of a trap , the animal in it will die a miserable death .
Nor is there such a thing as a selective trap .
An animal cannot read a sign that says ' Lynxes please do not use this trap ' !
There are no selective traps .
Protected species also get caught , and trapping is simply inhumane .
If people insist on catching animals , then they should be sensible and shoot them .
Any other method is inhumane .
I fail to see one good reason for supporting the fur lobby , hunting animal species and damaging the environment to the point that they are now almost all extinct .
Damn it all , why should a few people deck themselves out in furs ?
There is no call for it .
We must develop a different relationship with the gifts that nature has given us , and that certainly does not mean that we have to carry off the last remaining animal pelts .
As for those who are so concerned about human beings - and I hear endless expressions of sympathy for the poor native peoples - I have to tell them quite frankly that they are hypocrites .
We are shamelessly hypocritical when we import uranium which continues to be mined at the sacred sites of native peoples ; when forests are felled and people lose their homelands and we import the wood .
Those are the facts , if you please , and I would ask the Commission seriously if it has any intention of respecting our regulations , or if the situation will simply continue as before , with nothing being done !
Mr President , our group firstly wishes to pay tribute to the work of Mr Pimenta , who has addressed this particularly complex question with his customary tenacity .
This issue has all the elements of a psychological drama which we should very much keep in mind : the campaign against the unnecessary suffering of animals ; the need to ensure the survival of northern indigenous peoples and their traditional way of life ; the pressure from commercial lobbies and governments , which use unscrupulous arguments ; and an interinstitutional conflict between Parliament and the Commission , which prefers to evade its responsibility to Parliament rather than risk opposing some of its partners in the World Trade Organization .
On the majority of these points , we agree with the Committee on the Environment 's proposals .
First of all , I should like to say that we must indeed put pressure on the negotiators to define satisfactory trapping standards .
Too much time has been lost already .
By ensuring that the ban comes into force as soon as possible , we shall increase the chances of achieving a result swiftly .
Even if it may sound paradoxical , or even absurd , you will see why the date of last January should be retained .
It is unthinkable for Parliament to accept being presented with a fait accompli in this way .
It is a question of principle .
Furthermore , the procedural schedule in Parliament which is necessary to prepare for second reading and conclude this legislative procedure will provide an additional breathing space which must be used to good effect by the negotiators in the International Organization for Standardization .
However , I would stress the fact that the interests of indigenous peoples whose survival may depend on hunting must also be taken into account .
The inability of the Commission and their governments to conclude the negotiations must never constitute a threat to their way of life .
In this respect , while there are some sound points in Mr Pimenta 's arguments , we believe that it is preferable to follow the Commission proposal .
Our group will therefore be supporting the Committee on the Environment 's amendments , with the exception of Amendment No 24 .
Mr President , there are two almost irreconcilable interests in the debate on the use of these inhumane leghold traps : the economic survival of a group of hunters who have no other means of earning a living in the short term , and animal welfare .
From the outset , Mrs Sandbæk and I have adopted the position that the native hunters must not be deprived of their livelihood , and I am pleased that the amendments from the Committee on the Environment now specifically call for attention to be given to this threatened group .
We too are aware that the number of genuine native hunters is relatively small , and that they are just about able to support themselves .
But this is no reason to stop them selling any more furs at all because of the trapping methods which they use .
Here in Europe we apply transitional measures in all kinds of situations , and I see no reason why we should not do so with trapping methods .
This is , after all , what this group of people relies upon to earn their daily bread .
We very much hope that all the political controversy surrounding this piece of European legislation will finally result in the speedy introduction of safer trapping methods .
There can be absolutely no doubt , as far as we are concerned , that these barbaric traps must be abolished .
The Pimenta report is , in my opinion , a good compromise between the various viewpoints .
What I should now like to hear from the Commissioner is what is happening about the proceedings against the Netherlands , which has declared that the regulation will come into force as originally scheduled on 1 January ?
Mr President , the rapporteur deserves to be thanked for taking over the job of doing the Commission 's homework .
As we approach the end of the millennium , our society must give the same priority to preventing cruelty to animals - preventing unimaginable and prolonged suffering among living creatures - as it does to consumer protection .
Preventing cruelty to animals is almost a form of consumer protection from a different angle .
It means protecting consumers from going about clad in the fashionably processed suffering of mammal species .
A person 's ethnic origin can never entitle them to use cruel trapping methods .
It is quite amazing that the USA and Canada have so far refused to recognize that leghold traps are inhumane .
It is scarcely possible that regional development and the welfare of the people concerned should depend solely on the use of leghold traps , which are not even a traditional trapping method .
We should also recognize clearly that the decline in recent years in the sale of furs and skins is part of a pattern of changed practices on the part of consumers .
By following the proposals of the rapporteur , the European Parliament would be sending out a positive signal .
Mr President , as I stated in the last discussion about this issue , I was the hapless rapporteur on the first report on the leghold trap .
That was in 1990 .
In the course of preparing my report I did a great deal of research ; I took it extremely seriously .
I was the butt of - as Mrs Pollack has said - some of the most ferocious lobbying ever seen in this Parliament .
I am very happy indeed that Mr Schnellhardt has said , on behalf of my group , that we will be supporting Mr Pimenta 's report .
But I wish I could agree with my colleague , Mr Schnellhardt , that the Commission should be left to get on with the job .
I do not think it has done , and I do not think it did in the past what this Parliament asked it to do in 1990 .
Mr Pimenta faces the issue that was the most agonizing for me , personally , in my work on the report : the serious concern he has for the indigenous people in Canada .
I met them .
I went out on a trap line .
I have seen exactly what happens there .
As a result of what I saw then I deliberately set out to give longer time to develop an alternative method of trapping in order to cause the minimum amount of difficulty to the indigenous people in Canada .
But unfortunately it took quite considerable time for anything to be done on that .
It was clear when I was in Canada in 1990 that nothing had been done on it up to then .
What I think happened was that the Commission just kept its head down and hoped that it would all disappear ; that it was a flash in the pan and that nobody would take it terribly seriously and nothing would have to do be done about it .
But a lot of attitudes have changed radically in the last few years , particularly on issues of animal welfare .
Nobody ever thought that the poor old cows or sows or whatever were really being taken seriously .
In the last few years we have started to look on these as moral issues .
I think we have to continue to do so .
I am very happy to support Mr Pimenta 's report .
Finally , if I lived in northern Canada in the cold and wind that exists there - and I lived in Canada for well over a year in the 1960s - I would wear a fur coat .
I would probably wear one of those long furry things that were quite cheap and very practical at the time .
But the market for fur coats now has generally collapsed .
It is really only those rich people who live in southern hot countries who are buying them .
So I ask myself : do we really need to go the wall about a political issue like this ?
But the trap that Mr Pimenta has held up is evidence that this is a very nasty piece of work .
By now we should have found some alternative to it .
Mr President , intimidated by the threats of the Canadian and US Governments to appeal to the World Trade Organization , the Commission agreed , in July 1994 , to suspend for a year the entry into force of the rules .
As was absolutely predictable , that postponement failed to produce the hoped-for results in the search for traps that do not involve cruelty .
Once that deadline had expired , the Commission took it upon itself illegally to suspend the entry into force of the regulation itself as of 1 January 1996 , for the sole purpose of according the Americans and Canadians a further opportunity of developing so-called ' humanitarian ' trapping standards .
That task , which the North Americans in fact gave to the ISO - the International Standards Organization - back in 1987 , has proved hopeless for two reasons : the clear impossibility of developing trapping methods that are not cruel and the substance of the research which focuses less on studying improbable methods of trapping without inflicting pain than on legitimizing those methods already used by Canadian and US trappers .
It is therefore vital that the House confirm robustly and resolutely that it is a matter of the utmost urgency that the general principles of Regulation No 3254 / 91 , on which I worked , as a Commissioner , along with Parliament in the early nineties , are complied with : if it is allowed to slip further the real intention will be to get rid of it for good .
It is in that firm belief that , as mentioned by Mr Bloch von Blottnitz , the Greens are prepared to support the amendments to the Commission text tabled by Mr Pimenta : Amendments Nos 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 and 28 in particular remedy the unacceptable loopholes which the Commission proposal to amend Regulation No 3254 / 91 would allow for the purpose of continuing to bring into the European Union pelts obtained using traps .
Mr President , this is not the first time that I have had the opportunity of discussing this issue with the House ; several speakers have already described the course of events , and so I shall confine myself here this evening to the formal response which can be given to today 's debate .
First of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Pimenta , for his report on the extremely vexed question of leghold traps .
I know that the Commission and Parliament essentially have the same goals in this area .
We differ as to how those goals can be achieved .
As is made clear by Mr Pimenta 's report , Parliament is in favour of introducing a trade ban and then discussing the conditions for it to be removed .
You will be aware that the Commission 's stance , following its most recent decision , is the opposite , and we have therefore already had talks in the quadripartite group - including the USA , Canada and Russia - with a view to achieving results before we begin to consider what further steps can be taken .
Given the fundamental difference in our approach , it will come as no surprise to the House that the Commission is unable to accept the proposed amendments .
In addition , there was a direct proposal from Mr Eisma , who asked me for a response to Parliament 's letter of 13 May to the Commission .
The Commission has not yet come to a decision on the request from the President of Parliament for it to publish a list of countries which prohibit the use of leghold traps .
Naturally , the Commission will respond to this request within the deadline which it has to give a reply .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Market organization in beef and veal
The next item is the report ( A4-0203 / 96 ) by Mr Jacob , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0242 - C4-0291 / 96-96 / 0148 ( CNS ) ) providing for additional payments to be made in 1996 with the premia referred to in Article 4b ( 6 ) and Article 4d ( 7 ) of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 805 / 68 on the common organization of the market in beef and veal and amending Article 4i ( 4 ) of that Regulation .



Mr President , on this report , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development unanimously agreed to the Council 's request for urgent procedure , in view of the extreme urgency , complexity and sensitivity of this issue for all beef and veal producers , as well as all European consumers .
Firstly , I should like to say that I am presenting this report on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture , in my capacity as chairman of that committee .
The proposal submitted to us by the Commission is , in my view , fundamentally balanced , in that it contains a section devoted to specialized breeders - in other words , producers of suckler cows and young bovines - and another section devoted to the national element , which will enable each Member State to adapt and respond according to its own specific circumstances .
I tabled a number of amendments which did not receive the support of the Committee on Agriculture , and which I am now retabling in plenary on my own behalf .
These amendments seek to increase the aid to specialized producers to ECU 50 for each animal .
What seems essential to me in this debate is to support those specialized farmers and breeders in Scotland , Ireland , Italy , Portugal and France who live from the production of beef and veal alone and whose future depends on this activity , as opposed to other farmers who are undoubtedly affected by the crisis , but who produce beef and veal alongside other activities .
I therefore believe that it is important to support these specialized producers , whose animals have never seen an ounce of meat meal in their lives , because they are reared on grass . There are producers of this kind throughout Europe .
These are the producers who should be supported in particular , and that is why I am proposing to increase the compensation to ECU 50 for suckler cows and young bovines .
I am also making this proposal in order to send a political signal , because all that people can find to say to me on this subject is : ' The package will be inadequate , and so we shall have to show self-restraint and distribute it as widely as possible ' .
I am surprised , however , by those who are defending this kind of argument .
They are the same people , one should remember , who react vigorously from time to time to prevent the common agricultural policy from being touched , saying that they are against renationalization .
Now the same people are rejecting all those amendments which are designed to support specialized producers , in favour of distribution by the Member States .
If there is one category of breeders who should be supported , in my view it is traditional breeders .
Undoubtedly , other breeders are affected , and that should be taken into account .
But let us not forget those who are currently losing around FF 2000 per animal , and who are now in an extremely difficult position , because they have no borrowing arrangements , few investments and social security entitlements , and low incomes - an average of FF 50 000 for beef and veal producers .
For such farmers , the consequences of this crisis are dramatic .
It is therefore necessary to increase the package proposed by the Commission .
This package is inadequate - and I am sure , Commissioner , that you are aware of that today .
Given the extent of the crisis , there is a need to increase the proposed package substantially in order to provide support for these farmers , whose role goes beyond the mere production of beef and veal and is very important in terms of the development and management of Europe 's regions .
I have therefore tabled these amendments , and another which I should like to deal with by supporting the amendment by my colleague Mr Happart concerning the increased use of plant proteins in animal feed .
I entirely endorse this amendment .
I believe that it is essential .
This means , however , that there is also a need to renegotiate a number of matters .
The agreements on plant proteins concluded during the GATT negotiations must be discussed again .
They no longer hold good !
Similarly , we must have an assurance that meat meal has not been used in the production of imported beef and veal , since the current situation will give rise to an increase in protein prices to the benefit of third countries - which has already begun - since the European Union has a substantial shortfall in protein production .
In conclusion , Commissioner , I believe that it is important to support specialized producers , and so I am retabling my amendments in a personal capacity , even though they did not obtain the support of the Committee on Agriculture .
Furthermore , I also believe that it is important to strengthen the European Union 's capacity for protein production , since given the extent of the crisis , we cannot accept the GATT agreements in the form in which they were concluded .
This sector must therefore be completely redeveloped .
Mr President , Commissioner , I take a slightly different view from Mr Jacob , although I respect his opinion : while it is right to applaud the speed with which the Commission moved to take this measure to support producers affected by the BSE crisis , it has to be said that in substance that particular measure is the source of a good deal of injustice .
While the Council had said that it was necessary to support in the short term all beef and veal producers , with the idea of earmarking no less than ECU 534 of the ECU 650 for the supplementary premium for male cattle and suckler cows , in my view , the Commission is ending up by helping only a section of European producers . And it is precisely those producers that are already enjoying the largest helping of aid from the common organization of the market in beef and veal .
It is true that there is a need for speed and to commit spending , which has to be kept within very strict timescales , but it is also the case that there is something to think about here : I ask you , Commissioner , to consult the table that appears on page 49 of the first volume of this year 's price package from which it is clear that there is a small minority of countries which have many more premiums than they do head of beef cattle and a majority of countries where the imbalance is precisely the reverse .
We could discuss at length , Mr Jacob , whether there are specialized producers and , if so , which producers they are and whether priority should be given to that group or to others .
But what I do not want to see this evening is those producers who have specialized in obtaining premiums being advantaged .
I believe that all should be given the same opportunities and that Parliament 's amendments - at least those of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development whereby the flexible portion available to the Member States would be increased from ECU 116 m to ECU 424 m - will make it possible largely to resolve this problem .
More resources would certainly have been better but we have to be realistic .
We have then to be very careful to check that national aid becomes the exception and not the rule .
I ask you , Commissioner , whether we ought not to conclude from this that some kind of review of the COM in beef and veal is needed , and whether the time is not now ripe , given the news we have heard , to move on to other measures , since the eradication programme seems to be beginning to achieve some results .
You , Commissioner , have had the courage to take difficult decisions which have laid you open and continue to lay you open to criticism and probably will cause acute tension in the European institutional balance in Florence two days hence .
I therefore believe , Commissioner , that it is very important that there should be mutual understanding between Parliament and the Commission and a shared perception of what we want to do and the way to do it , including as regards this evening 's measures .
I therefore believe that it is for you this evening to show consideration for the work of our committee - our group , the Socialist Group , is counting on this .
Mr President , since early 1996 , when the British Secretary of State for Health reported that new cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease had occurred among humans in the United Kingdom , beef consumption has once again plummeted .
The market for beef has collapsed not only in the United Kingdom , but in virtually every region of Europe , including Member States which have not had a single case of BSE .
Thankfully , the Commission has taken a range of measures , including buying in beef and an export ban to protect consumers .
To reduce the impact of the heavy losses suffered by beef producers , the Commission promised an emergency programme .
For technical reasons connected with the budget , that programme must be paid for immediately , in other words by October 1996 .
We are grateful to the Commission for its proposals .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has considered the document that was submitted and has formulated a number of principles for approval by the House .
The committee is calling for a standard subsidy for suckler cows and male cattle .
The subsidy should amount to an additional grant of ECU 10 per head .
At the same time , I must acknowledge that dairy farmers have also suffered losses .
The price of cull cows and calves has fallen just as sharply as that of beef cattle .
Furthermore , the Commission itself admits that it will be hard to include all the stock that should , in fairness , attract compensation payments .
Let me give you one or two examples : for instance , those cases where farmers are claiming subsidies for growing pasture instead of livestock premiums , or where they have not kept within the limit of 2.5 livestock units per hectare .
Virtually all the farms in these categories will be excluded , because they are not currently entitled to premiums .
For those reasons , the committee decided to increase the proposed sum to be made available to the Member States to compensate for losses that would not otherwise be covered .
In the short time that is available , it will not be easy , even for the Member States , to distribute this money in such a way as to compensate farmers to some extent for their losses .
We should therefore give the Member States as much latitude as possible , so that they can get the money to the farmers in good time .
We have to be clear that these subsidies are only a drop in the ocean .
Nonetheless we must make the most of them .
I shall be grateful to you if we can find a viable means of doing so .
Mr President , Commissioner , in my view , the Council 's proposal for a regulation properly has the air of an emergency measure in what is developing into a real crisis , not only from the economic point of view but also because of its political and institutional implications .
It seems to me , however , that the haste has been ill-advised because instead of remedying situations of hardship , the measure is likely to compound the imbalance and the discrimination that exists between those countries which already make full use of Community resources and others that suffer from an historical disadvantage linked to the system of producer premiums .
In the table of statistics , mentioned by Mr Fantuzzi and annexed to price package for which I was the rapporteur , we voted , at the last part-session , for a state of affairs that is worrying to say the least .
There are countries which receive amounts far in excess of their entire production .
Right at the head is Luxembourg with 227 % , followed by Ireland with 147 % and France with 123 % .
At the bottom , needless to say , is Italy , which has received only 29.6 % , although with 2 , 200 , 000 head , it is Europe 's main producer .
It is not my intention to pave the way , here in the House and in these circumstances , for national claims , but it is at any rate right to ask the Commission and Council to prevent chronic under-utilization of Community resources becoming the inescapable rule for emergency measures .
The subdivision into the three methods of intervention - suckler cows , male cattle for fattening and the national element - seems to be completely inappropriate and allows only 30 % of Italian producers to have access to the premium .
We therefore propose concentrating resources as much as possible on the national element by unhooking the measure from the system of premiums .
But that is not enough : it also seems appropriate to give the Member States the opportunity to award national aid to offset the loss of income on cattle excluded from the premium .
To conclude , Commissioner , the resources of ECU 650 m are clearly inadequate .
It seems then that in Italy alone we are talking about an estimated ECU 250 m . And so I ask myself , with no more than a hint of bitter irony : will the other fourteen countries be content with the remaining ECU 400 m ?
Mr President , in our opinion the Commission is entirely justified in proposing to make ECU 650 million available for dealing with the effects of the BSE crisis .
The crisis which individual farmers are currently facing is not their fault , it is the result of failings on the part of the governments .
And if it is the governments which have failed , it is also up to the governments to put things right again .
We wonder whether ECU 650 m will be enough , but I am assuming that it is not possible to make more available at the moment .
We do have some fairly major objections to the Commission 's proposal itself , which as we see it gives an unfair advantage to extensive cattle breeders .
The BSE crisis affects all beef producers , both extensive and intensive farmers .
We therefore feel that measures must be taken which deal with both sectors fairly .
The amendments which have been adopted by the Committee on Agriculture are definitely heading in the right direction .
More is still provided for the extensive farmers , but the national governments are now in a better position to provide support for the intensive farmers too .
This gives the Member States the scope to channel aid towards the sectors which they judge to have been worst affected .
We think it is also very important that this should not mean the renationalization of agricultural policy , as Mr Jacob suggested .
It does not need to be .
The Commission must be careful to keep a close eye on competition , but it is primarily up to the Member States to take the lead here .
Mr President , I spoke earlier in the debate on leghold traps .
Now , however , I should like to put things in perspective : cattle breeders - and , by extension , the entire beef and veal sector - are today the human victims of the economic consequences of the epidemic of mad cow disease that has been raging since 1986 .
For several years , beef consumption has been falling in Europe .
For the last three months , the beef and veal sector has been totally disaster-stricken throughout the European Union . As time has passed , it has become absolutely vital to draw up a rescue plan for the beef and veal sector , from the producer to the retail butcher .
Such a plan requires a coordinated , comprehensive and united approach .
Among the possible measures , the matter of greatest urgency is immediate compensation for producers , in order of priority .
Firstly , there are the specialized beef and veal producers with herds of suckler cows .
Beef is the only source of income for their farms .
They have taken the full force of the crisis , and their loss of income is in direct proportion to the fall in prices .
What are they doing ?
They are waiting , while millions of cows grow fat in the fields and a solution is postponed .
And secondly , there are the dairy farmers , for whom beef nevertheless represents around a quarter of their income , in the form of veal calves and cull cows .
Tens of thousands of breeders , whose loss of earnings is currently put at between FF 1500 and 2000 per head of fattened animal , are waiting for our decision with impatience .
They will find it hard to understand why we have reduced the proposed aid to an additional ECU 10 per premium .
I ask myself , moreover , whether we were not unwittingly misled at the time of the vote in the Committee on Agriculture the other day .
Consequently , I call on the House - without , of course , rejecting the Committee on Agriculture 's amendments as a whole - to support Mr Jacob 's amendments , which favour non-intensive breeding .
Let us not forget that in order to repair beef 's image and restore consumer confidence , there is a need to discourage industrial production methods and replace them with natural methods , for example by encouraging the production of protein plants .
Commissioner , a crisis of unprecedented gravity is affecting the cattle breeding sector in the European Union .
And it is to be feared that as well as being exceptionally grave , it will be exceptionally long .
It took only a few days and a few decisions - or an inexcusable lack of decisions - for consumer confidence to be lost .
However , there is no doubt that it will take months , or even years , and also firm guarantees of quality control for that confidence to be restored .
We must face the fact that as well as this exceptional crisis , there is a structural problem of adjusting supply to demand , to which solutions have to be found within the totally destabilized economic environment obtaining in the sector .
Breeders are hostages to this situation , and they no longer know what to do .
Faced with a widespread slump in sales and unduly low selling prices , they still have to meet their costs .
At the same time , they are being asked to invest substantially in order to comply with environmental requirements , particularly in terms of the campaign against nitrate pollution .
The cost of setting up environmentally friendly systems of storage and effluent treatment is very high , at a time when some breeders are wondering whether to continue their activity in the current economic situation , or if they should switch to more extensive farming methods .
Since the European Union has not yet clearly indicated how it intends to resolve the economic and structural crises affecting the beef and veal sector , I think it is wise to pause before applying any measures which involve heavy investment in cattle breeding .
There is surely no logic in asking breeders to invest now in plant which is of no use in the future , but for which they will still have to make the annual repayments .
If we are to avoid hindering the establishment of a new European cattle breeding policy , we must not delay in showing cattle breeders , who are in the midst of a crisis , that the Union understands their concerns for the future and will not require them to invest in plant which may subsequently prove useless or unsuitable .
In conclusion , I should like to draw attention to one of the implications of changing the composition of animal feeds .
If animal proteins are replaced with plant proteins - for reasons which I think are quite legitimate - we shall have to review the agreement on protein plants concluded in the context of the GATT agreements , because the European Union 's rate of self-supply is currently low and will increasingly decline .
It is for this reason that we shall be supporting Mr Jacob 's position .
Commissioner , the least that can be said is that we were not caught unawares .
It was impossible not to know .
The laxity of the last few years was bound to have serious consequences .
As a result , in order to restore consumer confidence , we need to follow the path of the contaminated meat meal , identify the holdings where this meal has been used as cattle feed , single out the animals which are contaminated or likely to be so , slaughter them , analyse the brain , spinal cord and lymphatic fluid , and incinerate or deeply bury the carcasses of the animals which are contaminated or suspected of being so .
The cost of the analyses and the destruction of the carcasses , as well as that of the compensation for the loss of earnings of the beef and veal sector as a whole , should of course be borne entirely by the producers of this type of cattle feed .
Those who have cheated have to foot the bill - and I am choosing my words carefully .
It is unacceptable , it is criminal , that meat meal deemed unfit for consumption in the United Kingdom should have been exported for consumption in other countries .
If the directives on the labelling of food products were applied throughout the Union in such a way as to indicate the region of breeding and slaughter , consumers would be able to decide in a more informed way whether or not to buy this product .
It would only be necessary , for example , to label meat from the United Kingdom ' British beef ' for consumers - households or restaurants - to know exactly what they were buying .
In any event , the BSE crisis has demonstrated the fragility of the European Union , the instinct for renationalization , and the failure - or rather the non-existence - of European policy .
Consequently , Commissioner , I should like to ask you the following question : to which budget will the administrative costs of providing these ECU 10 or so of compensation per animal be charged ?
Mr President , first I would like to thank the Commissioner for coming forward with the proposal so promptly .
I welcome the idea of setting aside a portion of the package to be distributed by the individual Member States to meet the needs of farmers facing acute financial problems .
However , the crisis in the beef industry is unprecedented and much deeper than anything witnessed in the past .
The losses to livestock farmers are colossal .
In Ireland alone it is estimated that losses so far - since 20 March - are in the region of Irish £ 250 million .
The price fall has not yet levelled out .
In my view , stability will not return until decisive , radical and refocussed eradication measures are put in place and are seen by consumers to be producing results .
Losses will continue for as long as we have not restored consumer confidence through total and complete eradication .
It is obvious that the size of this package is totally inadequate to meet the real losses incurred by farmers .
A package several times greater would be necessary to compensate farmers even for the losses incurred so far .
I therefore propose that the fund be substantially increased .
As a first step the package should be increased to ECU 1 , 000 million .
Also , the situation must be kept under constant review .
The ECU 116 million - that is , ECU 9.5 million for my country , Ireland - to be distributed to Member States to meet cases of acute financial distress is also inadequate .
Whatever the final figure is , we must ensure that this money is also used to support the producers of heifer beef who , under the present system receive no premium or compensation of any kind .
Their losses have been greater than those of the producers of male cattle .
This needs to be recognised and included in the package before us .
Mr President , I wish to acknowledge the Commission decision to provide ECU 650 million compensation package for farmers who have and still do experience serious financial losses resulting from BSE .
The collapse of the beef market is undoubtedly the most serious catastrophe to hit European agriculture and indirectly , employment in the agri-food sector .
Scientists differ in their interpretation of the impact , if any , of BSE on public health .
Consumers are understandably concerned and confused .
In the process European farmers - the people on whom we rely to produce our food requirements - are in serious financial difficulty , so much so that many of them , even with compensation , will be forced out of business .
In relation to the proposed compensation package I would say to the Commissioner that payment should be fast and efficient .
There is no need to remind the Commissioner that the beef sector , even before the advent of BSE , was in financial difficulty .
The problem with export refunds and the associated difficulty of developing third country markets had a bad impact on the profitability of the entire European beef sector .
In our desire to compensate all farmers affected , and in particular the farmers most affected , we should try avoid introducing an over-bureaucratic system which would only tend to slow down the payment of compensation .
I believe we should use the existing established structures of the special beef premium and suckler cow grants , both of which are part of the agreed CAP framework , as a means of determining the shareout of the additional funds between Member States while at the same time allowing individual governments to decide how best the package can be applied to each sector .
I also believe that as a short-term measure and for the purpose of dealing with the build-up of animals due to the market collapse , beef heifers should be included with steers as being eligible for compensation .
I do not believe that the compensation package of ECU 650 million is sufficient , but it is a start .
We must put the system in place immediately for its implementation .
My concluding comment is : get this money into the system fast ; intensify our efforts to restore consumer confidence in beef as a quality food product , which is what it is ; and assist in every way possible to develop third country markets as a profitable outlet for European beef .
Mr President , I seek to paint a broader picture here tonight .
A week ago I brought four workers to Brussels to make their case for recompense .
They were workers from the Midland Meatpackers , one of the many abattoirs in my constituency which has been cruelly hit by the BSE crisis .
They represented hundreds of workers who have already lost their jobs or whose jobs are under threat .
They came to Brussels to seek justice .
They are the hardest hit sector of the whole beef industry for their skills are not transferable .
So they see themselves as having no future .
They have lost everything .
In two days they met many of the influential people and groups within Parliament .
You , yourself , generously gave them some of your time .
The workers returned home to Northamptonshire buoyed-up and encouraged by the support from all sides .
You , Commissioner , are on record as saying that those most severely affected should have priority funding .
But fine words are cheap and that encouragement will soon melt away .
I tonight would remind you of your words .
I would remind you of the undertaking in the Treaty on the CAP which promises the means for agricultural workers to find gainful employment .
I would remind you that money is available both in Objective 5 ( a ) and 5 ( b ) and in Objective 4 to find recompense for these workers .
So , I have five questions to put to you , Commissioner .
First of all , do you agree that these workers are entitled to recompense and do you endorse it ?
Secondly , that the funding that I have mentioned should and could be used for that purpose ?
Thirdly , that although the UK Government has opted out of Objective 5 ( a ) it could and should be encouraged to take that option up again and use the money accordingly ?
Fourthly , will you give an undertaking that all funding will be allocated on the basis of need , not just to farmers and abattoir owners but to everyone who has been so cruelly affected by this appalling disaster ?
Finally , will the Commission urge the UK Government to use the contingency funding at its disposal to offset the job losses ?
If you give these undertakings , Commissioner , you will demonstrate that the European Union is indeed an institution that has at its heart the wellbeing of all its citizens irrespective of influence , status or political favouritism , and as such you will be an institution that will be applauded .
Mr President , I would like to add my voice to those expressing their concern about those beyond the immediate farms who are being affected by this crisis .
A county council in my constituency , Shropshire , has produced this report .
I believe it is the first report of its kind to look at the local impact on the economy of the BSE crisis .
It paints a very worrying picture .
We already know that at least 700 jobs have been lost in meat processing , road haulage and in the markets .
We also know that an estimated £ 100 million has been taken out of our local economy and that will have further knock-on effects .
We also know that this impact is being felt most acutely in our small market towns which already have fragile rural economies and that is why they already qualify for Objective 5 ( b ) . This is a blow that they just cannot cope with .
We now need to focus on how we can bring help to those people .
We need to look at Objectives 5 ( a ) and 5 ( b ) . Possibly we need to look at something like a RECHAR or RESIDER programme for agriculture , but action is needed very , very quickly .
Commissioner , I have your copy here .
I will give it to you before you leave tonight .
There have been reports on the BBC tonight that the Commission meeting here has worked out a formula for the end of the ban on British beef .
I would be very grateful if tonight you would tell us exactly what that formula is so that we can report it back to our constituents .
Mr President , losses have been suffered .
Very large losses have been suffered , Commissioner , in this animal health disaster .
We could have dealt with this disaster on the basis of a simple principle - that of the assumption of responsibilities : by the British producers of Doncaster , in Yorkshire ; by the British Government ; and by the French importers .
You have opted for the principle of solidarity .
You are making the responsibility collective , and that is all very well .
On this basis , compensation should be provided for all losses .
But no , you have decided on a figure of ECU 650 million for the 81 million cattle that are affected .
That actually makes ECU 8 per animal .
According to the proposal , it is ECU 10 per animal .
Mr Jacob 's proposal of ECU 50 per animal - which is little enough - has been rejected .
And the idea of an additional premium for non-intensive farms has been rejected too .
In other words , you have rejected responsibility in favour of solidarity , and you have dismissed solidarity in favour of greed , mediocrity and accounting .
Nor is there any provision for preventive measures - Mr Happart referred to this - or the renegotiation of the agreements on protein plants and oilseeds .
I must say , Commissioner , that this affair is getting off to a very bad start .
I am not addressing you personally , but the Commission as a whole , as well as your predecessors , who bore a very great responsibility and who , when the time came to meet that responsibility , did very little , as the records make clear .
Put yourself in the place of the cattle breeders .
I understand why they have doubts about European integration and the protection that it will afford them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking the House sincerely for the urgency with which it has addressed the important issue that we are debating today , and also for the speedy way that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and particularly its chairman Mr Jacob , put together this report .
The first point I have to emphasize is that since 20 March , beef producers throughout the European Union have found themselves in a major crisis and have been facing serious financial pressures .
Since that date , the Commission has initiated a whole range of measures , starting with the opening of intervention which has already accounted for 150 000 tonnes of meat , with a further 30 000 tonnes earmarked for intervention in June . We have made use of every market instrument at our disposal , from an increase in export refunds to private storage , in order to at least reduce the impact of the problem .
Like you , however , I am aware that all of this taken together is not enough .
We must go a step further and provide additional income subsidies .
There is a general consensus - and this was evident again from today 's debate - that producers must be helped as quickly as possible , with a minimum of red tape .
However , this also means that we must organize the income support within the 1996 budget .
The fact that the EAGGF year ends on 15 October means that we must design our measures in such a way that they can be implemented before that date .
We therefore began by trying to estimate the loss of income among beef producers which could be expected in the current year , and to establish how much scope we had in the 1996 budget .
On that basis , we came up with the figure of ECU 650 million which is being discussed today .
As I told the House earlier in the month , an additional ECU 200 m has been earmarked for support measures in connection with BSE .
When that is spent , however , we shall have exhausted all the scope available to us , according to the current estimates of our budget margin for this year .
This means that we cannot go above the sum of ECU 650 m .
We then come to the question of how the ECU 650 m is to be shared out .
Under the first proposal , made by the Commission on 20 May , additional payments were to be provided only to those producers who had claimed premiums for suckler cows or male cattle in the previous year .
While this option is a very simple one to implement , it does , of course , have certain disadvantages .
The Member States therefore sought a more flexible approach and called for account to be taken of those issues which were not addressed adequately in the proposal .
In response , we came up with a flexible arrangement for 20 % of the ECU 650 m total , a figure of ECU 116 m , which was to be shared among the Member States , with the option of including in the distribution of that sum those producers who are receiving no premiums , or only limited premiums .
According to the amendments from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , it is now proposed to allocate a larger proportion of the total for national distribution and a smaller proportion for topping up cattle premiums .
However , an option as far-reaching as this would lead to serious problems , particularly as regards the coherence of the measures in question , and above all would jeopardize the main objective of getting these sums of money paid out to farmers quickly , in other words before 15 October .
This objection concerns in particular Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 13 .
Also , a considerable period of time would be required to set up appropriate new administrative and indeed monitoring mechanisms in time to be effective , and this would create difficulties that would make it impossible to ensure that the resources were shared out in good time .
However , the Commission recognizes Parliament 's wish to create greater flexibility and will convey that concern to the Council , to the extent that it does not jeopardize the main objective to which I have already referred .
As for the request that the Commission should do its utmost to ensure greater use of plant proteins in animal feed , and to guarantee that cattle are fed solely on plant rather than animal products , I must emphasize on the one hand that there is already very considerable support for plant protein cultivation in the European Union , and on the other that a prohibition on feeding animal or bone meal to ruminants has been in place for some time , and of course we intend to retain that prohibition in the future .
Moreover , we believe that we must take a rather cautious approach to further intensification of stock-farming , particularly in view of likely consumer trends in the Union .
Finally , as regards the option of providing national subsidies , I would point out that measures of this kind were applied during the last beef crisis in 1990 and 1991 .
By providing government subsidies , Member States can address specific problems of their own that are not fully covered by the Community resources .
On the question of assistance for those employed in the processing industry , I would remind you that I addressed that issue in depth during Question Time earlier today .
President Santer , in his speech tomorrow morning , will give his detailed views on the Commission decision this evening on the so-called framework programme submitted by the British Government .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
The next item is the vote on objections concerning the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance ( Rule 47 ) .
On Item II , Nuclear Waste :
Mr President , I am surprised that you have allowed the objection in the topical and urgent debate pursuant to Rule 47 , i.e. to switch the question of the transporting of atomic waste with the subject of elections in Bosnia .
I am referring to Rule 47 , which says that a motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with paragraph 1 cannot be included on the agenda for a debate on topical and urgent subjects etc. etc .... if the subject covered by this motion is already on the agenda for that part-session .
Now there is absolutely no doubt , Mr Hänsch , that the subjects of the former Yugoslavia , Bosnia and elections are already on the agenda , since they feature in several reports that are to be debated this afternoon .

The reports by Mr Alavanos , Mr Mendiluce Pereiro , Mr Giansily , Mr Titley and Mr Pex are of course concerned with this subject .
I am very surprised that you should ever have allowed the motion by the Group of the European People 's Party .
In doing so you have created a precedent !
I am therefore requesting that the matter should be discussed again this afternoon , at the Conference of Presidents , because up to now it has always been argued , in practice , that subjects for topical and urgent debate are not allowed if the subject is already being dealt with in other debates .
Mrs Roth , we shall discuss the matter at the Conference of Presidents this afternoon , as you wish , but as far as this morning and the topical and urgent debate are concerned , Parliament has taken its decision and will abide by that decision .
European Council in Florence - IGC
The next item is the joint debate on :
the statements by the Council and Commission on the preparation for the European Council meeting in Florence on 21 and 22 June ; -the oral questions by Mr Morán López , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , to the Council ( B40444 / 96-0-0115 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0445 / 96-0-0116 / 96 ) on the progress of the IGC.I have just discovered that the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs is still on his way here .
He has not yet arrived , so I propose that we should follow a procedure that is somewhat different from our normal one , and begin the debate with the Commission 's statement , so as not to waste any time .
I have also arranged for the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs to be informed of this .
The President of the Commission , Mr Santer , is prepared to open today 's debate by giving his statement .
Mr Santer , please take the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council to be held in Florence in two days ' time is of special significance for the future of our Union .
I am therefore pleased to have this opportunity of letting you know the Commission 's position on what it considers to be the priority items on the European Council 's agenda .
Before doing so , however , I would first like to congratulate the Italian presidency on the work accomplished during the last six months , of which Florence will be the crowning achievement .
The task has not been easy .
The problems confronting the Union have been numerous and difficult , and the internal political situation in Italy can hardly have failed to add to the worries of Mr Dini and his colleagues .
In spite of that , they have succeeded in driving forward the European ship by keeping the Union as one of their foremost priorities .
They have held to the course identified at the Madrid European Council despite all the Cassandras and siren voices that could have deflected them from the direct route to the achievement of our objectives .
I should like to offer my sincere thanks to the Italian authorities , and more particularly to Mr Dini for his dynamic and enthusiastic contribution as President of the European Council and of the General Affairs Council .
Mr Dini will shortly be giving you a complete survey of the European Council 's Florence agenda .
It is still the business of the presidency to decide on this agenda , so that I can restrict myself to dealing with the Commission 's major priorities .
The Commission is seeking a new impetus both in the fight against unemployment and in the work of the IGC , and it would like the European Council to restore calm in our institutions , which are being seriously disturbed by the so-called ' mad cow ' crisis .
As has often been said , employment is our first priority .
It is this conviction which led me to propose a Confidence Pact for jobs and it is this same conviction which was the basis of the communication from the Commission I presented to you on 5 June in Brussels under the title ' Action for jobs - a Confidence Pact ' .
I will not repeat the details of this communication here , but will simply remind you that our aim is to launch a collective approach , involving public authorities and the social partners , by defining their respective commitments , in a coordinated global strategy .
Everybody should shoulder their responsibilities and everybody should take on concrete commitments at their own level .
The foundations of the strategy for jobs now exist and are sound .
Since the adoption of the White Paper ' Growth , Competitiveness , Employment ' in 1993 , the fifteen Member States have been united in the same basic choice of macro-economic and structural policies which have been reinforced during successive European Councils .
Moreover , my tour of European capitals has confirmed to me that all the governments and all the social partners are more than ever aware that the highest priority must be given to the fight against unemployment .
The approach outlined in my proposal for the Confidence Pact has been welcomed in the great majority of capitals .
The panel of social partners has stressed its importance and urgency , and the tripartite conference held in Rome last weekend gave it wide support .
The conclusions of this conference totally agree with the Commission 's communication and correspond exactly to the spirit of my proposal , seeking a mobilization of all those involved and an assumption of responsibility at all levels .
I hope the European Council in Florence will follow the same line and that the Heads of State and Government will build on the foundation of the support recorded for the Pact .
Thus , Florence could be for employment what Madrid was for the single currency : namely , a confirmation of the political will and an instruction to the Council of Ministers to take short-term decisions and to start work leading to later decisions .
The Confidence Pact is not something that can be achieved overnight .
It is a matter , as I have just said , of determining responsibilities , mobilizing all those involved , creating synergies , energizing all the elements which can help to create jobs , whether it be the internal market , the macro-economic policy , or anything else .
This must be done as a matter of urgency and to the greatest possible extent .
Something concrete must be achieved in the short term .
This is the approach adopted by the Commission in its communication on the Confidence Pact and I hope the European Council will follow our lead by declaring itself in favour of the Pact and by confirming the main lines of action defined in our communication : namely , firstly , the creation of a favourable macro-economic framework with sustainable growth , based on monetary stability and a sound financial policy .
Secondly , full exploitation of the potential of the internal market .
Some real progress must be made before the end of the year in order to complete and improve it .
Our competitiveness must be strengthened , small and medium-sized enterprises must be helped and our access to world markets must be opened up .
One aspect particularly close to my heart is the construction of trans-European networks .
These are an indispensable element in the infrastructure and without them the potential of the internal market cannot be fully realized .
The European Council has expressed its own wishes in calling for trans-European networks .
It should now , this time once and for all , decide on the resources to be made available for their construction .
The Commission has made its proposal in line with this reasoning and I ask the European Council to be faithful to the same reasoning , which in any case follows from its previous decisions .
The third line of action to be followed is to speed up reform of the system of employment through closer monitoring of the implementation of the Essen priorities , by activating national employment policies and opening up large sites for future employment .
Fourthly , as a matter of priority , using European structural policies for job creation in allocating the uncommitted ECU billions available up to 1999 .
That , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is our first priority for the European Council .
The message from the Heads of State and Government should be one of confidence .
In that way they can show citizens that Europe is a force , a force for a large-scale mobilization in the battle against unemployment , a force that will bring about the convergence of national policies and that will create the added value necessary to rescue us from the jobs crisis .
A message of confidence , I also hope , for the second major item on the Florence agenda : the Intergovernmental Conference .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us be frank .
The situation at the moment does not fill us with enthusiasm .
The Italian presidency has started work with a great deal of commitment , and it is not their fault if their work lacks dynamism .
We have to recognize that negotiations have not really started .
Let us not make the mistake of thinking we have plenty of time or that we can calmly await clarification of the political situation in this or that Member State .
The problems to be solved are numerous and complex .
Their solution is urgent if we seriously wish to prepare the Union for enlargement , as already decided in principle , if we wish to convince citizens that the Union is a project with which they can identify , and if we wish to avoid the mistakes of the past by creating the margin of time necessary for democratic debate before , and not after , negotiations .
Do the negotiators fully understand this urgency ?
Have they a clear vision of the aims of the Intergovernmental Conference ?
I am not alone in asking myself these questions .
I heard them from many delegations during the conference which has just been held in Rome .
I conclude from this that there is an awareness among Member States that something has to change .
This awareness must be transformed into a new impetus that the European Council should give to the work .
The political will expressed at the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference in Turin on 29 March must be confirmed .
We must change into a higher gear .
We must fully commit ourselves to negotiation , and do so at a level worthy of the high ambitions for the future of an enlarged , more securely based and efficient Union .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the third important subject for the European Council in Florence is the so-called ' mad cow ' crisis that has shaken the Union over the last few months .
Our farmers throughout the Union have suffered serious financial losses , consumer confidence has been undermined , our institutions have been paralysed and the damage caused by the crisis is severe .
The European Council offers the chance of a turning point , a chance that must be seized .
Yesterday evening , the European Commission set out its position , which it will formulate in a document for Florence at the request of the General Affairs Council .
One principle is essential for the Commission .
All our actions must be based on , and inspired by , the absolute and sole imperative of protecting the health of our citizens .
Lifting the ban on British exports is therefore strictly conditional upon the eradication of BSE .
Since the source of this disease is in the United Kingdom , it is the British authorities who must put into effect the eradication measures required for the ban to be lifted .
This has been the constant position of the Commission ever since the beginning of the crisis on 21 March , and it will remain its position until the end of the crisis .
It will not be affected by political pressure , by blocking moves , even by the use of the veto .
The biggest mistake that could be made would be to turn the crisis into a politicians ' issue .
We cannot play around with health !
( Applause ) And in respecting this principle , it should be possible to come to an agreement in Florence about preconditions , about the stages and procedures that will allow us to consider , step by step , the normalization of the beef trade with the United Kingdom , but any decisions will have to be based on the best and most recent scientific knowledge available .
Any decision will necessarily have to pass through the normal procedures , with the full participation of veterinary and scientific experts from Member States , and any decision will have to be subject to rigorous monitoring , prior to its implementation , before the ban can really be relaxed .
There will be no blank cheque !
The Commission for its part will contribute fully to the search for a solution to the crisis .
It expects the United Kingdom to do the same , not only by taking all the steps necessary to restore consumer confidence and to stabilize the market , but also to enable the institutions to function normally .
To put it bluntly , the Commission expects the policy of non-cooperation to end .
Without this commitment , there will be no agreement in Florence !
( Applause ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have restricted myself to the three topics that in my opinion are matters of priority for Florence , but I also express the hope that the European Council will ensure that everything is in place so that , at its next meeting , it can take the decisions necessary , according to the agreed programme , to move towards the introduction of the single currency .
I also hope that , as a result of the commitments entered into at its meeting in Cannes , the European Council can finally lift the blocking of Europol , thus making it possible to increase the cooperation essential for strengthening the internal security of the Union .
Here then , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , are the hopes and expectations that I wish to express on the eve of the European Council in Florence and , as I already know , are yours also .
( Loud applause )
Thank you Mr President of the Commission .
The Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Presidentin-Office of the Council of the European Union , Mr Dini , is also here now .
I should like to welcome him most warmly , and ask him to speak straightaway .
Mr President-in-Office , please take the floor .
Thank you very much , Mr Dini .
I shall now call upon the author of the oral questions , Mr Morán López , to speak .
Mr President , Mr President-inOffice of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I should firstly like to thank you for the clear and detailed information you have given .
The responsibility for organizing the launch of the Intergovernmental Conference has fallen to the Italian presidency .
It is not necessary to remind the House that , at this stage of the process of European integration , the work of this conference is crucial .
On the one hand , it must strengthen and consolidate Europe 's institutions ; and , on the other , it must fine-tune them with a view to the enlargement of the Union .
We should remember and applaud the fact , in this context , that when the Italian presidency addressed the issue of the participation of Parliament in the Intergovernmental Conference , it took a positive line .
The stance adopted by certain other Member States , on the other hand , will prevent Parliament from participating to the extent that it was involved - and with good results , I believe - in the Reflection Group .
Nevertheless , it should be recognized that the degree of Parliament 's - and , by extension , the European public 's - involvement in the Intergovernmental Conference will be far greater than it was at the time of the negotiation of the Maastricht Treaty .
There is therefore a need to recognize this and address the important issues with which the conference will deal from the perspective of Parliament and the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
We know that in its initial stages , under the Italian presidency , the conference has identified the Member States ' positions as regards the issues involved in the revision of the Treaties . And we cannot fail to be concerned at the fact that certain Member States are resisting both the extension of codecision to all legislative acts and the institution of qualified majority voting in the Council as the general rule .
As things stand , there is a risk of the conference becoming bogged down or leading to only minimal revisions , thereby defining a European Union which is inadequate in terms of the challenges which we are facing and the demands of European public opinion which can clearly be discerned , in a process which ultimately provides the Union with its legitimacy .
The European public - and Parliament as its representative in our contacts with intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations - have set out a series of demands which Europe 's institutions have to meet in order for a new process of social legitimation to take place .
Firstly , there is the strengthening of European citizenship , as well as effective cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs , especially as regards the bringing of certain third-pillar matters into the Community domain and the stepping-up of cooperation on others , including the improvement of internal security and the effective combating of terrorism and organized crime , with all the consequences that derive from this , not least as regards the Treaties .
With regard to employment and social protection , the European public wishes them to be dealt with in a separate Treaty chapter .
I welcome Mr Santer 's words and initiatives in this respect .
On the basis of what Mr Dini said , I am confident that the Italian presidency supports this approach , and I would urge both the presidency and the Commission to continue along these lines , since without the degree of social integration represented by full employment and adequate social protection , the Union will be deprived of its legitimacy .
The Union 's institutions must be more effective , more democratic and more transparent .
We know that at the current stage of the conference , issues such as the weighting of votes , the extension of qualified majority voting and the simplification of legislative procedures have not yet achieved a minimum consensus .
All this gives rise to hope and concern : hope in the work of the Italian presidency ; concern at the existing problems and the UK Government 's blocking of the Community process .
Consequently , the committee of which I am chairman is calling for an effort from the Italian presidency , and asks the President-in-Office what measures , what initiatives , the presidency intends to take to ensure that the Florence summit is the success we wish it to be .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking both Mr Santer and Mr Dini for their speeches this morning .
The detail of much of what they have said will be taken up by colleagues from my group who will speak later in this debate .
As leader of the Socialist Group , I want to concentrate on the major political issue which currently confronts the Union .
My group today wants to make it entirely clear that we utterly condemn the aggressive and offensive campaign waged by Conservative politicians and some of the media in the United Kingdom against our partners in the rest of Europe .
We want to express our shared horror at the apparent ease with which connotations of war , the language of hate and the symbols of intolerance have so readily been invoked in the United Kingdom .
The British Government has chosen a policy of non-cooperation with its partners in Europe .
They have chosen to veto European actions across a wide spectrum .
They have been responsible for preventing action , for example , to fight fraud in Europe and to deal with insolvency by which so many companies in Europe are affected .
Unbelievably , they have refused to allow 1997 to be designated European Year against Racism .
These , amongst approximately 70 other EU actions , are all vetoed .
I ask myself : is this an appropriate , reasonable or coherent way to make friends and influence people ?
Is this the way to solve a crisis of consumer confidence ?
Will it deal with the real public health fears of Europe 's people ?
The answer has to be no .
Perhaps the British Government has cause to bring the European Union to its most serious decision-making crisis ever .
Have I missed something ?
Was BSE exported to Britain by another Member State of the Union ?
Of course not !
The British Government 's inept handling of the British-generated BSE crisis has led to collapsing beef sales all across Europe .
All the European Union 's industry is paying the price for one government 's incompetence .
This Friday and Saturday in Florence our fifteen prime ministers have a job to do .
They must take real action to fight the scourge of unemployment in Europe which Mr Santer so eloquently described .
For my group it is entirely unacceptable and unforgivable for one government to prevent action on measures to create jobs when that same government has in its own hands the resolution to this institutional crisis .
Every Member of this House wants to see the ban on British beef lifted , but every Member recognizes the need for substantive scientific evidence to determine the resolution to this crisis and every Member recognizes the concern of their own citizens .
Abandonment in Britain of government control has allowed free rein to an industry responsible for contaminating massive swathes of its own country 's dairy and beef herds .
When action was finally taken to ban the use of such foodstuffs in the domestic market , that same industry had absolutely no scruples of conscience about selling potentially infected foodstuffs to feed the herds in the rest of Europe .
Where is the morality in that ?
Where is the sense of decency and where is any modicum of acceptable business ethics .
In the view of my group this is the political reality of ill-considered , ideologically motivated deregulation of the Thatcher sort .
Yesterday the Commission adopted a framework agreement for dealing with BSE which is designed to come into being simultaneously with the abandonment of the British Government of its policy of non-cooperation .
We welcome that positive signal from the Commission but there can be no half measures .
The Conservative Government in Britain must abandon its non-cooperation policy fully and immediately and the framework agreement must be posited on substantiated scientific data .
I am a Londoner , I am British and I am European .
I am proud to be all of these .
I call on the British Government to respond in the spirit of the Treaty and allow Europe to function for the good of all .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , I think we all agree that the European Union is going through a severe crisis , for two reasons .
The first is the risk which looms of a crisis of public confidence in Europe 's ability to safeguard something as essential as public health .
It would be paradoxical if the European idea were to founder in a crisis of confidence over contaminated animal feed and the risks of the disease being transferred to humans .
For this reason the Commission must draw up a plan with the aid of independent experts and get this disease eradicated .
I think the most important need now is to restore confidence .
Some Member States have had the courage to tackle this in the past .
In my country amongst others we eradicated swine fever with help from the European Union .
And the crisis is extremely acute because the fundamental rules of the European Union are being challenged .
We live and work in a legally constituted community which is based on fundamental rules of law .
These include , for example , Article 5 of the Treaty , and I quote Article 5 ( 2 ) of the Treaty which says that Member States & # x02BC ; shall abstain from any measure which could jeopardize the attainment of the objectives of this Treaty ' .
Respect for Community law , and respect for Article 5 of the Treaty , means that a Member State cannot place itself outside the European system of law by deliberately blocking the normal working of the European Union .
So the UK Government 's policy of non-cooperation has consequences , for public opinion , and for ourselves too .
This policy of non-cooperation has done more than anything else to highlight the need , the urgent need for more widespread majority decision-making in the Council .
These , then , are the two fundamental problems facing the Florence European Council .
There is no doubt , Mr President-in-Office , that the meeting will be dominated by these two fundamental questions .
We hope a solution will be found to them .
In recent months Parliament has been accused of being too long-suffering , has been criticized for that .
It is true that we have spent much time and effort on efforts amongst the big groups to talk and to seek a solution .
Without success , unfortunately .
This is why the resolution put down by various groups of people from the various political groups is particularly clear and particularly critical .
I hope the European Council will take this resolution seriously .
We had hoped that the Florence Council would be a Council for jobs .
We need to talk about the IGC , of course , about foreign policy , but the major objective was jobs .
The most original feature of this debate , I think , was the promise you made on jobs , Mr President of the Commission .
You called to mind a number of essential things .
For example the fact that the existence of a single market and a single currency , so characteristic of the American economy , enables that economy to develop new activities and create new jobs .
But your statement , your ambition to establish the social dialogue , your ambition to find new ways and means of solving the enormous social problem of unemployment , are especially original and promising .
They are a sign of hope .
I sincerely trust that the Florence Council will not degenerate into squabbles over mad cow disease , but that it will produce a sign of hope that social dialogue , the originality of your proposal , of your pact of confidence , will prevail over squabbles which threaten to damage public confidence in the European idea .
Mr President , the Florence European Council provides an opportunity , not to be lost , to put a positive stamp on this six months which frankly , up to now , has not produced the expected results .
True , the presidency 's work was made more difficult by the national elections and the crisis in relations between Great Britain and the European Union .
On that point let us hope that by keeping to the course it was right to adopt the Italian presidency can succeed in saving the Florence summit , which British intransigence has put at risk .
We hope the summit can produce positive results on the fundamental issue of unemployment which you yourself described , President Dini , when you inaugurated the Italian term , as the most urgent problem to be dealt with , and you confirmed that position today in this Chamber .
So we ask you to speed up the initiation of a policy to stem the tide of unemployment and commit your successor to continue the battle against this great European evil .
18 million unemployed bring shame on the Union .
Here the question of the single currency also needs to be clarified .
We are firmly convinced that if the Euro is to become the currency of all the Member States , it should be introduced with the simultaneous participation of all . A currency that divides cannot fulfil the role of bridge to political union , with a common foreign and security policy which needs to have its bases strengthened in Florence .
We want the Italian presidency to leave a strong impact for the Irish presidency to inherit , but so far the presence we are asking for has not been sufficiently felt in the crises involving former Yugoslavia , Israel and Lebanon , or in the Mediterranean .
Europe cannot look eastward only , it must also turn its spotlight on the South .
Emigration , transport , agriculture and fisheries are all Mediterranean issues which need to be examined more closely in the last moments of this six months than has been the case up to now .
Finally , a word on Slovenia : as an Italian , I call for real guarantees and protection for our citizens who have suffered economic damage caused by former Yugoslavia .
The Italian presidency now has a good card to play on the Council table to recover lost time .
It is up to you , Mr President-in-Office , spurred on by playing at home in your own Florence , to demonstrate that you have the political determination and initiative necessary to ensure that the judgement on the Italian six months is positive .
Mr President , paradoxically there is a useful side to the otherwise unjustifiable blocking of European Union decisions by Great Britain .
In fact it demonstrates to the full the fragility of the Union 's present institutional mechanism .
Intergovernmental cooperation is a cumbersome and inadequate instrument : that has been seen and is still seen in the European Union 's lack of presence in foreign policy , as witness Yugoslavia .
It is a real contradiction to have a common currency , but no common economic , fiscal , or employment policy , no common foreign policy , and no common justice policy .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party hopes that contradiction will be resolved in a positive way and that Europe will take the path of federalism .
The Intergovernmental Conference is certainly not moving in that direction , at least not so far , and President Santer was right to state that clearly .
When the Council opens in Florence , I hope the Italian government will recognize all this frankly , and make it no routine meeting but a turning point in the political history of European integration .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , the European United Left , I should like to make three comments which reflect three general but deep concerns .
The first is the impression that the Intergovernmental Conference is becoming dissipated and stagnating , with the added problem of the BSE crisis .
It could be said that the conference has begun to lack intensity and substance .
We wish the conference to be consolidated . We wish to see fresh impetus given , and decisions taken at the Florence summit which signify that the IGC exists and is meeting with a response from the European public .
The second concern is the role of the European Parliament .
Despite the efforts of our representatives , starting with the President of Parliament , it must be said that Parliament does not have the necessary weight in the Union 's democratic balance , at a time when there is a call for greater democracy , transparency and representativeness in Europe 's democratic fabric .
At times , Mr Dini and Mr Santer , Parliament seems to be playing a role similar to that played by the government of a country which is not yet a Member State but which wishes to join the European Union : it has a presence , it can speak , but it takes little part in decision-making .
We are calling for the requirement of Parliament 's assent for any revision of the Treaties to be recognized swiftly and written into the Treaty .
And the third concern is European society and unemployment .
You have never struck us as being a dogmatic politician or economist , Mr Dini .
You will therefore understand that in the eyes of many European citizens , the urgency and rigidity of the conditions for achieving the single currency in accordance with the German conservative model are serving to legitimize policies which are sometimes anti-social and , to a large extent , discourage public investment in the Member States .
They do not , therefore , promote employment . Our group does not give much credence to the stability pact , or indeed the confidence pact .
We need different macroeconomic policies which generate employment .
And we do not wish to be told , a few months or years from now , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , what Chancellor Kohl was told by German demonstrators in Bonn with a large banner : ' You , the European Union , are not combating unemployment , you are combating the unemployed ' .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , the Greens feel bound to express our deep concern about the future of the European Union , because while we are discussing the Intergovernmental Conference which has opened in Turin , events external to that Conference are undermining Europe 's prospects .
What has happened with the mad cow crisis and the United Kingdom 's decision to block business shows that there is lack of respect for Article 5 of the Treaty , and that the existing Treaty is no longer tenable and would be even less so should there be enlargement .
Given this situation I believe we must vigorously confirm , the European Union must vigorously confirm that an effort is needed within the Intergovernmental Conference to achieve greater internal democracy and establish the conditions necessary for enlargement to go ahead safely .
And that is why it may be important - and I say this particularly to representatives of the European Socialist Party - for the European Union , under attack from the United Kingdom and faced with these blocking tactics , to act as fourteen countries for the time being , because by its obstruction the United Kingdom has de facto withdrawn from joint decisions .
We must be in a position to move forward , above all reassuring consumers about BSE , all European consumers , starting with British consumers who face difficulties as a result of their government 's decisions .
We must work harder all round , in every sense , starting with the Florence Summit .
On employment , the Greens are not at all satisfied to be told yet again that the only alternative is to reiterate the need for major infrastructure projects , and that the agreement obtained on the trans-European transport network is a great result .
Here too we have seen a debate about the prerogatives of the European Parliament and an attack on the Maastricht agreements , with Parliament prevented from discussing fourteen projects on the pretext that the decisions had already been taken , which meant Parliament was denied the opportunity of co-decision .
Such attacks call into question and threaten the future of Europe , and they do not augur well for good progress at the Intergovernmental Conference .
It does not solve the employment problem if the most we can do is offer firms new profit margins , which provides no guarantee of employment , and also damages the environment and social security .
Nor are we satisfied with what we have heard on foreign policy .
We have heard nothing about Albania .
We have heard that the Turkish premier will be present in Florence despite was is going on in Turkey internally and externally , and we do not have a commitment to MEDA .
But we are satisfied that this administration has finally made an agreement with Slovenia .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , it is a real shame , President Dini , that you arrived late this morning at the debate on preparations for the Florence European Council , as you would have been able to hear President Santer 's speech which brought some politics into this debate rather than simply presenting us with a list of expenditure as you have done : frankly that could probably have been circulated as a working document .
Allow me to draw your attention to some of the points made by the President of the Commission : on the IGC , President Santer confirmed that the record so far is hardly exciting , and we all know President Santer is a byword for prudence so I think that says it all .
The Italian presidency , the government you led earlier , and the present government , chose not to give the negotiating group the necessary political profile and substantially the result is that not one step forward has been taken in six months .
President Santer has taken a clear , firm and consistent position on the British crisis , without any pretence of mediating on everything and between everyone , based on the health of European citizens and consumers , and that came through in his speech .
Will the Italian presidency support these priorities ? Will it confirm that the ban will only be lifted when the disease has been eradicated ?
Will the Italian presidency do everything in its power to make the British government face up to its responsibilities on BSE and the intolerable paralysis of the institutions , which , incredibly , you seem to regard merely as a source of regret ?
Does the Italian presidency confirm that any decision on the subject will be based first and foremost on the most precise scientific evidence possible ?
True , the presidency has cleared the way for the agreement with Slovenia , overturning the position of the Dini government on that , and will sign the agreement on Uzbekistan : a drop in the ocean , in my view .
Mr President , I was rather surprised and pleased by Mr Santer 's words on taking up his office : less and better .
In 1993 , there were 17 000 EU rules , so a clear-out was needed in the mass of legislation .
Now the subsidiarity principle was to be applied : let the Member States take care of those matters which cannot be dealt with better in Brussels .
It was the right approach , but unfortunately Mr Santer has not been able to deliver the goods .
There are now 21 392 regulations , directives and other laws .
The quantity of legislation has increased elevenfold in 22 years .
But instead of a clear-out , it is now planned to press on regardless with majority decision-making and hence more government from Brussels .
We propose a different approach .
The limits of the EU 's powers should be defined , so that it deals with international topics .
EU legislation should begin and end in national parliaments , so our citizens are able to keep track of it .
The Commission should only put forward proposals if asked to do so by the national parliaments .
The EU should only be able to adopt common minimum rules , and standards should become a voluntary means of assistance instead of a centralized dictatorship .
It is all very well for a fruit wholesaler to be able to refer to common standards on the size of strawberries in international trade , but my mother-in-law does not need any EU rules to sell the freshly picked strawberries from her garden to people who can see the fruit .
It is all very well to have common minimum rules on the employment of children , but my wife and I do not need an EU directive to decide whether our son should deliver newspapers .
It is all very well to have common rules on what kind of toxic substances can be deposited in groundwater , but it is worse than mad cow disease when a majority in the Commission in Brussels is ready to stop a local authority setting tougher limits on the pollution of groundwater , which is not an international commodity ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) ... and I would not least suggest to the President of the Commission that he should open the Florence summit by putting forward a long list of proposals to abolish ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , you have mentioned the achievements of the preceding six months , and you have listed the goals to be achieved in the next six months , but we have really heard very little of the results obtained in the Italian six months .
Perhaps you took out those pages , but I cannot believe there were any extra pages , because everyone knows the standard times for speeches in this Chamber , you more than anyone .
I do not think Italy has brought any honour upon itself with its lax attitude to Slovenia over property taken from Italians and not yet restored .
Nor is it to the credit of our presidency that there has been no reference to human rights in countries we import from , countries which use child labour and where social security is totally lacking .
We ought to be trying to protect the physical and moral health of these people , and protect our economy .
As regards the grave embarrassment of the British government and the economic damage , it might have been avoided if something had been done earlier .
I remember asking the Commission a question a year and a half ago , and the reply was that everything was under control . So much under control that we are where we are today !
We are delighted with the initiative to create a European Observatory for Racism and Xenophobia and we would modestly suggest a home for it .
We see Mantua as the home for this agency , because that is where the pilot project saw the light of day , establishing how and when the phenomenon of racism and xenophobia arises , if only inside Italy .
As we live through the final days of the Italian presidency and approach the Florence Summit , I would like to remind everyone here of the need to return finally to the aims of the founding fathers of the European Union .
We talk too much about money and economics these days and never about the deeper political union which is the indispensable prelude , the sine qua non , for achieving economic union , the single currency and a minimum of welfare .
It is impossible , inconceivable , that the unemployment afflicting 20 million citizens in Europe can be eliminated if we do not achieve the political union that will give impetus and power to economic union .
There will certainly be interests , outside Europe too , seeking to impede the achievement of this union , but we are ready to fight for it in the knowledge that despite different cultural and political origins there are people in this Parliament who stand by political union , because they know that is where the future lies , and the alternative is war between poor people .
If political union is not achieved first - I wish the Italian presidency would commit itself to this - enlargement will only lead to massacres of poor people by other poor people and a constant rise in unemployment while the rich and powerful keep getting richer and more powerful .
We do not want oligarchies , we want democracy for all citizens equally , and we also want to remind the Italian presidency of the obligation to act in such a way that all are equal inside the European Union , and in particular that the problems of Italian firms should be dealt with by the same standards as other countries .
It so happens that at the moment we are the only country where a formal decision has been applied on the issue of telephone systems , while no measures have yet been applied in other countries in the same position .
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I would like to concentrate on the fact that Florence is the last act of the Italian presidency , so it is important to use it to the maximum advantage of our common destiny .
After all the talk of recent years , we expect the Italian presidency to close the six months by bringing concrete proposals and measures to Florence .
What is more , Mr Dini , you won acclaim from Parliament by committing yourself to that last time you were here .
I appreciate the Italian government 's decision to hold a national conference on employment as an operational follow-up to the confidence pact between the social partners , an initiative we resolutely support and consider extremely important .
I hope the decision will be taken in Florence to do the same throughout Europe , but the Florence Council can also decide to refinance the funding for small and medium-sized firms agreed at Copenhagen , indicate approaches to revision of the labour market and working time to be agreed between the social partners under the confidence pact , and above all decide to finance the trans-European networks and the most innovative part of the White Paper , raising the loan on the financial market called for by Delors and never authorized by the Council .
This is a fundamental political issue which demonstrates the capacity of the European Union to intervene in the economy at moments of crisis .
We are hoping for long-awaited concrete measures , and if they do not come it would be better to abandon the employment programmes .
There is resistance to serious discussion at the Intergovernmental Conference , as President Santer has clearly stated , and I think he did well to say so and it should also be said openly to the citizens of Europe .
We are alarmed at delay which could turn into paralysis , loss of the sense of Europe and the general interest , and regression to purely national visions .
Our criticism goes out to all the governments holding back the work on significant issues .
Now that the presidency is ending , and with it the obligation to be the mouthpiece for common positions , we call on the Italian government to become a resolute driving force at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , it is the heartfelt hope of the great majority of this Parliament that the Florence European Council is not remembered only for the mad cow crisis .
The joint resolution to wind up this debate refers to the issues on the table : the Intergovernmental Conference , employment , the CFSP , the third pillar , the internal energy market .
Great hopes hang on the effective capacity to finalize a timely and credible response to the tragedy of unemployment .
I live in an area of Europe where unemployment is over 20 % of the population of working age , where of 100 young people looking for work 55 do not find a job and many of them , long term unemployed , are now well over thirty-two years old .
This is a tragic situation , which goes well beyond tolerance limits and has serious economic , social and civil consequences , affording easier penetration to organized crime .
This situation makes me indifferent to byzantine disputes about dual European and national responsibility and obliges me to demand an effective and urgent European initiative , which really adds to the efforts of the national , regional and local governments rather than using them as a comfortable alibi for inertia and delays
So I want to thank you and support you , President Santer , on the method adopted and the merits of the European Commission 's proposal .
You have presented a confidence pact to governments and social partners and Europe must be in a position to sign that pact , especially with the younger generation , on the sure grounds that Europe will help them build a better future through its measures , its choices , its greater capacity to respond to the new challenges of globalization and because it is really prepared to gamble on their willingness to make a commitment , their inventiveness , their creativity and their intelligence .
We are pleased to note President Dini 's assurance of availability , on behalf of the Council .
Mr President , we also want to thank you for the very useful work done in the last few months despite the election campaign which kept you busy in Italy , finding echoes in some of the speeches here .
We are cheered by your commitment to start the negotiating stage of the IGC as soon as possible .
There is a widespread conviction that unless the problem of the Union 's democratic deficit is confronted and resolved , it will not be possible for the planned enlargements to take place and it will not be possible to give the European Union the desired impetus .
It must be the hope of us all , and I have almost finished , Mr President , that within a year Europe will really be able to plan its future , its borders , its aims , and its democracy . What better way to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Treaty of Rome ?
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing my thanks and appreciation to the Italian presidency , Mr Dini , and to the Commission President , Mr Santer , for their valuable contributions to this debate here this morning .

Next week 's European summit must concentrate on defusing the tensions which have been allowed to build up in recent weeks between the British Government and its European partners .
The policy of non-cooperation which the British Government is now pursuing in Brussels has had an entirely negative impact and must be abandoned at the earliest opportunity .
In Britain much of the anti-European rhetoric which has been unleashed following the government 's decision to adopt an obstructionist approach to European decision-making has been profoundly disturbing .
Responsible political leaders in London must now take the initiative and reassure the British people that they have nothing to fear from their neighbours in the European Union .
European leaders , especially the British Government , can help to restore some balance in relations between Britain and the rest of Europe by agreeing on a framework for resolving the BSE problem at the summit .
The European Union must also take steps to restore the confidence of consumers and producers in beef as a healthy , safe and marketable product .
It is imperative that the protection of the health of our citizens is our only priority and that all decisions will be based on the best scientific evidence available .
I commend President Santer on his principled stand on this issue , defending the citizens of Europe .
The beef crisis has already diverted attention from important work under way in the Intergovernmental Conference .
The beef crisis has diverted attention away from fighting unemployment and international crime .
The Intergovernmental Conference must prepare for the expansion of the European Union to include the former communist countries in Eastern Europe .
It is important that these negotiations are undertaken in a calm and rational manner .
Unfortunately , the debate on Europe which has been under way in the British media has been characterized by an absence of calm and rational comment .
Finally , the danger now is that agreement at the IGC will be much more difficult to achieve because of the antiEuropean forces unleased in the United Kingdom .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we realize we are taking a rather anomalous position : in Italy we use our casting votes to support the centre-left government , here we are about to vote against the compromise your presidency has put its name to , because it raises a concern which is above politics .
As we all know , eighteen million people are unemployed in Europe , not to mention the millions of unemployed who are not counted , and the winds of recession are blowing .
If it was raining at first , in terms of unemployment , it threatens to hail tomorrow .
And what is Europe doing ?
Very little in our opinion and that in the wrong direction , as the speeches by President Santer and Minister Dini today confirm .
Europe is substantially saying it maintains the Maastricht convergence towards the single currency , when that is now virtually impossible without ferocious deflationary effects and there is actually a move to relax the deadlines and modify the specific methods of implementation . But Maastricht is still there as a scourge to the national governments to attack social provision and , as has been seen in Germany , that cannot be done without acutely intensifying social conflict .
The confidence pacts are an attempt to make more room for investment policy to increase growth , but now even the European Parliament 's committee recognizes that growth alone does not create jobs , so political Europe is oscillating between Maastricht and some kind of anticyclical policy . The former aggravates employment problems , the latter does not resolve them , so we are getting into a real blind alley , and Europe is threatened , more than threatened now , with a crisis of social cohesion , and the prospects for European civilization and democracy are dim .
We are very worried and alarmed . We believe that unless there is a radical change in direction the crisis in Europe has already begun .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , the motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Institutional Affairs is quite right to complain about the status quo tendency of the Intergovernmental Conference 's work so far .
But has this Parliament done enough to overcome this policy of timidity and lack of imagination ?
Yet the task that lies before is plain for all to see . That task is to transform an economic community , an area without internal borders , into a union of nations , a political union , like it says in the Maastricht Treaty .
There is no democratic way of creating such a union other than by entering into a process that will produce a constitution , in order to overcome Europe 's East-West divide , thereby providing an initial response to the enormous challenges facing society today .
Where should the initiative for such a process ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , it is already three months since work on the IGC opened officially in Turin and we are forced to recognize that we find ourselves in a blocked situation .
Some will say that it was difficult to achieve more results in such a short time , forgetting that the reflection group under the chairmanship of Mr Westendorp had already done the spadework and that this preparatory work should have allowed the negotiators to start on real negotiations from March onwards .
We think it is time to sound the alarm since , in our opinion , the problem is not restricted to the question of the British veto , unacceptable as it is .
There is a real danger of getting bogged down , of a woolly compromise and of a downward revision of the Treaty , against which the European Parliament should rebel .
There is , in particular , a marked absence of political impetus and of an overall vision , which are lacking at the very moment when the building of the Community has to face crucial challenges .
Are we ready , as an institution , to respond to these challenges when faced with the hesitations of our governments ?
My group is convinced that there is no alternative to the pursuit of integration and that this will only be viable on a federal type basis .
That is why , if the difficulties persist , we think serious consideration will have to be given to the idea that those who wish to go forward should do so and in that way make all States face their responsibilities .
It is surely better to take the risk of a political crisis now , rather than pursue negotiations which would risk leading us , on the eve of enlargement , to woolly and inadequate compromises which would jeopardize for ever the future of our Union .
Mr President , on the eve of the Florence Council , the governments of Member States still seem to be hesitating to endorse the federalist proposals that the European institutions are urging upon them .
They are right to take a second look at them , since by listening to bad advice from the Europe of today , they would jeopardize the opportunities for the Europe of tomorrow .
Today 's Europe is divided into peoples .
We need not ask why : it puts the abolition of frontiers before security , free trade before jobs and health , and superstates before the sovereignty of the people .
How would citizens identify themselves in such a Europe ?
The mad cow affair is unfortunately a good illustration of our drifting off course and the IGC should learn the lessons from this if it really wants to solve the problems of concern to citizens .
First lesson : our agriculture , with all frontiers open , is in danger of sliding down the slippery slope of levelling down , whereas , in accordance with the spirit of Article 100a , we should set a high standard of quality for ourselves .
To stop such a slide , however , we must adopt strict standards and a genuine Community preference .
Second lesson : States should have the right to use Article 36 , particularly to protect the health of their people , even in areas already harmonized , something which is in any case expressly provided for in Article 100a for the environment .
Third lesson : the abolition of controls on goods at internal frontiers on 1 January 1993 has at the same time dismantled information and verification systems and has increased fraud .
This must be rectified as a matter of urgency .
Fourth lesson : since the beginning of the crisis , the Commission has sought to maintain the movement of goods without control - this is called free movement - and has gone as far as threatening Member States with the Court of Justice if they protected themselves and has rejected transparency because the press has revealed that pressure has apparently been exerted on experts .
We think the IGC should allow better control over the powers of the Commission and that it should impose on that body a general duty of transparency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , caught between the uncertainties in the East and the mad cow disaster , the Intergovernmental Conference is marking time and nothing gives us any reason to think that the Florence summit will be able to unblock the situation in a Europe whose machinery is beginning to seize up for the simple reason that it was bound to happen one day .
It is not so much the cows that are mad as the utopian project that we are always chasing after .
The British government , like the Anglo-Saxon multinationals involved in totalitarian feeding , like the Commission and like the governments of our countries , bears an overwhelming responsibility for the undermining of both cattle feed and human foodstuffs .
But it is scandalous to use this situation in an attempt , practically if not institutionally , to get round the unanimity rule .
The British government , after all , is defending its own interests .
Whether it is trying to continue exporting its glaucous gelatinous products is its business .
It is up to others not to accept these goods .
It must be recognized that it is because of the pressure from the Commission that the British government has been reduced , in retaliation , to try to block what it could in order to assert its point of view .
We have here a striking demonstration that it is absurd to seek to merge the old European nations .
Too much Europe is killing Europe .
The Europe we wanted and still want is one with a multiplicity of cooperation agreements , between States of course , but even more between industrial , commercial and agricultural enterprises .
By dint of seeking to govern and legislate in all areas , we arrive at a situation where any crisis in a single area leads to a threat of a general break-up .
That is what will happen sooner or later , since no yoke can hold peoples who want to be free .
Putting an end to the unanimity rule is finally allowing the Commission to exercise increasingly compulsory powers .
There is thus nothing to say that legislation will not be forced on us tomorrow on euthanasia , the liberalization of drugs or the democratic legalization of satanic cults .
Mr President , I believe that Mr Santer presented the issue in its proper terms this morning .
What we have today is a crisis of confidence of Europe 's citizens in the Community institutions . And I was particularly reassured by the Commission President 's statement this morning to the effect that the Commission will act solely on the basis of the best scientific reports with regard to the issue of mad cow disease .
However , the President of the Commission will perhaps agree with me that the crisis of confidence of Europe 's citizens in the Community institutions may be caused partly by certain past actions of those same institutions .
More specifically , with regard to public opinion in Spain , great concern has been caused by reports in the Spanish media that a senior official in the Directorate-General for Agriculture , Mr Mansito , has been relieved of his duties and in particular of the chairmanship of the Veterinary Committee as a result of his firm stance in defence of scientific criteria .
With regard to the Council - and I now wish to refer to the excellent speech by the President-in-Office , Mr Dini - I would stress that Europe 's citizens are also concerned at the fact that , at present , decisions in the Council are not being taken in accordance with the need to protect public health , but on the basis of political horsetrading .
I trust that the President-in-Office , with his characteristic rectitude , will prevent the Council of Ministers from being turned into a forum for political horse-trading .
Lastly , I wish to express my clear support for the stance of the President-in-Office .
At present , the British Government is violating not only the spirit of the Treaty , but also - as both Mr Martens and the President-inOffice said - Article 5 of the EC Treaty .
This is a clear infringement which must be eliminated .
Europe began with a Greek god in the form of a bull .
I am sure that it will not end with an insular mad cow .
There is one thing that we must realise , and the BSE crisis has made this clear : this Intergovernmental Conference must make progress on decision-making mechanisms that will prevent a destructive government from obstructing the European Union 's ability to act .
For this reason , the introduction of the principle of taking majority decisions in all matters involving legislation is the clear consequence of the BSE crisis .
This is one of the tasks that we must set ourselves at this Intergovernmental Conference .
President Dini , I am grateful to you and to Mr Faggiolo for your friendly attitude towards Parliament .
I am also sure that , in the final version of the Italian report on the progress made by the Intergovernmental Conference to date , issues such as ability to act , transparency and the objectives of the European Parliament will be adequately taken into consideration .
Let me make a second comment .
The NATO Council in Berlin has taken away the excuse used by all those who , on the grounds of their alleged consideration for the USA , were previously against a defence-policy identity for the European Community .
The NATO Council , with the agreement of the USA , stated quite clearly that such a defence-policy identity is in the interests of both parties and is in the interests of the development of transatlantic relations , and that for this reason we Europeans are called upon to develop our own capacities , in order to fulfil common objectives for the protection of peace and freedom .
I believe that these tasks will have to be set by this Intergovernmental Conference , as will many other things .
Allow me to make one final comment .
Mr Santer , I am grateful to you for your remarks .
If the Commission succeeds in ensuring that the elimination of the BSE crisis takes place subject to the condition that the policy of non-cooperation is abandoned , so that step by step , by taking all veterinary and medical knowledge into consideration , and by taking corresponding control measures at European level , the confidence of consumers can be won back , so that they feel that their health is not in danger , then we are in a position to solve this BSE crisis .
If you are going to stick to these conditions accordingly , then we are also in a position to make this clear to our consumers .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I am intervening especially on behalf of the French Delegation of the UPE Group consisting , as you know , of elected Members from the RPR and the CNI .
I should like to make three observations .
The first , to say to you , Mr President of the Commission , that we particularly appreciated your speech .
This morning , you set out in magisterial fashion the order of priorities : nothing is more important than public health .
It was essential that Europe should declare this to be its position and should do so in the strongest terms , here and now .
Having said that , we should not forget the reality , soon to be a tragic reality , of the economic problems that are about to arise .
We must realize that , within a few months for certain , anger will be brewing up in our beefproducing countryside since , while consumption within the Union has decreased to an often significant extent ( even though for some countries the drop is quite moderate ) , exports have now fallen to zero or almost zero .
The necessary steps must be taken to reverse the tide of opinion both internationally and amongst buyers outside the Union .
The second remark is to say that the position of Great Britain is morally indefensible and politically completely irresponsible .
To mix up the problem of the beef crisis with the functioning of European institutions is pointless and scandalous , unless it is a deliberate and in the end convenient camouflage of a wish to block the IGC .
Thirdly and lastly , the IGC should fight back .
Florence should mark a new turning point : Europe cannot afford the luxury of a crisis .
We ourselves are pleased at the firm determination of the French authorities to create the conditions for this initiative at the Florence summit .
Florence should have been the moment for all of Europe to take stock of the many critical decisions that weigh upon us , in particular unemployment , as underlined by President Santer , and the democratization of our institutions .
Instead , it has been hijacked by the behaviour of one Member State .
The waters of a flood of Anglo-Saxon self-delusion are lapping at the steps of the Fortezza del Basso .
Many people in Britain are shocked , saddened , angered and ashamed by the antics of the British Government .
The President-in-Office of the Council spoke of solidarity with the British Government .
Mr President , please think about solidarity with the British people instead .
( EN ) British Government representatives will claim that their policy of non-cooperation is all about defending vital national interests .
Well , I challenge them to explain the method in their madness .
They claim to want an efficient Europe that gives its citizens value for money : so they block moves to crack down on fraud .
They claim to want a Europe in which businesses can grow and prosper : so they block moves to support those very businesses .
They claim to want a Europe that is moulded in Britain 's interests : so they threaten to block all discussion of the big issues that face us today , from common foreign and security policy to justice and home affairs .
If that is protecting vital national interests , then clearly Britain is suffering from mad minister disease .
The hard core of Euro-sceptics is running the show , driving ministers to show how tough they are on Europe with ever more extreme acts of folly .
I make two suggestions .
To the British Government I say : wake up .
Conservatives are supposed to believe in strong leadership .
If they still do , then it is time to start showing some .
The British people want to see evidence that they can lead in the interests of the whole nation and in the common interest of the community of European nations , not in the interests of 20 disgruntled back-bench Members of Parliament .
To the rest of Europe I say : do not give in to blackmail .
My constituents have suffered more than most from the BSE crisis .
But it would do no favours to Britain , or to the Union , to give the impression that these tactics have worked and it would probably result in an unworkable agreement .
As British ministers should know all too well , it is never right to negotiate when someone is subjecting you to blackmail .
Now they should learn that there are no exceptions to that rule .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , the President-in-Office of the Council is not here any more as he has quite reasonably decided to follow the example of many Members of Parliament .
I agree with President Santer when he said the record so far was not positive .
As Mr Santer said , this is not a negative judgement on the Italian presidency - it is as well to remember Mr Santer 's whole sentence and not continue the election campaign which has not borne good fruit in Italy anyway .
The Italian presidency has actually done well in conditions that have frequently been very difficult .
In my view , President Santer 's negative judgement is on the deadlock in the construction of Europe as a whole .
One need only think of what we regarded as positive intentions proposed in Turin , which have remained intentions , perhaps partly because of the British difficulties .
But I am convinced that the difficulties also reside in the fact that we continue to concentrate only on monetary union instead of working for the political unity of our continent , with the risk that the monetary and financial objectives may collapse as well .
So I think it is right to ask for one more effort , as the final act of the Italian presidency , to establish a real plan of action that can be adopted and applied in every country of the Union .
It is not enough to speak of a confidence pact , President Santer , because there is no confidence , there can be no confidence in a Europe with 18 million unemployed .
There is one more thing I want to ask for at the Florence Summit : let the door be opened to the possibility of renegotiating important matters like the deadlines for the single currency and greater flexibility in the accounting parameters .
I ask that to save the European Union and relaunch it , so that together we can all avert the threat of real shipwreck .
Madam President , by way of an introduction we heard Mr Santer express the wish that the Florence summit should be a real turning point , marking the mobilisation of Europe to ensure real progress on the labour market and the creation of more jobs .
Like millions of people in Europe I am sure , I share this wish .
However , if it is to be possible it is essential that EMU should be discussed by the Intergovernmental Conference and that the convergence criteria should be revised because the cuts which are now being made throughout Europe in order to meet the convergence criteria are instead increasing unemployment .
I believe we all agree that all countries must have sound economic policies .
However , sound policy also means pursuing a policy which prevents social exclusion .
It is high time , Madam President , to review this politically high-risk project which is creating social unrest and political tension in Europe .
Put EMU on the agenda for the IGC !
Madam President , I listened with great interest to what Mr Santer and Mr Dini said to us here this morning .
Both gentlemen highlighted the lack of progress to date at the IGC negotiations .
While recognizing that the problems are very complex , they can only be solved by courageously taking the first decisions on the various items on the agenda .
The crisis of confidence in the Member States will have to be overcome .
The negotiators will have to move into a higher gear if they are to reach successful conclusions .
As Mr Dini said , we in the European Parliament are in the best position to reflect the concerns of our citizens .
I know that many items which people want tackled are high on our agenda but they are not being dealt with at the IGC .
I want to lobby unashamedly for the European anti-poverty network .
A priority must be the fight against poverty and social exclusion and in particular the discouragement of the 18 million unemployed .
We are all very concerned about the impact on employment of the beef crisis .
But consider for a moment the plight of the millions of people in long-term unemployment and the many people who have never had a job and who struggle through life in dire poverty .
The fight against unemployment must be put on a par with attainment of EMU .
We need to redress the balance between economic policies and social policies by providing for a social audit of all European Union policies .
We should enshrine fundamental rights for all citizens of the Union in the Treaty : the right to a decent income , health care , education , housing , work , training , welfare services , community and family life .
These must be guaranteed to all residents of the Union without discrimination .
Finally , the behaviour of the British Government with regard to the beef crisis is unacceptable .
I fear that if beef is allowed to take over the Florence Summit it will augur very badly for a successful summit in Dublin .
Madam President , despite the Commission 's honest efforts to solve the BSE problem - and I greatly appreciate President Santer 's initiative - it increasingly looks as if we are about to have one of the strangest European summits of the past 15 to 20 years .
At a time when the European Union 's heads of government need to be addressing urgent problems such as unemployment - and we have an excellent proposal on that - or the conduct of the IGC , EMU , enlargement , the role of the Union in Yugoslavia after the pull-out of US troops , for example , and a host of foreign policy issues , relations with Russia , Israel , with Turkey which cannot keep its hands off Greek islands , in short , at a time when the Union has a lot of important things on its plate this European summit looks like becoming a ridiculous mad cow farce .
No prizes for guessing what the man in the street will have to say about that !
The negative attitudes towards Europe which are already firmly rooted will flourish even more as a result .
Three brief remarks , Madam President .
On BSE first .
I totally agree with Mr Santer that BSE is a public health matter and must be resolved in a responsible manner .
I approve of the proposal which has now been put forward . I hope the United Kingdom will accept it .
But at the same time I must say the chances are that it will not .
In that event we should seriously consider having the other fourteen summit members simply take decisions without the United Kingdom .
The United Kingdom would then have to refer the legitimacy of those decisions to the Court of Justice .
As regards the IGC , it has to be said really that little progress has been made .
The progress report we have now received says little more than last December 's Westendorp report .
I think we need to indicate that it is important for something to be done .
We want our citizens to play more of a part .
We want more openness and transparency .
We want more democracy .
We want better arrangements for internal security and better results from our external policy .
These things have to happen .
Parliamentary assent is needed to all these things .
One last remark .
The resolution now before us mentions Yugoslavia .
We are very keen , and the resolution reflects this , to have an inquiry into Srebrenica .
I would draw this passage to the attention of the Italian presidency ; will they consider it carefully ?
President Dini - I shall address him even if he is not here at the moment - during the six months that has seen the start of the Intergovernmental Conference in Turin , the government holding the presidency - the Italian government - has changed radically .
Only President Dini has retained a fundamental role in the handover , moving from Prime Minister to Minister of Foreign Affairs : his responsibilities on Europe are quite undiminished .
So we look to President Dini , and naturally to President Santer , to guarantee the continuity of the work begun in Turin .
Since Turin , in fact , the European Union has moved into a phase of total renewal , a renewal applying to issues and problems which this Parliament , together with the other institutions , has clearly identified and which have been mentioned this morning : unemployment , the single currency , peace and economic growth , free movement inside the internal market , social cohesion , consumer protection .
On this last point we have a problem which certainly did not originate three months ago , which has already siphoned off too many resources from the work in Turin and which threatens to have a negative impact on the work in Florence : the mad cow crisis . While we maintain full solidarity with Great Britain , we want to see its government forcefully invited to shoulder its responsibilities towards consumers and their health , which are even more important than its economic responsibilities .
As President Dini reminded us this morning , Turin has produced two main issues : administrative and fiscal deregulation and bureaucratic simplification .
These are essential conditions of economic recovery , above all for small and medium-sized firms , the real cogs in that recovery .
The Italian presidency has not been without merit , and still has a chance at Florence to leave a lasting impression , especially on its the Irish successors , who cannot really be expected to have a Mediterranean vision of Europe .
It is worth remembering that Italy will not hold the presidency again for at least seven and a half years , and by that time Europe will either be finally built or will not be built at all .
Madam President , concerning the Florence European Council , my first words must be to condemn the United Kingdom government for its obstruction used to retaliate illegitimately against the Union 's measures to combat the scourge of BSE .
Despite everything this crisis has the merit of showing how impossible it is for us to maintain the Treaty rule according to which one Member State can boycott the normal functioning of the institutions and prevent decisions being taken that all the others want , decisions in this case that not only concern vital interests but are also aimed at protecting public health .
As priorities for the Florence summit and , as it happens , in accordance with the joint resolution that we are adopting , I should like to emphasise the following points : adopting a clear strategy to get the IGC going and redefining the respective priorities , unblocking the resources needed to implement measures planned in the White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment , giving support to the Middle East peace process on the basis of the scrupulous respect by all parties of the agreements in force and , finally , pursuing actions and current programmes in former Yugoslavia following on from the Dayton agreements in order to reach a lasting peace .
Madam President , as the beef crisis continues so the British Government 's still largely indiscriminate non-cooperation policy appears increasingly counter-productive .
There is simply no sense in blocking measures which , for example , prevent fraud , reduce red tape , promote minority languages and step up the fight against racism .
Whatever happens with the beef ban , if the British Government now disrupts the Florence summit it would be an act of folly and stupidity .
On the summit agenda will be proposals for a stability pact to boost job creation , measures to encourage small and medium-sized businesses , measures to boost investment in trans-European networks and measures to ensure that the single market operates more effectively .
With 18 million people without work in Britain and throughout the European Union it would be madness for the British Government to block this proposal .
Jobs must be the Florence priority and nothing - absolutely nothing - should be allowed to distract us from this objective .
I want the beef ban to be lifted immediately but I also recognize that the British Government must bring forward proposals which will command genuine consumer confidence .
The events of the past few weeks have undoubtedly harmed the European Union and weakened Britain 's standing and undermined her influence .
The Florence summit has to be seen as an opportunity for a fresh start .
The onus is firmly on the British Government to demonstrate that it is serious about constructive , European cooperation .
If a Conservative Government is not up to that task it should make way for a Labour Government which is .
Madam President , the harrowing experience of the tragedy in Yugoslavia has highlighted the absolute need for a common foreign policy and precisely targeted preventive diplomacy .
A lot is said about this vital need , but little is done .
The worst thing of all is that there is no mechanism for dealing with dangerous situations immediately they arise .
That is precisely what is missing now in the case of the Aegean .
For some time , the behaviour of a country bordering on that sea has been generating intolerable tension in the region .
For some time , various reports have pointed to an imminent danger of a hot conflict .
What is even more worrying is that the country in question , Turkey , actually felt free to embark on this behaviour after it was granted - with the blessings of all of the partners - a closer association with the European Union via the customs union .
When Turkey provoked the dangerous incident on Imia , it was the Americans - not the Europeans - who intervened and sent Mr Holbrooke , the architect of the Dayton accords , to take the heat out of the situation . And he it was who noted , somewhat scornfully , that the European Union seemed to be asleep .
However , Turkey has been stirring up trouble even since Imia . There have been threats of war , frenzied statements by ministers , brazen territorial claims and aspersions about the sovereignty of Members of the Union .
Time is running out . If the Florence Council really wishes to promote a common foreign and security policy and preventive diplomacy , it should point out very clearly to that mischief-making country that if it wishes to reap the benefits of European cooperation it must honour its obligations to the European Union and show respect for international legitimacy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the escalation of the mad cow crisis shows how lies , economies with the truth and secrecy create a climate in which hatred , fear , xenophobia and suspicion can flourish .
It hardly needs saying that this may ultimately jeopardize the ratification of amendments to the Treaty .
When Major then blames the European Union for the crisis this is the ultimate example of the attitude adopted by an awful lot of governments whenever they use and misuse the European Union as a lightning conductor , an umbrella or a scapegoat .
That too fuels scepticism and disbelief amongst the public .
The Intergovernmental Conference must strip governments of the institutional instrument they might use to play this obstructionist game again in future .
The instrument they make use of , ladies and gentlemen , is the secrecy of their deliberations and the secrecy of voting in the Council of Ministers .
I thus call on the IGC to address itself to the ending , once and for all , of secret voting in the Council 's activities as legislator and generally speaking to the promotion of transparency .
Madam President , three months after its official opening and despite the efforts of the Italian presidency , the Intergovernmental Conference is at a standstill .
The first reason for this is the general lack of political impetus .
The problems to be solved by the conference are not technical but political .
Only the ministers and Heads of State and of Government can provide the indispensable impetus .
They should become personally involved , which has not yet happened , if they wish the conference to make progress .
The second reason is the blocking by the British Government .
The blocking of the conference started well before the ' mad cow ' crisis , but since it was expressed in a civil fashion the other Member States could delay the moment of truth .
The blackmail by the British Government over ' mad cow disease ' is forcing Member States to ask themselves the following question sooner then they expected : how can the present United Kingdom Government be bypassed , how can we progress without it ?
A fine result for Mr Major .
He isolates himself and shows by his attitude the vital importance of majority voting .
The European Council in Florence should lay down a few guidelines for the Irish presidency so that the Intergovernmental Conference does not find itself in Dublin at the same point as it is today .
Our resolution details the priorities .
I shall deal with only four of them .
The new chapter on employment to highlight the wish to put employment at the top of European Union priorities ; public services as a central element in European citizenship ; codecision for the European Parliament covering all legislative acts ; making majority voting the general rule ; and finally the simplification of the Treaty , a subject that should be tackled after Florence if we want to have a chance of making progress in that direction .
This Parliament , I hope , will not approve a minimal reform .
Nor will some national parliaments .
Ambitious reforms are the only way .
Madam President , last week the Committee on Regional Policy met in Brussels . At that meeting , two Austrian heads of provincial governments , who had entered into office as a result of democratic elections , could not be given formal accreditation owing to the British policy of non-cooperation .
The problem in the Committee on Regional Policy was solved in the spirit of European cooperation .
We must do the same thing on the subject of BSE , and in doing so we must not , above all , forget our own farmers at home .
Yesterday evening many millions of Europeans had the pleasure of seeing the excellent match between England and the Netherlands .
I should like to ask our British colleagues what would have happened if Europe had followed a policy of non-cooperation in the European football championship .
But there are more important things in Europe than the Committee on Regional Policy and the European football championship : unemployment , a Europe that is able to act for itself , economic and monetary union and many other things .
And here we really do need the cooperation of everybody .
As far as unemployment is concerned , we need not only cooperation , but also workable plans , not mere catch-phrases .
There are massive conceptual differences here , between us , the Group of the European People 's Party , and other groups within this House , in particular the Socialists .
Employment cannot be guaranteed on paper only .
A paper employment chapter in the Treaty is simply too little , and if it were to result in a centrally controlled employment policy for Europe , then that would be too much .
Jobs are created by the economy , and above all by small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Member States and the Union must cooperate with one another in order to create the framework conditions that we need to get more jobs .
I shall end with a quote from a young , twenty-five year old man , who wrote to me as follows , " Let us not forget that the European Communities did not arise out of sheer affection between nations , but out of the experience of terrible catastrophes caused by senseless nationalism and ignorance of one 's neighbours ' . Let us not disappoint that young man !
Madam President , at a time when European citizens are expecting solutions to the burning issues of employment and an indication as to what kind of Europe we want to build together , the EU decisionmaking has come to a deadlock because of one government 's policy of obstruction .
Hopefully this situation can be resolved at the summit in Florence so as to make decision-making regarding both employment and the IGC efficient .
Not only economic growth but also co-operation between governments and employers ' organisations and trades unions is required in the fight against unemployment .
We have to be able to agree jointly on a policy which would channel economic growth into investments .
Similarly productivity has to be improved and new means of work-sharing has to be found .
It should not be forgotten that we also need to invest in research and education in Europe .
Although the IGC is still at the stage of general discussion , as far as I know the initiative put forward by the Finnish and Swedish foreign ministers regarding the development of WEU as a means of crisis administration within the EU has received support .
This initiative is to a large extent similar to Parliament 's standpoint .
NATO 's decision concerning the possibility of using NATO forces in European operations also fits into the whole picture .
The common foreign and security policy should be made more efficient .
We should also ensure that countries not belonging to defensive alliances are given equal opportunities to participate in the forming and implementation of a common foreign and security policy .
In today 's Europe non-alliance should not be seen as a way of avoiding responsibility , but could instead increase stability and security .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is an astonishing degree of agreement to the effect that as far as the third pillar is concerned , results have so far been unsatisfactory .
Even the British Government is entirely in agreement with this view , and this is contrary to many of our citizens ' expectations regarding European policy .
If we look for the reasons , the first thing that we find is the requirement that there should be unanimity in the decisions of the Council of Ministers .
However , if we look beyond this , we find that , on grounds of national sovereignty , it is claimed that certain decisions should not be taken on a Community basis , but ought to remain the preserve of the national authorities .
Yet suppose that Community police action would guarantee the public greater protection from crime than would a national procedure , then that would mean that the public were being deprived , in the name of national sovereignty , of a protection that they were actually entitled to .
If sovereignty leads to a situation in which the public are deprived of possible protection against crime , then I cannot imagine that sovereignty in that sense is supported by the will of the people .
Therefore , in the context of the summit and the negotiations over the Maastricht Treaty , the concept of sovereignty must be examined under the microscope .
Sovereignty is the basis of the nation state , and in the foreseeable future we shall no doubt need that as the organizational model for the purposes of performing public duties .
However , sovereignty must concentrate on those key areas in which it is indispensable , and it must allow a little room to manoeuvre so as to enable Community duties to be performed , not least as far as the third pillar is concerned .
Madam President , the Florence summit and the Intergovernmental Conference are confronted with problems that show up certain weak spots .
Owing to certain disagreeable developments in one specific area - and here I need name only the key words : BSE , health , and the behaviour of the British Government , and I say ' British Government ' deliberately , because I do not mean the British people or Great Britain itself - a situation has arisen in which all further progress is being blocked , on certain fundamental issues and also , at the same time , on what one might call everyday decisions - and there must be about eighty of these already .
Although I would urge us all to seek to convince one another by means of argument , and also show a certain amount of patience and understanding in the present situation , it should not be possible for unjustified blockades to be set up , which have no basis in fact .
I call upon the British Government to give up its current obstreperous behaviour .
In that sense I support all developments that lead to future changes , and that also includes the area of common foreign policy and common security policy , where we must have the necessary flexibility - See Point 9 of the motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Institutional Affairs - to make further developments and measures possible , without being obliged to participate , but also without being able to prevent decisions being taken .
The Florence summit was intended , as the Italian presidency comes to an end , to sum up the progress that has been made over the last six months , to open up prospects for the future and to introduce the next presidency .
On all the subjects that are to be discussed , this summit is especially important , because an initial report is to be given on the results , to date , of the Intergovernmental Conference .
To sum up , I should just like to go over , briefly , the main points for discussion at the European Council and the Intergovernmental Conference .
They are concerned with further institutional development , of deepening and broadening .
I support the present motion for a resolution .
Particularly important are those developments that give the European Parliament more weight .
They are also concerned with questions of security , and with universal services .
Important , here , is the progress that has been made in the third pillar - and I shall just mention Europol in this context - and particularly the economic and social components , in which the employment situation and the strong joint efforts that are being made to improve it are given the highest priority .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , when you find yourself in the presence of fourteen partners who say ' yes ' to a Commission proposal and only one who says ' no ' , not because it disagrees with the proposal but because it wishes to pressurize the others to obtain their support for another decision - and it cynically admits this and makes no mystery of it - you are clearly faced with a breach of the law .
You may therefore declare that such a decision is valid and the recalcitrant wishing to contest this validity will have to prove it before the Court of Justice , and I wish him good luck .
I am astonished , Mr President-in-Office , that neither you nor the legion of legal advisers surrounding you have not yet thought of this solution .
This also goes for the President of the Commission .
You are the guardian of the Treaty and you cannot allow the solemn commitments embodied in Article 5 of the Treaty to be reduced to a useless scrap of paper in this way .
It is therefore your duty to act , and not only by threats , which are undoubtedly expressed with much conviction and I must acknowledge are well-directed , but are so far without effect .
Since you have such means at your disposal , why not use them ?
Madam President , we must hope that this does not simply turn into a Council meeting about mad cow disease - Florence is much too beautiful a city for that .
Certainly it is an important question , especially as it has resulted in a political game which is only increasing the public 's mistrust of the Union .
However , let us ensure that at least the other fourteen Member States are prepared to accept their responsibilities .
Mr Dini said that it is important that the EU does not give the impression of being an artificial construction .
I agree with this .
We must show that we really can use the Union to deal with the problems which concern the public .
This means employment and nothing else .
I am totally convinced that this is the common message from this House and the common message from the people of Europe .
In this connection there are now a number of initiatives which can be taken up , from France , from Sweden and now also the Commission 's idea of a confidence pact .
I hope that Mr Dini will take the following message with him : take up all these initiatives and show that it is possible to achieve something concrete in Florence .
Finally , Madam President , there is another area in which fine words must be given some substance .
This is the question of openness .
We must have a system of rules so that EU officials know what is required .
Things should not be left to their discretion .
The basic rule must be that all documents which are received by or emanate from the EU institutions should be public .
It should be entirely possible to start this work while the current IGC is in progress .
We do not need to wait for an IGC lasting one and a half or two years ' to be over before instituting reforms in this area .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when more than 18 million people in the Community are unemployed , then the Union , as a union , is challenged , even when the main responsibilities involving employment policy lie with the Member States , and above all the social partners .
The confidence pact for employment in Europe , as proposed by the Commission , is absolutely essential , as are employment alliances at all levels .
That is social dialogue in action , and subsidiarity in action .
But subsidiarity also means that when the primary , smaller competent body cannot master the task alone , then the larger body must become increasingly active in a subsidiary capacity .
We need an agreement to release additional investments for trans-European networks , without increasing public duties as a whole .
We need to concentrate resources on investments that create jobs , including those in the EU Structural Funds .
However , there is no way that these resources should be taken out of " traditional ' social policy , i.e. Chapter III of the Community budget .
On the contrary , other parts of the budget should be brought into play , parts in which there are unspent surpluses , for example , in the case of the Funds as well .
The confidence pact favours greater flexibility , productivity-oriented wages and a reduction in costs accessory to wages .
I hope that at the Florence summit substantial progress will be made on the main aspects of the confidence pact , as well as the white paper on employment , and that the main features of the European model will become clear , namely partnership and the social market economy .
Madam President , in his remarks , the President-in-Office of the Council spoke about the third pillar - and many Members have done so too - and he said that as far as the third pillar is concerned , the expectations of the public must be fulfilled , with regard to internal security in Europe .
And in fact this is correct : the third pillar is concerned with a series of important areas of the policy of the European Union , areas that are relevant to security .
But if we look at what the third pillar contains - and the President-in-Office of the Council also mentioned Europol - then it seems that fulfilling the security needs of the citizens of Europe is a sad story .
This is because , for a long time now , all those who are involved , who are concerned with security in Europe , have known that we are conducting a debate that could be summed up in the following comparison .
If the European Union were a car , its bodywork would be that of a Lamborghini , whereas its engine would be that of a Cinquecento , and a spluttering one at that .
That is the major problem that hits us when we look at the Europol Convention .
The main problem is that as far as internal insecurity goes , progress is being made , whereas as far as internal security is concerned , Europe is just not getting to the point .
And in this specific case Mr Herman has put his finger on the problem .
But it has to be said , unfortunately - and we do not believe that it is right - that the voting is still fourteen to one , and this shows that if Florence does not make any further progress on the institutional reform of the European Union , then this summit will once again be futile .
We really must succeed in fulfilling the needs of the population , and their expectations of the European Union .
It must be possible to take essential future decisions , including , for example , those that are concerned with internal security , because the extent to which a citizen identifies with the institution in which he lives is always dependent on how secure he feels there .
We shall only make progress in ensuring that the citizens of Europe identify with Europe , and we shall only be able to satisfy their need for this identification and their need for security , when we finally take seriously the question of the institutional reform of this Union , especially where the third pillar is concerned .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , European summits have to be concerned with fundamental issues , and in Florence , the question is whether we say yes to the Community , or yes to blackmail .
For ten years the Tory Government has said no to European social policy , and now it is saying no to the basic European consensus .
That really is the limit !
The character of Europe as a mutually supportive community is now at stake .
Oh yes , the European Union is more , much more , than just a free trade zone , and membership is based on treaties and on trust .
As far as the present situation is concerned , this means that negotiations are needed on the subject of the BSE crisis .
The principles of the EU and the health of its people , however , are not negotiable .
Anyone observing how calmly the fourteen Member States have accepted the British policy of obstruction will realize just how low our expectations of the London Government 's willingness to cooperate have sunk .
If we no longer have any expectations , then the Intergovernmental Conference cannot possibly be successful either .
But if it is not successful , what future will there be for Europe ?
The European Union needs Great Britain , and Great Britain needs the European Union .
The only solution to the present crisis must therefore be that Great Britain must stay , and the Tory Government will have to go !
Madam President , I had intended to say a few things in connection with the institutions today , but the speech of the President-in-Office has forced me to turn to something else , specifically to the Turkish Prime Minister 's mischief-making in Florence .
Is it proper , Mr President-in-Office , at a time when Turkey is flagrantly violating international law , that you should have announced it to us just like that ? As if nothing , absolutely nothing , was happening in the Mediterranean !
Mr President-in-Office , that country is officially disputing Europe 's frontiers , and its conduct gets worse each time the European Union butters up to it .
At a time when Europe Union has a credibility problem how can the leadership of Europe possibly adopt a neutral position when international law and the legal civilization that our societies have established through thought and the shedding of blood are officially held up to ridicule ?
Have we learnt absolutely nothing ?
Does the fact that those frontiers are long make it as if they do not exist ?
It will be a terrible pity , Mr President-in-Office , if the Council undermines its own credibility again in Florence by giving the impression that the arguments of the market count for more than those which emanate from international law and respect for human dignity .
It is credibility that we are fighting for . Exactly who gets hurt each time credibility is lost hardly matters .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , after the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Dini , I could be very brief .
However , I wish to thank you for the support given by various speakers both to the President-in-Office and to the Commission seeking to make the European Council in Florence a true success and a turning point so that our Union can continue not only to exist , but also to achieve your ambitions .
The strategy developed by the Commission for the European Council in Florence is embraced by the overall strategy that I had the privilege of presenting to you myself , here , when the present Commission was appointed .
As President Dini repeated just now , this strategy aims at making Europe a Union closer to its citizens .
To do this , we must concern ourselves with the problems facing our citizens today .
These involve three aspects .
First , unemployment and jobs .
Our citizens fail to understand why Europe , with its huge internal market of 370 million inhabitants and 15 Member States , is not succeeding in solving their daily problems .
We must therefore concern ourselves in the first place with the problem of unemployment and jobs .
Although some people say today that social and economic policy is first and foremost the responsibility of Member States , I continue to believe that a convergent policy for the European Union and its 15 Member States , applied to the largest internal market in the world , should succeed in producing a multiplier effect and giving added value to the financial outlay agreed nationally .
This is therefore the direction to which we wish to commit ourselves in Florence .
The second problem concerns what we call in Community jargon the problem of the CFSP , the common foreign and security policy .
Our citizens see daily on television a Europe playing no part in world policies and world strategy .
Our citizens want more Europe not less Europe in the areas of foreign policy and security .
This is what we should be focusing on more strongly during the Intergovernmental Conference .
I am very pleased that the presidency has put the question of external security on the agenda of the Florence European Council , particularly after the decisions just taken by the Atlantic Alliance at the Berlin meeting .
Thirdly , our citizens are now feeling insecure about some of the problems facing them , problems like organized crime , the fight against drug trafficking , etc . , and about the absence of a common policy on security and asylum .
They want Europe to be playing a part in such matters and they want us to solve these problems in accordance with their own wishes .
We therefore hope that , in Florence , we can unblock some of the dossiers , such as that of Europol , which is something we have been talking about for several years but has not yet seen the light of day .
Citizens no longer understand .
If we wish to restore their confidence , we must be able to act so as to solve their particular problems .
There remains , clearly , the problem raised a short while ago which seems to be casting a shadow over the Florence summit .
With regard to this , I would like to add , without repeating all that I have said on the subject here , either today or on 5 June , that the Commission has always shouldered its responsibilities in this area .
It has been , and will continue to be , guided in its actions solely by the necessity to protect the health of its citizens .
It is in this spirit alone that we have taken the decisions concerning beef derivatives subject to a number of conditions and restrictions .
It is in the same spirit that , yesterday evening , we adopted a general framework , a procedure and an approach designed to lift the British ban step-by-step , but only on the basis of clear scientific considerations and according to the procedure provided for by our institutions .
Of course , Mr Herman is undoubtedly right to ask why , as guardians of the Treaty , we do not go to the Court of Justice .
We are facing a political problem .
Chairman Wilfried Martens cited Article 5 of the Treaty .
I myself cited it before you on 5 June .
I am not giving up hope , and I say quite frankly that , in the next few days , a political solution will be found to a problem that is frustrating the working of our institutions .
We are committed to this .
It is the role and duty of the Commission to make proposals to this end based also on the request from the General Affairs Council .
If the situation can be unblocked in this way and a political solution achieved , then I hope we shall not need to resort to the extreme measure of appealing to the Court of Justice .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office , greatly encouraged by the support you have given us here today , I know that both President Dini and I will do our utmost to prove ourselves equal to the high ambitions you have just expressed .
So strong is the support we have received today that I think I can now repeat what I have already said , that the European Council in Florence should be , for employment and for the other problems on the agenda , what the European Council in Madrid was for the currency .
I thank President Santer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a moment .
Votes
Madam President , I would mention that this proposal was part of a price package for which I was rapporteur and was the only one not passed by this Assembly .
As rapporteur let me say that there were very important reasons for that vote . It was a decisive ' no ' to the grubbing-up campaign which is gravely damaging European vineyards .
As rapporteur I ask that this vote be confirmed , and that consequently we vote against the proposal of the Commission to extend the old regulation which is no longer appropriate to a changing situation .
This will mean we also have an excellent opportunity to ask the Agriculture Council which is meeting next Monday and Tuesday to prepare a new document .
So I repeat , I ask that the vote against the extension of the current regulation be confirmed .
( Parliament rejected the Commission proposal )
Madam President , the Commission understands the concerns that have been expressed with regard to the grubbing-up aid scheme in the wine sector .
However , I wish to emphasize once again for the Commission that this proposal was only intended to cover the period from the end of this campaign until the adoption of the reform of the wine sector .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has sent a clear message to the House .
If this is now confirmed , the Commission will do its best to find a solution in this direction within the framework of the pricepackage discussions in the Council .
I hope that that message will be received with generous acclamation by Parliament .
Madam President , the Commission is maintaining its proposal on grounds which are not wholly convincing , I was the rapporteur on reform of the wine sector , which has now been awaiting variation by the Council for a long time , too long , and a code of conduct has existed between the Commission and Parliament since March 1995 whereby if Parliament rejects a Commission proposal the latter undertakes to withdraw it . Now , as this has not been done in this particular case and I have not heard that any particularly important and exceptional reasons exist to justify for putting it forward again , I would ask Parliament to remit the vote to the next session so that the Commission has time to think again and produce more convincing arguments .
A proposal to postpone the vote is put before our Assembly .
Does anyone wish to speak against ?
Madam President , at the request of the rapporteur , we have just confirmed our opinion , which seems to me essential .
I am totally opposed to Mr Fantuzzi 's proposal , because in fact what we are in danger of passing is that the whole of the ' price package ' be called into question .
I therefore urge the leaders of the Socialist Group to think hard about the consequences of Mr Fantuzzi 's proposal .
If it is accepted , the Council of Ministers will be unable to adopt the ' agricultural price package ' next week because this regulation will not be included .
That is why , as the rapporteur Mr Santini has confirmed , Parliament has held to its opinion .
Our position on this remains as it was and I reject Mr Fantuzzi 's proposal .
Madam President , just a second to reply to that statement .
This is about extending a regulation for a year without any consequences , except that obviously growers who grub up their vines would no longer receive rich premiums .
It will increase the pressure on the Commission to commit itself to thinking seriously about reform of the COM for wine and will in no way prevent any of the other regulations in the price package being adopted .
( Parliament rejected the proposal to postpone the vote )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , with regard to the text of the joint motion for a resolution on the European Council in Florence which is to be put to the vote - and there is always a certain amount of haste in putting resolutions to the vote - I believe that something has escaped the attention of the authors . Recital A refers to the political blackmail being used by the United Kingdom ; and paragraph 3 also refers to the United Kingdom .
What we wished to say , however , was ' the government of the United Kingdom ' . I should therefore like to table an oral amendment to the effect that the term ' United Kingdom ' should be replaced by the term ' government of the United Kingdom ' in recital A and paragraph 3 .
I would also point out that the original French version of paragraph 3 refers to the need to ' induce ' the UK Government to face up to its responsibilities .
The English version , however , uses the word ' compel ' .
The English version does not therefore correspond to either the French version or the Spanish version , which I have before me . I would therefore ask the translation services to revise the English version of paragraph 3 , replacing the word ' compel ' with a word which implies agreement , in keeping with the French version .
Mr Medina , some of your points concern the language versions .
We take note of these .
There is then a proposal to add the word ' government ' .
Madam President , I understand quite well the political reasons behind this request of the Socialist Group .
But if you look at the Treaty and at point 3 , we should read Article 5 of the Treaty which says very clearly that Member States shall take appropriate measures .
That means Member States and we do not ask that from governments .
The reference made in this particular point to Article 5 makes it impossible to accept that oral amendment .
Madam President , I am solely putting forward what was the intention of the people who drafted the original text .
Clearly there are linguistic problems in two areas which can be sorted out in the text .
But the other point concerns the clear intention when the compromise text was put together .
Paragraph 3 does not reflect properly the intention of those who drafted the text .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , since you are opposing this on behalf of your own group , we do not accept the oral amendment .
We shall not start a fresh debate .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , may I ask you for an answer concerning the legal status of Amendments Nos 8 to 11 ?
The European Commission has maintained , both in committee and yesterday evening in the plenary , that these amendments are in violation of our Rules of Procedure , specifically of Rule 72 ( 2 ) , since they are allegedly new amendments which amend the original Commission text .
Can I take it , since the matter is now being voted on by the plenary , that this view of the European Commission is not deemed correct ?
I think it is important to be clear on this before we begin negotiations with the Council .
I have asked the opinion of the presidency services , who do not share the opinion of the European Commission , and I am therefore relying on the advice given to me .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Madam President , I should like to draw attention to a number of instances in which the different language versions of the amendments - in particular the Spanish version - need to be brought into line .
In Amendment No 5 , for example , the words ' doit obtenir ' in the original French version have been translated as ' debe permitirse ' , which is not the same thing .
More importantly perhaps , in Amendment No 23 , the word ' établis ' has been translated as ' residentes ' ; and I would point out - though not as emphatically , since I do not know English as well as I know Spanish - that it has also been translated as ' resident ' in the English version .
With regard to the profession of lawyer , these are different concepts , I believe .
Furthermore , in Amendment No 25 to Article 10 ( 5 ) , the word ' de ' is missing , altering the meaning .
Finally , Madam President , Amendment No 35 , which was tabled by 29 members of the PPE Group , needs to be brought into line with Amendment No 25 by adding the word ' relevant ' to the term ' competent authority ' .
This is a point on which our British colleagues insisted ; and , although Parliament 's translation service duly added the word ' relevant ' in Amendment No 25 , they failed to do so in Amendment No 35 .


Madam President , in relation to Amendment No 25 to Article 10 ( 4 ) , there has been a specific request that the words used are ' public interest ' , not ' public order ' .
The words ' public order ' have no meaning in this context in English .
Could you please confirm that this will be translated as ' public interest ' ?
Madam President , I fully accept Mrs McIntosh 's interpretation of the English version .
On the other hand , the French version must continue as ' ordre public ' .
This must be quite clear .
Madam President , on this very important point , the French expressions ' ordre public ' and ' intérêt public ' in no way have the same meanings . ' Intérêt public ' would mean that the State could make use in some way of a potestative clause to release itself quite unilaterally from the obligations of the Directive .
The words ' ordre public ' presume a direct breach of the most fundamental laws of the State or possibly of its own security .
I believe it is extremely important to keep the words ' ordre public ' in the text .
I do not know what the exact English translation is , but I believe the English concept of ' public interest ' is much wider and much more vague than the French expression ' ordre public ' .
We agree on the fact that the basic text is the French text and that the other language versions will have to be completely in accordance , on the point of substance , with what is voted through in French .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , I should like to have the reaction of the European Commission .
Madam President , Mr Pimenta can anticipate the reaction of the Commission since he well knows that , partly due to his effective efforts , these issues have received the most thorough attention .
Parliament must make its decision on its choice of procedure and of course that is Parliament 's privilege .
The Commission cannot really add anything useful at this stage to that consideration .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Welcome
On your behalf , I would like to welcome a delegation from the Tunisian Chamber of Representatives .
Votes ( continuation )
Madam President , in the motion for a resolution on broad economic guidelines there is at least one expression that is open to misunderstanding .
Therefore I should like , on behalf of my group , to make an explanatory statement regarding this expression .
We are of the opinion that a " relaxation of monetary policy ' is only possible where it does not lead to the endangering of price stability , of interest levels and , therefore , of a possible upturn in the economy , because this is the prerequisite for the creation of new jobs in Europe .
Only if this is made clear are we prepared to agree to this resolution as it stands .
Madam President , of course , anyone can explain whatever they want to , but a vote taken in this House cannot be tied to the fact that a complex situation , like the policy mix that we need in order to solve the problem of mass unemployment , is now being defined , unilaterally , by Mr von Wogau , as being a tautology .
This sentence , as it stands in the text , means what it means , and anyone can think what they like about it , but that does not alter anything .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Each European Council held at the beginning or end of a Member State 's presidency of the Union is always the time for the public expression of certain wishes after having passed judgement on several questions .
On the eve of the Florence summit at the end of the Italian presidency , I should like to draw attention to three points that seem to me essential , if not vital , for the future of our Union .
Firstly , I am in broad agreement with the analysis presented by the President of the Commission , Jacques Santer , and I repeat his turn of phrase here : Madrid was the Council of currency , Florence should be the Council for jobs .
But may I be allowed to add this : let us stop shouting all over the place that our priority is the fight against unemployment in Europe !
We have all understood this !
Let us act !
Talking is not enough . We must act and show the political will to put an end to rising unemployment and to bring it down .
The European Union will once again emerge discredited if no concrete proposals emerge from this Council to expand employment , both by creating jobs with major public works and by economic measures to promote growth , and not forgetting job sharing .
We cannot continue to do nothing for the 19 million or so in Europe who are still unemployed and creating a life of poverty for nearly 50 million .
This is the priority that the Florence Council should take on board , with a timetable and specific commitments .
Secondly , what we need now is a political Europe !
The Intergovernmental Conference provides the means to achieve this .
But with the way it is going today , there is a great need to hurry .
Nothing has been established and nothing constructive has emerged from the first debates .
We are really looking at a debate among selfcentred experts , not to mention the stench from all the nationalists .
Today , the IGC is bogged down .
It too needs a strong statement of policy in Florence .
In six months , it may be too late .
Reconstruction of the treaties is essential to the establishment of the political Europe that has long been hoped for and must be accompanied by a social Europe .
Thirdly , we cannot contemplate the Florence Council , carrying so many hopes and expectations , being put at risk by the mad cow crisis .
There is a real public health problem here and it should be quickly cleared up .
Every precaution should be taken .
But I will not accept the adoption of blocking tactics , even blackmail , which imperil European construction , now at a turning point in its history .
I dare not imagine that some of us might be completely irresponsible .
Where mistakes have been made , there must be redress .
The diplomatic terrorism being used is pointless !
I should like to end by thanking the Italian presidency which , in difficult circumstances , has been able , in spite of everything , to work and make progress on certain issues .
Having said that , these six-monthly rotating presidencies are showing their serious limitations and this strengthens my conviction that there must be a more stable European government .
May the IGC move us forward in this matter .
The current obstructionist tactics of the British Government are to be deplored .
The BSE crisis was a direct consequence of its own political ineptitude and there was no justification for punishing the rest of the European Union for its own mistakes .
Hopefully the Florence Summit will bring an end to this unfortunate episode .
However , it must resolve it in a way that does not reward blackmail .
If blackmail tactics are seen to succeed on this occasion then a real danger exists that other Member States would be tempted to apply similar tactics when it suits them .
One of the lessons to be learnt from this saga is that the IGC must refine the decision-making structures of the European Union to ensure that there is no repetition of these circumstances when one Member State is able to hold the entire European Union to ransom .
The European Council in Florence will take place under the shadow of the harsh anti-popular measures imposed in Germany by Mr Kohl which demand further cuts , albeit nominal , in the incomes of working people and the abolition of substantial rights in the social insurance and pensions fields as a means of catering for monopoly interests and combating the economic crisis , and which will serve as a model for the wider economic policy to be pursued by the European Union in all of the Member States .
At the same time , however , this European Council will take place under the shadow of the struggle being waged by German workers and their comrades in other countries against the high-handed , anti-democratic and antipopular policy being imposed by the Brussels masters in the framework of the Maastricht Treaty .
The acceptance of the scenario for the third stage of EMU and the move to the single currency , the refusal of the governments even to re-examine EMU in the framework of the intergovernmental conference and the acceptance , even by the majority in this Parliament , of the imposition and perpetuation of a Europe of two speeds all make it manifestly obvious that the institutions of the EU are completely indifferent to the real problems and demands of Europe 's peoples and are kow-towing to the dictates of large-scale capital .
The European Union 's inability to develop positions of its own on international problems , the waiting on each occasion , that is , for a lead from the United States , applies not only to issues of vital concern to it , such as the former Yugoslavia and the Middle East , but , also , sadly , to the expression of support for its own Member States ; for Greece , for instance , faced as it is with the expansionist policy of Turkey which keeps on pushing territorial claims and is drawing heart from the culpably neutral stance adopted by the European Union and its Member States and from their persistence in continuing and widening economic and other relations with it while it blatantly violates international law , occupies the northern part of Cyprus and tramples on human rights within its own borders .
The move to strengthen policing at the European level via uncontrolled mechanisms , the attempt to exert joint control over the Union 's foreign receipts and the unification of the policy approach on immigration matters , in particular the formulation of common rules for the deportation of citizens of third countries , constitute a further erosion of the sovereign rights of the Member States and are detrimental to the democratic links and friendly relations which many of them maintain with movements which are progressive and concerned for peace .
Unfortunately , the majority in this House has rejected certain proposals that we put forward , among them proposals relating to employment , in the shape of an overall policy to combat unemployment which demanded , in particular , the establishment of a 35-hour week without wage reductions , the non-blockage of Cohesion Fund resources in the event of failure to meet the EMU criteria , full acceptance of the principles which underpin the fundamental obligation to provide public services , via the rejection , first and foremost , of competitive tendering , and the taking of measures to combat racism and xenophobia .
Indeed , it has done the very opposite by approving provisions which will lead to an upsurge of militarization , to greater inequality , to de-democratization of the Community 's institutions and to a continuation of the present economic policy which has already put 18 million people out of work and 55 million below the poverty line .
In my opinion the European Council summit in Florence should discuss and take a decision on the following subjects :
Shelving plans for a common currency.-Measures in the respective Member States of the EU to increase employment and alleviate poverty.-Ensuring that the enlargement of the Union to include states which wish to join and which used to be part of the former Soviet bloc takes place as quickly as possible.-Speeding up the rate of reform of the Common Agricultural Policy.The European Council should also make it very clear to Albania , Belarus and Turkey that their cooperation with the European Union is being severely damaged by the infringements of human freedoms and rights which are now occurring in these countries .
It should also once again be stressed that the EU should stand for cooperation between sovereign states and that there must never be any move towards a superstate .
If in the future Europe is to be a stable and peaceful continent where democracy and human freedoms and rights are honoured and established principles , any federal tendencies within the European Union must be opposed .
Once again , President Santer has given us a demonstration , rhetorically speaking , of how to square the circle , since he has said that combatting mass unemployment is the Union 's highest priority and , at the same time , he has reaffirmed that we should stick to the basic decisions of current economic policy in terms of macroeconomics and structural policy , i.e. pursuing a policy of saving , at the expense of much-needed reproductive spending , combatting inflation when there is no inflation , and sticking to the Maastricht strategy for economic and monetary union without taking the losses into consideration .
As long as the Commission is not prepared to take on board Parliament 's constructive criticism of this economic policy , which is based on superficiality , wishful thinking and unilateral opportunism as far as the financial markets are concerned , and as long as it is not prepared to enter into conflict with the Council , and in particular with certain particularly powerful Member States , including Germany , then all the Commission 's initiatives , which in themselves are to be welcomed , and which are intended , somehow and in spite of everything , to improve the way in which the unemployment problem is taken into consideration , will either never get off the ground or will , at best , remain relatively ineffectual .
I believe that this House is entirely prepared to offer the Commission its firm support in the disputes that will be inevitable if the necessary corrections are made to our economic policy .
However , the condition attached to that support is that the Commission itself must explicitly correct the objectives and clearly identify the problems that it faces .
Only in this way can we really achieve a European employment pact , in the teeth , as it were , of the finance ministers ' rejection and of five or six more powerful Member States .
At the end of the day , the fate of the European Union will probably be decided by this issue of mass unemployment .
We call upon the Commission to face up to its historic responsibilities , instead of continuing , with honeyed words , to pretend to be doing something .
Intergovernmental Conference
At the last IGC member state governments failed to convince the citizens of Europe that the European Union was relevant to their needs and had answers to their problems .
As a consequence the Maastricht Treaty was nearly rejected and the EU was catapulted into temporary crisis with the concept of European integration seriously undermined .
If the same mistakes are not to be repeated , this IGC must focus on the primary concerns of the European public .
The obvious area for concerted action at the moment is devising policies to combat drug trafficking .
This has been confirmed by recent public surveys that although they demonstrate little public awareness of the IGC itself , they nonetheless show that a majority of public opinion wants priority to be given to tackling the drug problem on a European-wide basis .
While I welcome the fact that the Irish Government has made this area one of the priorities of the Irish presidency , I seriously question the commitment of our European partners .
This is evident in a number of ways .
The UK 's blocking of the ratification of the Europol Convention deprives the EU of one of its major weapons against the drug barons .
The absence of a united approach by all governments , as illustrated by the permissive Dutch approach to soft drugs making it a virtual supermarket for drugs ; the violent opposition of France and opposition from Belgium and Spain to a proposed 16.7 % increase in the budget for the European Drugs Unit is difficult to comprehend , particularly when the existing budget is a pathetic £ 4 million .
In fact the total budget for combatting drug abuse and drug trafficking amounts to a mere £ 24 million - a damning indictment of current EU policy and the low priority being given to the drugs issue .
If the present IGC in its revision of the Treaties fails to remedy the situation then it could be heading for disaster and deservedly so .
If the European Union fails to utilise its existing powers properly and to build on them then it does not deserve to be given increased powers .
Barton recommendation
There are two proposals in this report which we do not agree with even though we voted for the report as a whole .
1.We consider that the individual Member States should in future continue to have the right to refuse the registration or the use of vehicles if they are so moved.2.One can of course argue that the decibel limit for heavy motor cycles can be increased from 80 to 82 because an untrained ear cannot hear the difference .
However , we believe that there must a limit somewhere .
Nor is it sufficient to measure the average values in noise tests .
It is the peak noise values which are of interest as it is those which cause nuisance .
We have voted for the Barton report , although we do not agree that issues concerning the noise made by motorcycles and the like should be dealt with at Union level .
However , we regard the report as being less regulatory , less protectionist and less arbitrary than the Council 's extreme common position .
In Mrs van Dijk 's statement yesterday , she gave the reasons for the position of the majority of the group .
The minority , however , on the basis of the same ecological and social objectives , came to a different conclusion .
Why was this ?
We are working on the assumption that highly fundamental environmental objectives are best achieved by effective practices being changed and not by maximum limits set by the administrative authorities .
Especially in areas where the active cooperation of many individual operators is necessary , the strategy of regulating environmental pollution by means of maximum limits is restricted by the willingness of those operators to organize their own cooperation .
With this in mind we support the demands of motorcyclists for workable compromises on maximum limits , with the simultaneous ending of illegal practices .
The cooperation of the motorcycling organizations should in our opinion be a central element in making two-wheeled motor vehicles , which from the social point of view are an essential means of transport , ecologically defensible and harmless to health as well .
In addition to this , we believe that the arguments of the motorcycling organizations regarding the use of catalysers on two-wheeled motor vehicles and the problem of " sheer bolts ' are founded on fact and should be taken seriously .
Fontaine report
Madam President , no profession is excluded from freedom of movement and freedom to practise within the Community .
Quite rightly our rapporteur has reminded us that this key principle is established by Article 52 of the Treaty of Rome .
Here , we have worked for decades to set up this freedom of movement .
I was myself a rapporteur on the free movement of midwives in 1969 , if my memory serves me well .
We have always done our best to set up freedom of movement for workers and freedom to practise for professionals , particularly in the liberal professions , by avoiding regulations which would in the end have had the effect of discriminating between nationals and migrant workers .
Community legislation on the freedom of lawyers to practise has had the effect that almost one third of lawyers currently registered with the Luxembourg bar are non-nationals .
I understand the efforts made by , amongst others , the Community Bar Council to facilitate the practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the professional qualification was obtained .
The more so because lawyers in my country - which has no law faculty - are obliged to obtain their professional qualification in another country .
However , we do prescribe further training periods and examinations for them to master the specific features of Luxembourg law , since there can be no question of favouring non- nationals over nationals as regards these additional tests .
In order to maintain the quality of services provided by lawyers , there can be no question of levelling down by abolishing the additional training periods and tests prescribed in Luxembourg .
Because some of the proposals from our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights go beyond what would be adequate and non-discriminatory , I cannot vote for these amendments and I have , a fortiori , also voted against the report , because the amendments we tabled were rejected .
We are in favour of this report , which represents a step towards balanced regulations authorizing lawyers of one European Union country to practise in other countries of this same Union .
We congratulate our colleague , who has produced a most competent report and has played an important part in furthering the compromise obtained , which goes in the direction of the very clear interests of the professionals in the various countries concerned , France among them .
From the French point of view , this agreement is reached in an area where our national tradition is that of considerable expertise which can be of benefit to clients throughout the European market , something we are particularly pleased about .
The present Directive and the related report are arousing dismay and opposition among Luxembourg lawyers .
Dismay , because the Commission 's approach is inconsistent .
Just when the transposition of Directive 89 / 48 on the general system for recognition of degrees is still in progress , with all the problems described in the Commission 's report of 15 February 1996 , it is now sought to force the hands of the States , in different sectors , by extreme liberalization .
Luxembourg lawyers do not understand why the system introduced by Directive 89 / 48 can no longer serve .
It has contributed to vast liberalization of the profession in Luxembourg , where over 27 % of lawyers are foreigners .
At the same time , it has ensured that these lawyers , whether foreigners or nationals , offer the safeguards and knowledge needed to serve their clients on the spot .
Dismay also because the new stage of liberalization will create new discrimination between those who will be admitted without any restriction and those , whether foreigners or nationals , who have to take an additional examination in the country where they will be practising .
Our opposition to this new Directive will therefore be understood .
It contains a serious defect because it offers no safeguards to clients : a foreign lawyer who sets himself up with his home-country professional qualification and wants to work in Luxembourg law may know nothing about this specific law .
I shall be told that clients will very quickly discover this .
True , but it is irresponsible to allow the market to operate as regulator of a profession which is , when all is said and done , of public interest .
A foreign lawyer who sets up in Luxembourg with his home-country professional qualification may know nothing about the languages used in that country .
I shall be told that , in that case , he cannot practise ; but it will still be the market that will have to clarify this state of affairs , and I refuse to let the market control these choices .
Without going into the details of Mrs Fontaine 's report , I may say that , although I willingly accept the need for liberalization of the legal profession , the method chosen by the Commission and by Parliament does not reassure me .
That is why I support the amendments tabled by the Luxembourg Members and am against Mrs Fontaine 's report .
Like the French Members of my Group , I have voted against Mrs Fontaine 's report on the proposal for a Directive on the rights of lawyers to practise .
There are already two Directives on lawyers , that of 22 March 1977 regulating the provision of services and that of 23 December 1988 relating to the equivalence of degrees .
The new Directive seeks to go further by wider liberalization of the conditions under which lawyers can practise in all European Union countries .
However , lawyers cannot be compared with a marketed product .
Neither is their profession comparable with that of banks and insurance , for example , for which it has been possible to harmonize the conditions for equivalence and practising without too much difficulty .
The law in each of our countries , on the other hand , has , and will retain in the future , its own specific features and peculiarities .
The conditions for admission to the profession of lawyer are not identical ; those for practising the profession of lawyer are even less so .
The duration of the right for a lawyer to practise under his home-country professional qualification in a Member State other than his own should therefore not be extended indefinitely , but on the contrary should be lowered from five years ( period laid down in the Commission 's proposal ) to three years in order to facilitate speedy integration into the profession of the host Member State .
Better protection of consumers ' rights would also have been ensured by providing that , during this intermediate period , the lawyer can practise law in the host Member State only by acting together with a lawyer practising in that State .
Failing which , because it validates over the whole Community the admission of a lawyer to the bar of his home country , the text will end up juxtaposing fifteen different professions in what we wish to be a single market .
As regards access to the profession of the host Member State , the aptitude test has rightly been abolished , seeing that a lawyer wishing to gain access to the profession of lawyer in a State other than his own is required to furnish evidence of effective and regular professional activity for a period of three years in that State .
But there should also have been a provision that a lawyer so admitted to the profession of the host Member State must use his home-country professional qualification alongside the professional qualification of the host Member State .
Consequently , I hope that when the Council examines this Directive , it will reconsider these very debatable proposals .
In the vote on the report presented by Mrs Fontaine on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive to facilitate the practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained , I took account of the tremendous progress represented by this directive towards giving effect to the fundamental principle of the freedom of establishment and practice of the liberal professions - in this case , that of lawyer - in the European Union .

I should also like to emphasize my particular satisfaction at the adoption of Amendment No 7 to Article 1 ( 2 ) ( a ) , which recognizes the variety of professional titles in accordance with the different official languages of the Member States of the Union , which in the case of Spain are Castilian , Catalan , Basque and Galician . This is a good indication of the European Union 's recognition of the linguistic diversity which enriches it .
The European Parliament once again demonstrated that it does not want or is unable to understand the inherent special problems of the small countries of the Community .
The Socialist Member , Mr Fayot , and I tabled an amendment reflecting the fears of the Luxembourg legal authorities about the process of registering a foreign lawyer with the relevant bar , but this amendment was unfortunately rejected .
I remain firmly convinced that the host Member State should be able to apply to legal consultations about the law of the host Member State the conditions that its legislation lays down for its own nationals , insofar as they are in conformity with the provisions of Directive 89 / 48 and inasmuch as they are justified by a concern for nondiscrimination in respect of its own nationals and by over-riding reasons of general interest .
In other words , I maintain that in every country , including mine , the defence of a citizen should be fully guaranteed by legal assistance from persons properly qualified in the law of the Member State in question .
Now , it is established - and who will dare contradict me on this point ? - that this qualified assistance is no longer guaranteed if a Member State is deprived of the right and ability to judge and assess a lawyer 's knowledge of national law .
It should be stressed , moreover , that the vote of the European Parliament for the Fontaine report will not change in any way the very special situation in my country , which has to cope with different legal systems .
Thus , administrative and constitutional law are essentially Belgian in spirit whereas civil and commercial law are influenced by France and Belgium .
Tax law has its origins in German tax law and decisions , both administrative and those of courts , refer to German case law .
Another difficulty lies in the fact that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is a trilingual country , so that the question of languages is an essential one for a lawyer practising his profession in the Grand Duchy .
It should also be emphasized that very many Community nationals holding foreign law degrees are currently keeping terms in Luxembourg and are successfully taking examinations at the end of their training .
Having said that , I remain convinced that the system at present in force in my country genuinely offers the citizen-lawyers of Europe the chance to practise and establish themselves in Luxembourg , as long as they can provide proof of their qualifications in Luxembourg law .
For all the above reasons and because I am persuaded that the arguments developed in the proposal for a Directive will not receive the agreement of any Luxembourg citizen , I shall vote against the report presented by Mrs Fontaine , which has shown understanding for the problem specific to my country , and I congratulate her for that , but whose arguments have not been followed by the qualified majority .
" To make new progress in the construction of a cultural Europe ' ; that is how the rapporteur describes the size of the task that she had to cope with .
Anyone who knows anything about the differences that have had to be overcome , for example between the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany on the one hand and France and Spain on the other , will be bound to admit , on seeing the results of all this work , that the rapporteur has carried out her task with a great deal of sensitivity as well as energy .
The report is an impressive example of how the policy that the Community has pursued since 1988 / 89 , a policy of mutual recognition of qualifications gained in a Member State on the basis of mutual trust between the Member States of the Union , can also be applied successfully in the case of lawyers ' rights to become established anywhere in the Union .
The content of the new directive may thus serve as a convincing example of the sensible application of the principle of subsidiarity .
The rules in force in Member States remain unchanged , but the lawyer who practises in a country other than his country of origin is also subject , in the same way , to the rules of the Member State in which he is established and in which he practises .
It is also worth mentioning , and appreciating , that the report has also taken on board and applied the judgments given by the European Court of Justice in the cases of Klopp and Gebhard Bahnen regarding freedom of establishment .
The report itself is thus a testament not only to the diversity of European legal practice but also to a new , cooperative legal culture .
It deserves the full support of Parliament .
Hoppenstedt reportLindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm , Lindholm and Schörling ( V ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen , Krarup and Sandbæk ( EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) As opponents of the Union it was with great satisfaction that we read a report which opposes the Commission 's integrationist zeal .
We share Mr Hoppenstedt 's view that the Commission should not decide on licensing or have the right to negotiate on personal communication services vis-à-vis third countries and in international bodies .
In this connection , as in many others , it is the Member States which are in the best position to take sovereign decisions .
As is made clear in the rapporteur 's explanation of the amendments which have been tabled , including Nos 10 , 12 , 15 , 17 and 19 , the committee feels that it is unnecessary to lay down special EU procedures for selecting and authorizing space segment and gateway service operators , since the effective number of global competitors in this particular sector is already so limited that it should be possible to create a basis for sensible coexistence among these very few operators in the future market in satellite personal communications .
However , attention is rightly drawn in the report to the need to establish a common legal framework for authorizing services and also a ' one-stop-shopping ' system to prevent incompatible national decisions on satellite systems from being taken .
All in all , the rapporteur of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has succeeded in carrying out a critical but balanced assessment of the Commission 's proposal .
I can therefore fully endorse the rapporteur 's conclusions , which should be seen in the light of the need for international coordination of satellite personal communications services and in the context of the other EU legislation in the telecommunications sector , in particular the Commission 's proposal for the ' licences ' directive .
Pimenta report
Madam President , the excellent report by Mr Pimenta raises the fundamental question of the hierarchy of standards .
Does the European Commission rank below GATT and the World Trade Organization ?
In 1991 , Mr MacSharry told us that he was moved by the fact that the bones of animals caught in traps were torn , that they cut their own tendons and skin with their mouths or teeth so that they could escape .
And it was reaffirmed that , from 1 January 1995 , there would no longer be any leghold traps .
Then , in 1994 , it was explained to us that there were technical problems and that the ban had to be postponed to 1 January 1996 .
1 January 1996 has been and gone , but we are now told about the Inuits who from time immemorial - even though steel did not yet exist - have trapped animals in steel leghold traps .
The reality is quite simple .
The reality is the World Trade Organization , which wants freedom of movement without any kind of hindrance .
We have given in over fruit and vegetables , by adopting United Nations standards !
We have given in over the WTO bananas by submitting to the wishes of American multinationals !
Perhaps we shall give in over hormone-treated meat and we are now in the process of giving in over leghold traps !
There is no European Union , there is only a world market and although there are still innocents who believe , even the greenest of innocents are forced to recognize that they have been rolled in contaminated cattle meal .
Madam President , I was glad to see Parliament giving such tremendous support to Mr Pimenta 's report .
The debate on hunting and humane trapping methods has been both long and heated , within the EU and in the rest of the world .
As a result there are now 60 countries which have prohibited hunting using leghold traps .
Of these , 22 countries have introduced the prohibition in the last five years .
This shows , among other things , that hunting can be carried out without the terrible leghold traps .
After all , I don 't suppose that there is anyone here who believes that the Lapps in Sweden , for example , have stopped hunting because fox traps are prohibited .
In the EU the import ban should have entered into force on 1 January 1995 .
However , as a concession to the wishes of the major fur-exporting countries , particularly Canada , its entry into force was postponed till 1 January 1996 - a most remarkable occurrence .
There is no legal instrument which would allow further postponement and something now has to happen .
It is with dismay that we now discover that despite this the Commission is proposing amending the regulation in a way which will constitute a regression of a decade for the EU and all of us .
It is reasonable to ask why .
Is it out of fear of countries such as the USA and Canada ?
Is it out of fear of the WTO , or what ?
No matter what , it is to say the least deplorable and unworthy of an organisation which claims to represent a humane approach .
Humane hunting methods and leghold trap regulations have become a symbol of the conflict between animal welfare , indigenous peoples , markets , trade and the environment .
An institutional question of principle has now also arisen here , namely , what happens when Community legislation is undermined by , for example , the Commission ?
Unlike the Commission , the Green Group in the EU Parliament has not changed its standpoint and has not given in to pressure and has therefore supported the report .
When the Commission appeared before us last December , we expressed our dissatisfaction at its failure to implement the ban on the import of pelts of certain wild animals caught by means of leghold traps .
Today the Commission is presenting us with a new regulation designed to cover up this failure . However , there are serious doubts about the legality of this regulation , because as well as setting an unfortunate precedent with this kind of approach , the Commission does not have the power to postpone these import restrictions .
And so ?
And so we welcome Mr Pimenta 's excellent report which , despite the legal equivocation I have referred to , introduces the necessary corrective elements by means of suitable amendments which were approved by the Committee on the Environment and restore the obligations contained in the text of the original regulation .
It is to be hoped that on this occasion , Parliament 's voice will be heard - although it must be said that having deliberately failed to comply once , there is nothing to say that the Commission will not re-offend .
We trust that that will not be the case .
The Danish social democrats in the European Parliament are sceptical about this new regulation , since we do not think the Commission is entitled , on its own initiative , to postpone legislation which has been adopted .
A dilemma arises for us in the vote on leghold traps , however .
On the one hand , there is no doubt that leghold traps are an inhumane trapping method , and that use of them should be eliminated .
It is therefore an excellent idea to ban imports of pelts from animals caught using leghold traps .
On the other hand , we are very concerned about a repetition of the events we saw in the past with the ban on imports of pelts from seal pups , when the Greenland trappers were left to suffer the effects of the ban , which had serious social consequences in Greenland .
So we are anxious to avoid a general ban affecting imports of pelts from animals not caught with leghold traps , and that a ban should not deprive the indigenous Arctic population of their livelihood .
The best approach for all the parties concerned is to establish clear rules as soon as possible , so that any switch to other trapping methods can begin .
We therefore have to reject the attempts by the Canadian Government to delay an international agreement on humane trapping methods .
Canada 's indigenous population has been used as an excuse for the Canadian Government 's inertia in the international negotiations on new trapping standards .
These delaying tactics have been emulated by the United States , amongst others .
If we vote against the regulation , it would be an acknowledgement of the forces which have worked against change .
The situation is not entirely clear-cut , but we have decided to vote against some amendments which would be detrimental to the situation of the indigenous peoples whilst generally supporting the Pimenta report , because we must show our contempt for leghold traps and for the governments which do not want to do anything - either for animal welfare or the indigenous peoples .
I would like to express my support and that of the Green Group for the report by Mr Pimenta on trade in skins of animals caught in traps .
Despite the fact that this issue has been discussed for years now , no agreement has been reached with Canada and the United States so the Commission 's proposal to remit this again cannot be accepted .
There must be a ban on imports of skins of animals caught in a cruel way , especially as the European Union has already prohibited the use of traps on its own territory .
Such a ban does not conflict with the GATT agreements , because the COM regulation includes a clause protecting health , environment and ethical interests .
As regards the legitimate rights of the indigenous populations , it has been shown that only some of them live exclusively from hunting and their income can be replaced or increased by new occupations , underpinned by local aid .
We therefore urge Members to vote for the amendment tabled by the Green Group , which clarifies the terms of the ban , involving both indigenous peoples and animal protection organizations in a consultative capacity , and providing for proper involvement of the European Parliament .
I support the Pimenta report as I am angry that the Commission has so far failed to implement the ban on importing furs from animals captured using leghold traps .
It is unacceptable that this ban is still not in force six months after it was due to be implemented .
Many people in my own constituency are concerned about animal welfare issues - and rightly so .
If we want Europe to be known as a civilized part of the world then we must act in a civilized way towards animals .
I hope the President 's proposed legal challenge to the Court of Justice over the Commission 's failure to act is swift and successful .
However , I am also aware of the need for us not to dictate our standards to native peoples in other parts of the world - so the Pimenta report 's idea that native communities who do not use leghold traps can still trade with Europe , regardless of the position of their national authorities , is a sensible and fair compromise .
Jacob report
Madam President , here is an animal health disaster .
Damage has been done and must be put right .
One way of doing this was simple : it was that of responsibility , responsibility of the enterprise owned Mr Mudler - who is not a colleague of ours - of Doncaster in Yorkshire .
This way was not chosen .
What was chosen was solidarity , but solidarity also implied that there should be full compensation for the damage .
But what has the European Commission decided ?
Well , simply that we are going to compensate by a lump sum : ECU 650 million to be shared among 81 million cattle , which amounts to about ECU 8 per animal .
And effectively , provision is made for an additional subsidy of ECU 10 , that is 50-60 francs .
Responsibility has been rejected in the name of solidarity and we end up with rapaciousness , mediocrity and accountancy .
This is where we are now , faced with a disaster for which the Commission is partly to blame .
Neither direct damage , indirect damage , immediate damage nor induced damage are being compensated for in full .
Just now , we saw Community law give way to UN standards , now Community law is giving way to the standards of natural law , which imply that those responsible should make amends .
Madam President , I welcome the Commission proposal to support the hard-pressed beef farmers throughout Europe .
The reduction in beef consumption across Europe has totally destroyed the market for beef and beef products .
This has placed many farmers in serious financial difficulty .
I understand the need to restore consumer confidence in the red-meat industry .
This we must strive to achieve , but we should never forget that beef farmers , through no fault of their own , have faced a serious crisis since this problem has been blown out of all proportion by the press and the media throughout Europe .
We must do everything possible to restore confidence throughout the industry once again .
I could not support the proposal of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to reduce the level of support through the suckler cow and beef premium .
But , although the proposal is not perfect , it is at least a good attempt to help and to achieve a new beginning .
It will take a long time to recover from this crisis , but we must not ignore it .
In fact , as we move towards the autumn , the problems may well increase and develop to an even greater extent .
To subsidise a sector of production which is hit by a crisis in this way is not tenable in principle .
The European Union cannot subsidise each sector of production hit by a fall in sales .
Of course measures against BSE must be taken , and these should include stopping the use of bonemeal in animal feed .
Reform of the Common Agricultural Policy will not be furthered by the EU Parliament now sending out the signal that as soon as a fall in sales occurs in any part of the agricultural sector the producers in that sector will receive compensation .
It is not therefore possible to vote for this report , even though we are of the opinion that forceful action must be taken to counter BSE .
The current beef crisis is worse than anything that occurred in the past .
For example , in Ireland alone it is estimated that the accumulative loss since the middle of March is in the region of £ 250 million .
The fall in prices will continue until we restore consumer confidence and an effective and comprehensive eradication policy is fundamental to achieving that .
The present proposed package is totally inadequate to meet the real losses incurred by farmers .
I would like Parliament to support the proposal put forward by myself and colleagues to increase the package to ECU 1 , 000 million .
Furthermore the situation should be kept under constant review .
A total of ECU 116 million of which ECU 9.5 million id proposed for Ireland is a woefully inadequate proposal .
Furthermore , whatever final figures are agreed it is imperative that the money is used also to support the producers of heifer beef who currently received no premium or compensation of any kind .
Their losses have in fact been worse than those of the producers of male cattle and this must be recognized .
We would have been very pleased to see that our Parliament was taking on its responsibilities with regard to the mistakes arising from the mad cow crisis , and that it was taking good note of this by showing itself capable of reacting to the helplessness of farmers .
We are forced to say , however , that nothing of the sort has happened !
The vote taken today is highly significant : a reduction in additional aid ; suckler cows and young male cattle at ECU 10 per head instead of ECU 20 and 25 .
It is well known that only the interests of a certain number of countries are being satisfied , to the detriment of the general interests of the European Union .
As a result , the interests of specialist breeders , who are of course those most affected by the current crisis , are neglected to the advantage of mixed and intensive cattle rearing .
I remarked previously , during the last part session in Brussels , that my amendment asking the Commission for a full enquiry in order to identify the responsibilities of the various parties involved ( cattle food industry , Member States , Community institutions , etc . ) for the propagation of BSE had been rejected by a large majority of the Members of our Assembly present .
Was there complicity , thus taking advantage of the ignorance of cattle breeders and scapegoat consumers who , in every case , will pay for an affair for which they are in no way responsible ?
The matter is sufficiently serious for the governments of Member States to wake up to this at the Florence summit and not to allow the internal political problems of Great Britain to interfere with the search for a financial and political solution to this case .
It is almost impossible at EU level to judge what support might be needed by individual meat producers in the Member States of the EU because mad cow disease hits different producers and different countries so differently .
Support should instead be decided at national level in accordance with local and regional circumstances .
Broad economic guidelines
Madam President , while we are promised with every major new European project that it will increase growth and employment , the report of the European Monetary Institute records , on the contrary , a steady drop in the average growth rate in Europe which , and I quote , ' was 4.7 % in the 1960s , 3.3 % in the 1970s , 2.2 % in the 1980s and 2 % so far in the 1990s ' .
It does not add , as it could have in order to give a complete picture , that unemployment is following a reverse curve and stands today at close to 11 % in the Union , in spite of a tiny plateau in 1995 , which does not give reason to anticipate any reversal of the trend in the future .
In this worsening situation , the Commission merely plans to continue as before .
It even specifies , and I quote , ' that if this strategy does not yet seem to have produced globally satisfying results in the Community , it is because it has not been implemented with sufficient vigour and credibility ' .
This assessment is undoubtedly partly true , particularly as regards reform of the job market , reduction of charges on the low paid and adaptation of the education system , including professional training , to market requirements .
But it must all the same be wondered whether a policy that fails constantly is not wrong somewhere .
Our view is that the Union is pursuing the broadly counter-productive objective of forced convergence , and that it is suffering from the absence of a genuine measure for international trade protection .
In view of this trend , the Commission 's report quite clearly shows that the criteria for public deficit and government debt will not be fulfilled on average at the end of 1997 , unless between now and then there is a hoped-for miraculously vigorous resumption of growth .
This amounts to tossing a coin over the question of the single currency coming into force .
For a reform of that importance , is this really responsible ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the preamble of the joint motion for a resolution is very enlightening : economic stagnation , unemployment at record level , sluggish demand , declining public investment , depression amongst businesses and consumers .
However , we should ask ourselves why this has happened because there in fact are examples of brilliant economic success in Europe .
Norway and Switzerland in the west , for example , or the Czech Republic and Estonia in the east .
All these countries have the following features in common : first , they have a strong national currency within a space of a small country , which proves that it is possible for a small country to have a strong currency .
Secondly , none of them is a Member of the European Union and is therefore not obliged to apply the deflationary policy of the convergence criteria .
History also teaches us that the centres of growth in Europe were often small States or free cities particularly in Italy or Flanders , and not large artificially unified continental conglomerates .
In order to give new impetus to growth in Europe , we must abandon the unrealistic objective of monetary union , and copy the examples of these small independent states , Norway or Singapore , which show that national independence and the conditions for growth are entirely compatible .
Referring to the national compromise and the Edinburgh agreement , the Danish social democrats naturally cannot support those elements of the resolution which run counter to Denmark 's four reservations .
There is much that is good in the economic guidelines , for example the concentration on employment .
I have voted against as I am against EMU .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Aid to former Yugoslavia
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0174 / 96 by Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 95 ) 0564 - C4-0535 / 95 ) on ' humanitarian aid to the former Yugoslavia : prospects and guidelines ' ; -A4-0184 / 96 by Mr Mendiluce Pereiro , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council ( SEC ( 95 ) 1597 - C4-0595 / 95 ) on ' reconstruction in the former Yugoslavia ' ; -A4-0204 / 96 by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 95 ) 0581 - C4-0608 / 95 ) on ' the European Union 's financial contribution to reconstruction in former Yugoslavia ' ; -A4-0178 / 96 by Mr Titley , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 95 ) 0582 - C4-0519 / 95 ) on ' reconstruction in former Yugoslavia : EU aid administration and international aid coordination ' .
Mr President , we are beginning a debate on a number of reports dealing with aid and reconstruction in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the former Yugoslavia .
The reports coming to us all the time are , I think , rather worrying .
Various objectives of the Dayton accords , such as freedom of movement , are turning out to be pie in the sky .
Refugees are being allowed to return to their homes only after checks by the armies of the controlling ethnic groups .
Thousands of refugees - there were new waves of refugees after Dayton - and the Croat and Serb sides , but also the party of President Izetbegovic , are contributing to a resurgence of ethnic cleansing . Of course , we can now say that there is peace and not war , which was not the case some months ago .
However , this peace is , firstly , very fragile . Secondly , it is being used less for reconciliation and more for consolidation of the gains made through the ethnic cleansing that took place during the war .
Thirdly , it is engendering greater division rather than unity .
The activation and mobilization of the international community as regards aid and reconstruction which can , in my opinion , in addition to the humanitarian aspect , constitute a very significant political intervention in developments in Bosnia and in the former Yugoslavia as a whole , should , I believe be assessed in that framework .
The International Institute for Peace Research in Stockholm has stated , accurately , that the Dayton agreement has brought the deep conflicts which continue to exist in the former Yugoslavia very clearly into focus , and that the impediments of the break-up of Bosnia , which are still in place , can only be surmounted by international aid and a flow of trade and information .
The mobilization of the European Union and the international community has to be seen in that context , I believe , and , of course , the European Union carries a big responsibility because it has been up until now , and will continue to be , the biggest contributor to economic intervention in the former Yugoslavia .
That is the basis on which the Committee on Foreign Affairs gave unanimous approval to the report that I am presenting .
I would like to emphasize a few main points .
Firstly to say that the humanitarian aid should be viewed as a link , as a bridge , to the policy for reconstruction overall .
However , it does have its own autonomous features , and because of its urgency and its humanitarian nature , as a means to ensuring the survival of people and saving lives , it is important that it should not be tied to political conditions , to political requirements , but should be available to all sides and to all regions of Bosnia .
My second point is that while the aid must , of course , be directed towards the provision of food and clothing , it must also be aimed towards meeting other needs , including the provision of medical equipment , encouragement of the return of medical staff to Bosnia and the former Yugoslavia , initial repair of damaged water supply , natural gas and electricity grids and the re-establishment of transport networks , all of which are essential in order to provide the people of Bosnia with a modicum of basic normality in their lives .
My third point is one that the World Bank has given special emphasis to : namely that the aid should be used in such a way as to encourage the mobilization of local resources and the setting in motion of an autonomous economic dynamic in Bosnia .
As my fourth point I mention mine-clearance . This must be accepted for what it is - an essential element in the approach to the problems , closely linked with the provision of aid .
IFOR is playing an important role in mineclearance , and the Committee on Foreign Affairs is minded to promote budget lines to assist the process .
Lastly , Mr President , I want to stress the importance of encouraging the return of refugees , but in a realistic manner , from western Europe , and of supporting NGOs , especially those established locally , as means to breaking down the final barrier in Bosnia , namely the barrier of enduring fear and hatred , and in order to permit the revival of a multi-ethnic society in that land .
Mr President , we have discussed the issue of former Yugoslavia so many times in Parliament , in relation to numerous resolutions , that the report which I am presenting today refers only to the new developments which directly concern the reconstruction proposals and the corresponding communication from the Commission .
However , I should like to draw the House 's attention to a number of points which I believe to be very important .
Firstly , it should not be forgotten that the Dayton agreements have been signed - and signed in their totality - and must be complied with in both their letter and spirit .
And I stress this because many people are now questioning the wisdom of holding the elections on the date which is planned ; of holding them throughout Bosnia ; of applying the principle of conditionality ; of bringing firm pressure to bear to remove those accused of war crimes from public office , arresting them and bringing them before the International Tribunal in the Hague - something which some people even believe might be considered a provocation .
Many of us take the view - and many people here in Parliament felt that the Dayton agreements were too much the result of a belated exercise in political realism designed to offset the disastrous consequences of this war - that now the Dayton agreements have been accepted by the parties , it would be extremely dangerous to start adding further doses of political realism which would not actually help their implementation .
In this context , I think it is important to highlight a number of points . As rapporteurs , I and several other Members have just been on a seven-day fact-finding mission to Bosnia-Herzegovina .
We were able to see that progress is being made in a number of fields , above all in military terms - although I do not wish to fall into the trap of saying that the military aspects of the Dayton plan are working , but the civil aspects are not . Given the differing degrees of complexity of the two aspects and their treatment in the Dayton agreements , this is a generalization which we cannot accept .
We must do away completely with the impression that what the Americans are doing is working and what the Europeans are doing is not .
However , it is true that the implementation of many of the civil provisions of the peace plan is facing serious problems . I shall draw attention to some of these , of which everyone is aware .
There is only relative freedom of movement : people are able to move around individually and in small groups , but there is no generalized freedom of movement .
Only small numbers of refugees have been able to return home , and then usually to territories in which their ethnic or religious group is in the majority .
As regards democratization , the options of the democratic opposition political parties are minimal , and I am sorry to say that none of the political forces represented here in the House has made a serious attempt to support the creation of non-ethnic , non-radical political options in the territories of Bosnia-Herzegovina . In my view , this reflects a serious lack of responsibility on the part of all the democratic political parties represented in this Parliament .
Karadzic continues openly and directly to pull the strings of the government of the Republika Srpska , and there are considerable doubts that he will be arrested before the elections .
And I would say that the responsibility of President Milosevic , who is the real protagonist in the manoeuvring which has led to the disastrous failure to arrest Karadzic , and the responsibility of President Tudjman to remove from political office and detain a number of war criminals in Mostar and Herzegovina , such as Dario Kordis and others who are less well-known , mean that we must keep up strong , sustained and unequivocal pressure on Belgrade and Zagreb if we wish the Bosnian peace process to move forward .
There is not a great deal of positive information concerning the forthcoming elections , although I should like to express my personal concern - and that of many Members of this Parliament , I believe - at the debate surrounding the date of those elections . Many of us believe that it is not a question of the date itself , but of meeting our responsibility as the international community to ensure that the conditions are as favourable as possible by the planned date .
Consequently , if we continue to fail to support the democratic parties , and if we continue to fail to bring maximum pressure to bear for the arrest of the war criminals and so on , postponing the elections will not represent a significant change .
I shall end by saying that in terms of actual reconstruction , the results of the European Union 's action can be seen in Mostar , although there are serious political problems , such as the lack of reunification .
However , physical reconstruction can be seen in Mostar .
It is not visible in the rest of Bosnia .
It would also be a good idea for the Commission to examine whether the mechanisms , procedures , rules and regulations applied in an operation of this scale and with this degree of political responsibility are suitable for this or future actions which we are required to carry out beyond our borders in the framework of the CFSP .
I would say that they are not , and that - without wishing to criticize in the least the Commission or its agents on the ground - it is important for the Commission to tell us which of these mechanisms and procedures will be useful in the future and which will not .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in presenting this report of an apparently strictly budgetary nature , I should like first to draw the Assembly 's attention to the origins of this affair and then to its financial implications , and also to its political implications , which to my eyes are immensely important .
First , the origins .
The proclamation of the independence of Croatia and Slovenia on 25 June 1991 led to the intervention of the Yugoslav Federal Army two days later and at the same time provoked war which had disappeared from our continent since 8 May 1945 .
To begin with , the old European demons - differing judgements and analyses and failure to understand what was happening , then divisions over what to do - led Europeans not to intervene and to watch the progress of the war as an exotic phenomenon which would come to an end some day .
The consequences for the rest of Europe first appeared as a subject for reflection by our pseudo-philosophers looking for moral imperatives , but mostly for cheap personal publicity , and not as a crucial issue for the whole of our continent .
And sending in the UN blue berets , whose only orders were to keep the combatants apart , could give the impression of a profound lack of interest in a conflict on the doorstep of the Union of 12 , later of 15 .
For five years , the Europeans , who love justice and freedom , watched sadly and in dismay something which the rest of the world saw as an illustration of the powerlessness of Europe .
And then came 16 June 1995 when , under the name of the rapid reaction force , the West froze the situation on the ground , before presiding over a withdrawal of the opposing forces and achieving on 21 November the global peace agreement for Bosnia , concluded at Dayton in the USA .
Three weeks later , the agreement signed in Paris at the Elysée Palace Conference created two entities , the Croat-Muslim Federation and the Serb Republic of Bosnia , and decided on the deployment of an international peace-keeping force under NATO command , the implementation force , amounting on 1 February 1996 to 65 , 366 men .
This Pax Atlantica - there is no other possible expression - since 54 , 220 of the soldiers come from 15 countries of the Atlantic Alliance - is now accompanied by a plan for reconstruction .
These are the financial and political implications of the peace we are discussing today .
What our Assembly should consider at this sitting is what any Assembly with budgetary powers should do , that is , provide the financial resources to transform peace through arms into a return to normality by moving on to the reconstruction of this region of Europe devastated by war .
On this subject , we have in fact three reports apart from mine ; those of our colleagues Mr Alavanos , Mr Mendiluce and Mr Titley which , even if they cover the same geographical entity , relate to three different types of reality , graduate their approach to the use of appropriations and are in fact complementary .
For in an ideal situation , the more rebuilding progresses and the less we shall need humanitarian aid , the more it will be possible to mobilize appropriations for housing and employment and the more those with homes and jobs will once again become free human beings .
Our Assembly should therefore now take formal note , by a vote that we hope will be in favour , of its involvement in the process of funding reconstruction .
Although the first Conference of donors on 20 and 21 December 1995 took place hurriedly and at some distance from our Assembly , the next , on 12 and 13 April in Brussels , gave it a substantial role as Mrs Müller , Mr Mendiluce , Mr Titley and I represented you there .
This second Conference had been preceded by a trialogue under the responsibility , for our Assembly , of Mr Samland , during which a broad convergence of views with the Council and Commission emerged .
This positive action demonstrated that in this matter the Council , the Commission and the second branch of the budgetary authority shared the same objectives .
The Committee on Budgets unanimously pronounced itself in favour of the Alavanos report on humanitarian aid .
In our view , no limitation whatsoever , whether budgetary or legal , can be imposed on humanitarian aid , when it is needed to deal with a distressing situation and above all to help the innocent : the women , the elderly , the children abandoned along the road having fled from the fighting .
Let us simply remind ourselves that , apart from the 200 , 000 who have lost their lives , 3 , 600 , 000 others have been displaced and their homes destroyed or damaged , so that 80 % of them are now dependent on international aid .
As for the Titley report , which deals with the management of European Union aid and the coordination of international aid , the Committee on Budgets has also expressed an opinion which was unanimously adopted and which emphasizes the need to provide credible justification for the resources committed by the European Union .
The justification for this use of appropriations is only a condition adding to those we have consistently urged in this Assembly for many years , particularly the re-establishment of the rule of law , the restoration of basic freedoms , the creation of a civil society and naturally cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal at The Hague , for which the operational funds should be substantially increased on this occasion .
As regards Mr Mendiluce 's report , the Committee on Budgets has also expressed a favourable opinion for the same reasons as those stated concerning the Titley report .
Turning to the report entrusted to me by the Committee on Budgets , I wish firstly to draw my colleagues ' attention to the importance of the contribution from the European Union .
Although contributions are theoretically shared between three major participants , the European Union , the USA and the other countries wishing to give aid , it is useful to recall that only the contribution from the European Union is the subject of a multiannual programme , which also requires a review of budgetary perspectives up to 1999 on which discussions have already started .
This is reflected in a withdrawal of funds under two main headings of our budget , as a result of the simultaneous adoption of our budget on 13 December and the conclusion of the Paris Agreement on the following day .
I remind you that in December we approved a sum of ECU 400 million programmed as shown in the table on page 14 .
The Committee on Budgets now proposes to you that we confirm the Commission proposal to release ECU 600 million from the PHARE programme for the period 1996-1999 .
For information , I should like to remind you that the budgetary commitment for the PHARE programme over this period amounts to ECU 6 , 690 , 000 , 000 , so that the ECU 600 million allocated to the former Yugoslavia represents less than 10 % of the Union 's outlay in assisting the CEECs .
ECU 1 billion over five years which is a symbolic figure as the ECU 400 million and ECU 600 million have to be added together represents less than the average annual unused appropriations of the combined PHARE and TACIS programmes .
The table on page 12 also shows the proposed breakdown for democratization , sanctions , antipersonnel mines and the city of Mostar , the Gordian knot and focus of all the difficulties experienced by that unhappy country .
It is now clear that the particularly tight programme approved by the Committee on Budgets , especially as regards the progress of Category IV , which you will find on page 14 of my report , will be greatly facilitated by proper regulations for the use of these appropriations , which have finally just been proposed by the Commission .
The arrival the day before yesterday of these draft regulations proposed by the Commission nullifies point K in the preamble of my report .
This is a minor comment , but I now wish to make a major comment .
Yesterday morning , I was opposed to urgent examination of this document .
Because of its importance , it seemed to me to call for a particularly detailed examination by our Assembly , examination all the more so because we have consistently maintained that the regulations for the PHARE programme are totally unsuitable and have demanded regulations fully adapted to the exceptional situation in the former Yugoslavia .
A few more days reflection will therefore be useful for a careful examination .
To conclude and to get away a little from figures , I should like to mention a quotation .
The President of France declared recently : ' Recent history has provided Europeans with a good illustration , in Bosnia , of their present opportunities and limitations .
On the positive side is the Franco-British military cooperation and the German decision , taken at the prompting of Chancellor Kohl , to participate in external peacekeeping operations .
On the negative side is the present inability of Europeans to engage in a large-scale politico-military action on their own responsibility .
We must put an end to what is perceived by the world as European powerlessness .
We must build our common European defence policy , to which we are committed by the Maastricht Treaty ' .
I will add for my part that our Assembly must also participate in this .
By adopting these four reports which in fact form only a single one , our Assembly will play its full part .
We have often been criticised for being inclined to discuss matters of little importance .
This time , make no mistake , this is a major report and , by approving it , you are preparing yourselves to take a major political act .
Mr President , we should all be clear that there is no peace in Bosnia at the moment in any sense in which the ordinary person would understand that word .
There is very little sense of reconciliation , there is virtually no freedom of movement and few refugees have been able to return home .
Instead , international military force has merely brought about a halt in hostilities .
It has provided us with a very small window of opportunity to show the local population that they have a stake , both politically and economically , in the future .
They will get a political stake when elections are held and , despite all the difficulties , it is vital that these elections go ahead on schedule .
The economic state will depend on the success of the international reconstruction effort , which is the area my report deals with .
In assessing that effort we should remember , firstly , that the destruction was enormous : the basic infrastructure was extensively damaged or destroyed , only 20 % of houses were left undamaged and 60 % of industrial capacity was destroyed .
Secondly , the basic structures of society were missing .
Government institutions have had to be built up from scratch .
The legacy of the old state-run economy means that there are great problems concerning property rights , which hinder economic reforms , and there have been major issues concerning Bosnia 's international debts which had to be resolved before the financial institutions could offer assistance .
Thirdly , economic reconstruction is not the same as humanitarian aid .
Reconstruction involves careful planning , extensive consultation and the implementation of long-term financial management .
It therefore takes longer to produce results and requires patience .
Given these and many other difficulties , the reconstruction effort mounted so far by the international community has been remarkable .
The Commission in particular has achieved a great deal , particularly in Mostar .
Therefore , the concerns I am about to outline should be seen in that context .
There have been two major international donor conferences which have jointly raised US $ 1.8 bn .
That amount contrasts , of course , with the US $ 7 bn which the IFOR operation is costing .
It is also a misleading figure .
In making their pledges governments have sometimes juggled the figures .
The real amount is less than US $ 1.8 bn , which has caused some of the reconstruction projects to be scaled down .
Further , the money has been very slow to materialize .
In April only half of the money pledged at the December conference had actually been committed .
The burden of reconstruction money has not been shared out as fairly as originally intended .
The EU is still responsible for more than its fair share .
That is why I call in my report for other donors , particularly the United States , Japan and the Islamic countries , to make a greater commitment .
Donors have mainly put money into specific projects or given assistance in kind .
Too little money has gone into other areas .
Funding for recurrent expenditure is desperately needed .
Rebuilt schools and hospitals are of little use if there is nobody to pay the salaries of teachers and doctors .
Money needs to be channelled into the social sector , both to provide shortterm employment and to fund a basic social security safety net .
Another essential area being underfunded is land-mine clearance .
There are more land-mines in Bosnia than people .
Economic life cannot return to normal if people literally cannot walk in their back garden for fear of landmines .
But only 2 % of the money committed in the first donor conference has gone on land-mine clearance .
Finally , we must constantly emphasize the importance of housing reconstruction .
Without that normality cannot return .
When I was in Bosnia , criticisms were made that the Commission was releasing money too slowly .
Given the difficult circumstances the Commission operates under and the need to ensure financial probity and full transparency , these criticisms are largely unfair .
There is a desperate need , however , for small sums of money to be rapidly disbursed .
I hope we can do something in that respect in the future .
It is also essential to make it clear that there is no weakening of our determination to make our assistance conditional on respect for the Dayton agreement and particularly respect for human rights .
We must also ensure that there is effective coordination of the international aid effort .
We have heard a number of stories of failed coordination which has hampered the effectiveness of that aid .
Finally , the international community has done much , but has actually talked a lot more .
If we are to build a real and lasting peace in Bosnia , then the international community must put its money where its mouth is .
Mr President , following the signing of the Dayton agreements , peace at last seemed possible in the wartorn territories of former Yugoslavia .
However , peace is not won ; only wars are won .
Peace is built . It is built by restoring dignity to those from whom it has been wrested by force of arms , by sowing the seeds of harmony where the warmongers wished only hatred to grow , by covering with a mantle of renewed hope the traces of the long dark night of suffering and death .
Hence the urgency of carrying out the moral reconstruction of former Yugoslavia and the need for measures which help to establish a just order , based on respect for democracy and human rights .
This is not an easy task .
The pain and humiliation of those who suffered the indignity of ethnic cleansing is too great .
The scars left by the violence and hatred are too deep : 200 000 dead , more than four million refugees and displaced persons , cities reduced to rubble , and a traumatized civilian population .
Consequently the REX Committee , like the rapporteur on humanitarian aid , believes that for peace to be genuinely possible , over and above the Commission 's own emergency measures and the priorities it has established in its communication on the prospects and guidelines for humanitarian aid , there is a need for such aid to be reoriented towards measures which facilitate the return and social reintegration of the refugees and displaced persons .
It is therefore not only a question of ensuring a continuum between the emergency stage and the rehabilitation stage , important as that may be , but of encouraging the social and political conditions which will make possible if not the dream of the restoration of a multi-ethnic , multi-cultural and multi-linguistic society , as Mr Mendiluce said yesterday , then at least the achievement of peaceful coexistence .
It is a question of healing the wounds in the hearts and minds of those who have been the innocent victims of this war , and providing peace education aimed at promoting tolerance and respect for diversity .
To this end , there is a need to increase substantially the financial resources being made available , to coordinate the efforts of the donor countries and NGOs , to support the UNHCR in carrying out its guiding role , and to introduce the principles of greater flexibility and decentralization into the technical assistance initiatives under the PHARE programme .
In this way , peace will start to become a reality in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
The European Union , which was incapable of stopping the war , now has it in its hands to make peace possible .
This is the European Union 's great responsibility , and indeed our responsibility .
Mr President , in the debate on former Yugoslavia I should like , as joint draftsman , to focus on Mr Alvanos 's report on humanitarian aid to this war-torn region .
Very few people are aware that the European Union is far and away the biggest donor of humanitarian aid to the countries of former Yugoslavia .
Since 1992 the Union has provided 1.6 billion ECU , and this region thus takes more out of the ECHO aid fund than all other regions put together .
Aid is channelled through the Red Cross , the UNHCR , Médecins sans Frontières and dozens of NGOs operating in the field in order to help the 3.5 million or so refugees within the region to survive .
I must stress here the respect I feel for all those working with the NGOs , who often have to operate under difficult conditions and sometimes at considerable risk to their own lives .
Against that background , Mr President , I have a few comments which you will also find in my opinion and which have been very largely adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
We believe a clear distinction needs to be made between humanitarian aid and aid to reconstruction .
Aid to reconstruction is not emergency aid .
Humanitarian aid is given without political strings attached and aid for reconstruction does have political strings .
We think these two flows of aid must be kept separate because otherwise humanitarian aid , which is in any case all too meagre , will be misused for projects which are really part of the reconstruction effort .
We have put down a number of amendments on this and are glad that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has endorsed them .
Secondly , the levels of aid for food , clothing and services such as housing are more or less adequate , but the NGOs report that not enough psychological and social help is being given , for example to the families of people who are missing , to women and children who have been the victims of assault and rape .
Perhaps a little more can be done here under ECHO .
Thirdly , help is also needed in the social and cultural field , because multicultural organizations need to be able to regenerate themselves .
It must also be possible to counter the segregation which increasingly threatens to become established in schools and hospitals , but help is needed for that .
And we believe such help has to be given .
And then there are the soldiers being demobilized , Mr President .
There are some 300 000 of them and we hear that they are increasingly forming gangs and thus creating a new danger .
It is said that there are 3 to 4 million mines in the region .
We think humanitarian aid money can be used here if there is no other way of paying for mines clearance .
A couple of remarks to close with , Mr President .
We think it is most important for the return of refugees to be properly coordinated .
We are genuinely concerned that too many of them will be forcibly repatriated .
We urge the Commission to be particularly alert to this possibility .
Finally , Mr President , one political question : what is actually going to happen when the United States withdraws from the entire region ?
Can we then expect the European Union to fill the gap ?
Is there any truth in the rumour that Mr Bildt too will be resigning at the end of the year ?
Can the Commissioner give specific answers to these questions ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , what the European Union is doing at the moment regarding reconstruction in BosniaHerzegovina - and that is the only thing I want to speak about - is a scandal .
Haven 't we repeatedly emphasized in recent months just how important the civil reconstruction of the country is , so as to raise people 's hopes for peace in good time before the elections in September ?
With a great show of strength , we made over ECU 200 million available , and we insisted on unbureaucratic and rapid aid .
And what happened ?
Six months later , most of the emergency relief that was made available has still not arrived .
It has become tangled up in the Commission 's bureaucratic jungle and in its bickering over who is responsible for what .
Right from the beginning , Parliament indicated that the PHARE Programme was not suitable for BosniaHerzegovina .
I was able to verify at first hand the fact that long deadlines for tendering , and central planning via the government , are not at all appropriate for this particular situation .
So it is hardly surprising that the first mine detectors were not due to be delivered until May , despite the fact that we all know that in actual fact reconstruction is totally impossible without a comprehensive mine clearance programme .
And what about the ECU 92 million of emergency relief that Parliament made available under separate budget headings ?
We called it , " Europe for Sarajevo ' .
But unfortunately Sarajevo has received almost nothing from Europe , with the exception of constantly changing faces .
The Commission has put these funds on ice , saying that there is no legal basis for them .
At the end of May it submitted the draft to the Council and Parliament for advice .
If we are lucky , implementation may start in August , in other words a month before the elections .
But we have always insisted that the budget headings should be used in accordance with the budget decision , and that we should not fight out our battles over a legal basis on the backs of the people of Sarajevo , Tuzla and Banja Luka .
The political repercussions , for which you , Commissioner van den Broek , share the responsibility , are most unfortunate .
People will not see any recognizable sign of hope if they cannot repair their houses .
The return of refugees will not be possible , because there are no houses or jobs in sight .
The demobilized soldiers cannot find anything to do and , thanks to the Commission 's failure to act. the opposition , which would like to be based on peace and European values such as tolerance and freedom , is being robbed of its argument that Europe can be relied on .
Mr van den Broek , the former Yugoslavia is not going to do us a favour by organizing itself neatly and tidily on the basis of PHARE and humanitarian aid .
This is a country that has largely been destroyed , and its people are without hope .
Instead of facing up to these challenges , you have fallen back on traditional ways and means , and on top of that you have not even organized them properly . And the price of all this is being paid by the people there , who so far have seen hardly anything of our aid .
One glance at Mostar could have shown you what needed to be done , in other words , to organize decentralized assistance using qualified staff .
In Mostar , reconstruction is proceeding hand in hand with the creation of new infrastructures , and 90 % of all projects are being carried out by local firms .
This approach also makes it possible , to some extent , to walk the difficult political tightrope between aid and conditionality .
But what should be done now ?
Commissioner , it is high time you took on full responsibility for this matter !
Set up a proper team in Brussels , made up of people who will work together and not against one another !
Link the PHARE Programme aid to the emergency aid !
Don 't create two mutually independent procurement structures !
Learn from the experience gained in Mostar !
Develop decentralized programmes , place more reliance on the local mayor rather than on a deposed government in Sarajevo , and get your priorities right !
Encourage the formation of local infrastructures instead of looking for orders for EU companies and jobs for EU advisers !
Send qualified personnel to the most important towns , and above all make use of the time leading up to the elections !
Support the independent media , and help the opposition to make its voice heard !
In other words , finally get round to doing what Parliament instructed you to do at the end of last year , when it took the relevant budget decision !
And now for a reaction to the Council .
It seems to me , Mr Fassino , that there is considerable uncertainty within the Council as to how it can be made possible for refugees to return to their homes .
Mr Schäfer , for example , a minister who was in Bosnia at the same time as the delegation from this House , stated on his return that basically there was nothing to stop the operation to return the refugees to their homes from starting on 1 July as planned , provided that when they got there they would find conditions - and especially accommodation - fit for human habitation .
However , as we know , this is something that cannot be achieved quite so quickly .
However right it is to insist on the refugees ' right to return to their homeland , it is equally true to say that no refugee ought to be compelled to go back to an area from which he was driven by force , and where he would now have to live as part of a minority , with no guarantee of his safety .
However right it may be to say that every refugee is entitled to get his home back , it is equally true to say that many of those homes that are still intact have long ago been taken over by other refugees .
It is therefore essential to ensure that the rehoming of refugees does not itself give rise to further misery .
We should therefore follow the recommendation of the mayor of Tuzla , who is insisting that first of all the one million or so refugees that were uprooted within Bosnia should be given the chance of relocating .
Only then should a full-scale start be made on rehoming the one million or so refugees who have found shelter abroad .
This gradual process would also make it possible to resolve many of the outstanding property disputes dating from the days of Socialism .
It is precisely because the refugee issue is so closely linked to rapid reconstruction that our delay in getting the emergency aid scheme off the ground is particularly unfortunate .
In this context it seems to me that the Regulation adopted by the Council is highly disturbing , in that it succeeds in turning the emergency aid into a creeping subsidy programme for Spanish and other suppliers .
Mr President , we have held countless debates in this House and adopted numerous resolutions on the tragedy of the war in former Yugoslavia .
We have condemned the atrocities committed , and drawn attention to the inaction and dissent of certain members of the international community , as well as to the efforts carried out on the ground , with great personal commitment , by those who have sought to defend the victims by monitoring both the ceasefire and the situation of civilians .
The point should also be made , however , that some people have done very good business in this war , because we are not so naive as to be unaware that wars always provide opportunities for shady commercial dealings at the expense of the victims .
Little has been left standing ; the destruction is continuing , and time is short for peace to be secured .
In this debate today , we are determined to establish reasonable criteria for reconstruction of the areas which have suffered the severest damage as a result of the conflict .
Former Yugoslavia is on our borders , and this means that the Union must make a great effort , even if critical voices are raised - and they will be heard .
It is worth committing ourselves to the establishment of a plan for peace , harmony and cultural tolerance .
Intolerance and hatred are scourges which must be combatted with solidarity .
And solidarity , let us not forget , is a duty which cannot be replaced by goodwill or charity .
In other words , success will depend on a number of factors , but above all on a distinct financial effort .
It can never be stressed enough that the peace is fragile .
The region - above all Bosnia-Herzegovina - is shattered , its industrial fabric destroyed and its productive capacity reduced to nil .
So it is essential to lay the foundations for reconstruction without delay , thinking in both the medium and long term .
And achieving peace will depend on the process of democratization as well as on the economic effort .
In the view of the REX Committee , the financial instruments available must first be directed towards restoring the productive fabric and infrastructure , with a view to making progress in two directions : regional integration , and preparation for future association with the Union , which can be achieved by adapting our contractual relations as the situation develops .
Unfortunately , the transition to a market economy - a precondition for this contractual development - will be taking place in the worst possible conditions .
As a result , the Union 's financial instruments must be well defined and match the realities .
Two questions which the REX Committee has been asking itself in the course of its lengthy discussions are , firstly , whether in the present budgetary framework the Union will be able to respond rapidly and effectively to the challenge ; and , secondly , whether the virtual insolvency of the former Yugoslav republics will be another obstacle to gaining access to international credit .
The REX Committee considers it essential that , with the exception of humanitarian aid , the Union 's technical , financial and macro-economic assistance should be made subject to the criteria of political and economic conditionality laid down by the General Affairs Council at its meeting in October last year .
The nature of the consequences of the war in former Yugoslavia will not allow total normality to be restored for a long time , and it should be stressed , finally , that abuses will continue to be committed , but that these abuses will be far more serious if the international community - and , more particularly , the European Union - fails to assume its responsibilities .
Mr President , six months ago the peace negotiations in Bosnia-Herzegovina ended with the signing of the Dayton Accord .
Since then , the international community has made great efforts to achieve longterm peace in this devastated country , by means of reconstruction .
The European Union and its Member States have fulfilled their responsibilities with regard to a substantial part of these efforts , in terms of both reconstruction and peacekeeping by the IFOR troops .
However , we have not yet succeeded in ensuring peace .
After a certain amount of initial difficulty , the first results of the reconstruction effort are now visible , and even the restoration of infrastructural facilities is slowly but surely progressing .
Thanks to the presence of the international troops , however , the most important objective has been achieved . The war has ended .
This does not mean that all the wounds in the relationships between the individual ethnic groups have already been healed , and that peace is guaranteed in the long term .
But thanks to IFOR the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina can now venture to make a new start in relative safety .
Unfortunately the situation is still not such as to make this possible without the presence of the IFOR troops .
Enormous efforts will still have to be made if there is to be reconciliation between the different ethnic groups , because if there is one thing we have learned from Bosnia-Herzegovina , it is that it is more difficult to make peace than to make war .
The planned withdrawal of IFOR forces at the end of this year is therefore likely , in my opinion , to constitute the greatest threat to maintaining both the peace and the reconstruction process .
My group has therefore taken the initiative and , by means of a European Parliament recommendation , has asked the Council of Ministers to prolong the presence of at least the European contingent of the IFOR troops so that it continues into next year .
Mrs Maij-Weggen has spoken about this problem .
I take exactly the same view as she does .
The matter must be discussed .
A decision of this kind is essential , because without IFOR we cannot expect the peace process to be successful .
All those who have said so here today are right , because although progress is being made on reconstruction , there is still a lot of work to be done .
As was shown by last week 's follow-up conference in Florence , on the implementation of the peace accord , there are some areas in which a lot of work still has to be done .
This is particularly true with regard to the return of refugees and those who have been driven out of their homes , the measures needed to guarantee freedom of domicile for people throughout the whole of the sovereign territory , and the building up of joint democratic institutions at national , regional and local level .
The implementation of free and democratic elections could make an important contribution here , if - and I emphasize the word " if ' - the basic conditions for those elections can be provided .
Of absolutely vital importance is the existence of free and independent media , so that it is possible for all candidates and all parties to have free and equal access .
Even more important , however , is the existence of multi-ethnic political parties , which will make it possible , after the elections , to continue the process of rapprochement between the various ethnic groups , and to prevent ethnic separation from becoming strengthened and legitimized by the elections .
The European Union now faces an important task . It must do everything it can to ensure that the hope of a peaceful future in Bosnia-Herzegovina can survive .
I hope that we shall all be in a position to do so .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is now almost seven months since Dayton or Paris , and we have to ask ourselves whether anything has really changed .
The only thing that has changed is that there is no longer a war going on , but the changes have not been as great as we should have liked .
On the civilian side , things are not yet progressing as we had thought they might .
We are coming up against a lot of obstacles , including the fact that in this instance war has paid off , since the aggressor has gained 49 % .
It is also true to say that ethnic cleansing is still going on everywhere in Bosnia . Over the last four years we have learned that ethnic cleansing still goes unpunished .
It is now continuing in all regions , and we cannot prevent it , despite the many organizations that are there on the spot .
We are forced to admit that local politicians and police officers are still compliantly doing the dirty work for their criminal bosses .
Of course there are decent politicians everywhere , and those who would like to make these things public , but who dare not , because if they did they would very soon lose their heads .
So the civilian implementation is not working , but the reason it is not working is that it is mainly Europeans who are involved .
At the end of the day , everybody agreed to this civilian implementation , and everybody is responsible for it , just as we are also all responsible for the positive results of the military implementation .
As far as humanitarian aid and reconstruction aid are concerned , we are faced with the question of how to give our aid , whom to give it to and on what conditions .
If we were to follow our own ideas , then we would be able to give aid to hardly any projects at all , because hardly anywhere are the provisions of the Dayton Accord being observed .
The extradition of the war criminals is being boycotted .
Freedom of movement has not been established .
Only a tiny number of refugees have returned from the Serbian sector of Bosnia into the Croatian-Moslem sector .
The authorities in the Serbian sector have absolutely no interest in having their fellow Serbian citizens coming back to Sarajevo , for example , which in many cases they went away from as a result of Serbian pressure .
Nor have they any interest - although they maintain that the opposite is true - in seeing them go back into Krajina , thereby forcing the Croatian authorities to show their true colours .
They would much rather keep them almost like hostages , so that they can then say that they have so many Serbian refugees that they are unable to allow any Croatian or Muslim refugees , who have lived there for hundreds of years , to come back .
The reciprocity scheme is working wonderfully well , except that the Serbs are to some extent preventing their own fellow citizens , who would very much like to return to their original homes , from doing so .
The politicians in the Serbian sector of Bosnia do not regard their sector as a constitutive part of Bosnia , and yet that is what is set down in the accord , and that is what they signed up to !
In other words , not much is happening .
Yet the people of the country want peace !
They need , at long last , to have leaders who want the same thing , and the new elections could bring this about , at least in part .
But the prerequisite for any elections whose results will not be a foregone conclusion is to have media that will stop inciting the people and start informing them , and will finally follow this motto : this land of Bosnia is the land of Muslims , Croatians and Serbs !
This message must be got across , every day , morning , noon and night , by television and radio , so that the people - and in particular their politicians - finally understand it .
Our aid must be concerned with the media projects .
It is a matter of the utmost urgency that we should rebuild houses and that we should rebuild multi-ethnic schools .
But it is also necessary to provide aid to build up the SMEs , thereby providing the possibility of help by self-help .
Jobs are absolutely essential in order to give people prospects and in order to make them immune to the inflammatory speeches of their leaders , some of whom are criminals .
Mr President , previous speakers have rightly expressed our fears in respect of war and peace .
The mid-term review of the Dayton Agreement conducted in Florence expressed those same fears for the peace process .
In view of the time I shall confine myself to a few brief points .
The setting of a date for elections is interesting but it is not enough unless the international community is prepared to give its backing and help ensure that the elections are truly democratic .
IFOR must help to secure the arrest of Mr Karadzic and Mr Mladic and the return of the refugees .
The Union and other donors must help with the development of independent media , and I would echo here a call which a number of people have already made to the Commissioner in other contexts .
We are already hearing that some people , namely foreign journalists , are experiencing problems , are being harassed and hampered in their work .
In the context of the elections which we hope will take place in September I hope it may be possible to set up a sort of hotline between journalists and Mr Bildt 's office or the other authorities so that proper and timely warning can be given if journalists are prevented from doing their job freely .
Free media , in the context of the elections , will go a long way towards fostering the democratic perception that one 's voice is heard and can be heard .
Mr President , I should like first of all to compliment Mr Alavanos and the other rapporteurs on their reports .
Mr President , I do not want to go into detail about what has happened in the blood-soaked former Yugoslavia over all these years .
I just wish to say that on numerous occasions there has been no shortage of hypocrisy in the European Union , and no shortage of it here , too , in the European Parliament .
I also believe that the European Union bears a huge responsibility for the tragedy that the peoples of the former Yugoslavia have had to live through , and still are living through .
And therefore its responsibility to assist in the repair of the damage , in so far as it can be repaired , and to show solidarity with the people of the region in their struggle for survival is equally huge .
The main foci of the aid must be :
the reconstruction of infrastructure destroyed in the war ; -the return of all refugees and displaced persons to their homes ; the creation , that is , of conditions which will encourage them to return , because fine words alone will not get these people back to their homes , to the places where they lived peacefully in earlier years ; -clearance of the minefields which are endangering the lives of many thousands of people in Bosnia ; -the placing of priority on the social rehabilitation of the people , with emphasis on ensuring that the appropriations are not frittered away by businessmen and the various opportunists who will be looking for the main chance ; -fair distribution of the appropriations among all of the peoples - Serbs , Croats , Muslims - without special conditions and requirements.We would view any attempt to link this aid to political conditions , to a demand for the establishment of any particular social organization model , as a new manifestation of inhumanity on the part of the Union and its institutions .
The Dayton peace was imposed by weapons , by force .
So , of course , it is not real peace .
The crisis and the hatred created by the war have not been overcome . Any attempt to impose conditions , or any unfair treatment in the management of the aid , could re-ignite the flames of war .
Posterity will judge whether the European Union shouldered its responsibility and implemented a good policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the peace process in former Yugoslavia and more particularly in Bosnia-Hercegovina does indeed continue to be very hard going .
To my mind there are two factors which might have a very negative effect in the short and medium term .
The first is the lifting of the arms embargo yesterday and the second is the possibility - I hope it will be no more than that - that the elections planned for the autumn will fail .
The Dayton Agreement stipulated that the state of Bosnia-Hercegovina should not initially have its own army and its own police force , which would of course normally be an essential part of the state apparatus .
There were obvious reasons for this but it remains a fact that the presence of two armies within a supposed state , which are still hostile to one another , continues to be a factor of divisiveness .
On top of that the Security Council decided yesterday to lift the arms embargo , thereby placing the Americans on the ground in IFOR in a very ambiguous position , as peace-keepers in IFOR on the one hand and , on the other hand , as the biggest supplier of arms to the Federation of Bosnia-Hercegovina .
Everyone know this and it is also visible on the ground .
Hence my question to the Commissioner as to how the Union will seek to monitor the agreements which have been reached and to ensure that IFOR 's credibility is not damaged , because in my view it is practicable to say that IFOR should stay rather longer than originally envisaged but it is a contradiction in terms to link that to rearmament .
As for the second problem , the elections , it is clear here that many groups on the spot and concerned principally with human rights are warning that in the short term those who will wield the greatest influence are those who advocated and fought for ethnic cleansing .
On the other hand all the parties , including the opposition , think that it is better to hold the elections than not to .
I am willing to give this the benefit of the doubt but it will be most important for us to monitor this process in the next few weeks and months , otherwise we shall fail over this too .
Mr President , peace has returned to Bosnia-Herzegovina .
At least the guns are silent .
Two hundred thousand soldiers , or a few more , have returned to barracks , with ordered arms .
Today , the worry is that everything , or nearly everything , remains to be done .
We must , at least for the time being , go into mourning - but mourning is by its very nature temporary - for a dream long kept alive of a multiethnic , multicultural and multireligious society .
Make no mistake , the rapists and murderers have won the game .
I am not saying they have won the war , but they have won an important battle .
Each of the now peaceful zones is controlled by an exclusive , or at the very least a largely dominant , ethnic group .
Try to go from one town to another in Bosnia .
It is practically impossible .
Try to telephone from Tuzla to Banja Luka , it is also virtually impossible .
These minimum freedoms of movement and communication are still non-existent .
The people in control of these adjacent enclaves care little for their citizens ' freedoms , including freedom of expression and freedom of the press .
But the European Union does have enough weight to induce these authorities to respect , however minimally , the freedom of the citizens living in the zones they control .
We have the means , you have the means , to set clear conditions for establishing cooperation , particularly of a financial nature .
In this respect , the naming , prosecution , judgement and sentencing of the criminals and the quality of the help given to the court by the local authorities - Serbs , Croats and Bosnians - will have to be regarded as a decisive criterion for the allocation of European aid .
For the violence to continue to be held in check , it is also essential that IFOR , in its present form or in a form still to be determined , should be present , that it should be well armed and determined to protect the populations which , when it suited it , the international community left in the hands of butchers .
Such a military presence , which is supposed to prevent any resumption of the armed conflict , should also enable these populations to regain confidence and to start rebuilding their own future .
Mr President , on reading these four outstanding reports one is impressed once again by the enormity of the human suffering and material damage caused by more than four years of war in former Yugoslavia .
Whilst the Dayton Agreement offers a basis for peace , given the continuation of divisions along ethnic lines the question remains whether Bosnia can ever become a multiethnic unified state .
We cannot see an enforced balance of power and peace agreement achieving this .
Nevertheless the international aid we are discussing today is the appropriate instrument for encouraging a return to normal society in former Yugoslavia .
In addition to humanitarian aid in the form of food supplies and medical care amongst other things , the focus must switch in future to reconstruction aid , with a view to selfsufficiency .
It is primarily important that tangible results should be achieved ahead of this autumn 's elections .
It is not easy to pick out priorities from the wide range of projects .
But we would give precedence to those projects likely to encourage cooperation between the different population groups in former Yugoslavia .
High priority should also be given to demobilizing the 300 000 or so troops and finding these people employment .
One question which does not receive sufficient attention is how far the Union can help to reduce the number of weapons in the region .
I fear that peace will not be helped merely by stabilizing existing arms levels .
I would be glad to hear the Commissioner 's views on this .
Lastly , in giving aid for reconstruction the point is not so much that the Union should prove its credibility in terms of its foreign and security policy , as we read in one of the reports .
The point is primarily that the Union and the international community should , in providing aid , fulfil their moral obligations towards the citizens of war-torn former Yugoslavia in the hope of establishing a lasting peace here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Alavanos , Mendiluce and Titley reports submitted to us on humanitarian aid and reconstruction in the countries of the former Yugoslavia are unsatisfactory .
Only that of our colleague , Mr Giansily , has the strict budgetary qualities that we are pleased to acknowledge .
As for that of Mr Alavanos , the Greek communist , it repeats the intentions of the Council and Commission concerning humanitarian aid , but accompanies them with unacceptable conditions connected with his ideological views .
In 1991 , Mr Alavanos , like Mr Delors , opposed the independence of the Slovenian and Croatian peoples , who were unanimous in their wish to recover their freedom and sovereignty .
This attitude is known to have been regarded as significant support by the rulers of the communist regime of the Communist-Serb army .
It is hard to understand why Mr Alavanos , who praises a unitary , multinational , multicultural Yugoslavia , does not extend his argument to his own country .
Why should he not advocate a Greco-Turkish or Turko-Greek society , which would end the age-old conflict between two neighbouring nations ?
The two other reports are also marred by such ideological attitudes .
In this way , it is forgotten that Croatia , a third of whose territory was occupied and laid waste for more than four years , has made an immense effort to welcome into its liberated area not only its own nationals but also tens of thousands of Bosnians , both Christian and Muslim .
The war has resulted in partition , as always unsatisfactory , but because each people has now , somehow or other , been allocated a territory , why is it necessary to force the return of refugees at all costs to their former place of residence ?
What madness that is , when the same causes produce the same effects !
The important thing is to prevent for the Muslim population of Bosnia the Palestinization that threatens them .
May these refugees therefore leave their camps in a foreign land as quickly as possible and return to their homes , or to somewhere near their homes , in Bosnia , for only amongst their own will they find the surest guarantee of peace !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , Europe failed to prevent the conflict in former Yugoslavia , has failed to end the conflict in former Yugoslavia .
It must now be a point of honour for Europe to take the lead in providing fast , efficient and generous assistance to do as much as it can to rebuild former Yugoslavia , and Bosnia-Hercegovina in particular .
There are , of course , a number of strings attached .
Firstly , the Dayton Agreement must be implemented in full .
I think the frame of this debate is clear .
Everyone understands that structurally important problems remain given the lack of a true desire for peace on the part of all the parties concerned .
So there is by no means any de facto implementation of the Dayton Agreement .
The elections have already been postponed and questions remain as to whether the autumn elections will be a success .
The mid-term review of 13 and 14 June in Florence confirmed that sizeable problems remain over freedom of movement and media freedom .
That war criminals are far from being handed over , that Karadzic and Mladic are still at liberty .
Something which I think is often overlooked is the close link between the situation in Bosnia and the situation in Eastern Slavonia .
Because any worsening of the situation in Eastern Slavonia , due to new mass movements of refugees , may seriously affect the fragile situation in Bosnia-Hercegovina .
I thus believe special concern should be shown for Eastern Slavonia .
A second proviso which we , and primarily the Committee on Budgets , would impose is that there should be maximum transparency in respect of monies earmarked and strict monitoring of the way in which financial resources are spent .
In concrete terms that means that the European Parliament wishes to be and to remain fully involved in the specific reconstruction effort .
It is important here that our Committee on Budgets and Committee on Budgetary Control should play a major part .
Urgency , regular urgent procedures of the kind we have seen for the transfers of appropriations we have already approved , are no longer democratically acceptable to this Parliament .
Today we have yet another financial regulation .
Yet again urgency is requested .
We need to think carefully about how , through the budget , we can make sure that on the one hand aid is given efficiently and quickly enough but on the other hand that it is transparent enough .
In concluding , may I say that I was impressed by Mrs Müller 's report on the slow pace at which funds are released .
We have to cut through this red tape , at least as far as the future deployment of aid is concerned .
Mr President , at the beginning of this debate we heard once again about the ineptitude and failure of the outside world and the European Union to deal with the problems of former Yugoslavia .
I think we should stop talking of the European Union in those terms , because we know that foreign policy is directed by an intergovernmental band of ministers equipped with vetos , whose moral calibre can thus by definition never be higher than that of the member with the lowest moral calibre , and that consequently this whole business is the result or the fault of an amoral foreign policy regarded by its proponents as a sign of competence .
I think we should make no bones about the fact that the blame for events in former Yugoslavia lies with the intergovernmental Council and we should stop talking about ineptitude or failure , because this is not the way it was .
We are now living with the reality of the Dayton Agreement , child of the Vance-Owen agreement and grandchild of the plans of Karadzic which he demonstrated to me neatly on a wall chart early on in his country 's sufferings .
We are not totally happy with it .
We are happy that it has a military component , carried out by NATO in cooperation with other troops , with IFOR , which separated the troops , unfortunately at a time when Mladic 's troops were losing out .
Nevertheless , they are separated .
And there is a civilian component which is really a joke , since the maintenance of order and , for example , organization of the return of refugees and elections needs a pretty firm hand when you have a situation of violence .
My first question to the Council is whether there is still any prospect of an international police force , which would also have to be well equipped .
We cannot plonk London bobbies down in Banja Luka and environs , or in Sarajevo and environs .
That is just not feasible .
You need troops there who are more akin to riot police or our Dutch military police , a force which can if necessary call on armoured vehicles .
In Bosnia we are regularly dealing with armed gangs .
Is there any prospect of this police force becoming a reality and of operating effectively ?
Concerning elections , I must also ask the Commissioner how things stand with regard to our help for a free media .
We know that the conflict in Yugoslavia just as in Rwanda and Burundi , for example , is very largely the result of misuse and manipulation of the media .
We have been talking about this for years and there is still no prospect of effective opinion-forming by truly free media supported by us .
I think that is needed as a start to the healing process .
Mr President , I particularly welcome the acceptance today in another report of the need for an international public inquiry into the political events surrounding the fall of Srebrenica .
I think that certain countries are not so keen on this , any more than they want to see the arrest of Karadzic and Mladic , perhaps because too many awkward facts may come to light .
I think it is important that Parliament , as the elected voice of Europe , should have asked for this .
Mr President , it is good to hear from colleagues who have visited the former Yugoslavia that the situation there has improved .
This underlines the value of our support both for IFOR and for the reconstruction which is being managed so well by Carl Bildt .
Both inside and outside the EU there are many who regard developments in the former Yugoslavia as a test of the European Union 's foreign policy strength .
This makes positive results all the more important .
To achieve them money is needed ; the aid conference was successful but more is needed .
In this connection I should just like to emphasise that the PHARE programme , which is regarded as a milch cow , is not inexhaustible and has many , many calves to satisfy .
EU support should primarily go to power supplies , communications and homes and to revive the industry which has been destroyed .
For liberals it is especially important that no EU aid should be given to those who refuse to respect human rights .
Allow me , Mr President , to take this opportunity to express my estimation of the great efforts being made by our colleague Elisabeth Rehn .
Nor should aid money be given to those who do not show by their deeds that they have understood the necessity of suspected war criminals being brought to trial .
Those responsible for ethnic cleansing must be removed , refugees must return home , independent media must be established once again and free elections must be held .
We must construct a solid post-96 structure for Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Mr President , now that it has been decided to have the elections in Bosnia held on schedule it is important to look at how the rest of the peace process is going .
Without lasting guarantees of security in Bosnia and without visible success in reconstruction , the elections will be taking place in a kind of social vacuum .
They will then at best confirm the existing political balance in Bosnia , which is not as good as it might be and will only improve once the peace process brings very clear benefits , at least there .
So it is also necessary to establish very quickly whether the international presence in Bosnia , so fundamental to any reconstruction effort , is to continue .
One can doubt whether the date chosen for the elections is the right one .
Is there anything for people to vote on ?
Will the conditions be right in September ?
But given that the international community has decided that the Dayton plan must be adhered to , we must now concentrate primarily on conditions in Bosnia itself and the Union can help to ensure that the parties all have a fair chance of putting their views across in the election campaign .
A number of previous speakers have emphasized the importance of creating good , free and fair conditions during the campaign and the elections themselves and in that context it is also important to pay more attention to the role of a free media .
We also believe that the Union should seek together with other donors to speed up the visible reconstruction of Bosnia .
A lot of talking goes on , a lot of planning goes on , but people see very little by way of concrete results .
More money must be freed up , procedures must be less complicated , more local people must be involved and materials and equipment must be delivered faster .
People in Bosnia must be shown that things are changing and that they themselves can do something to further the process .
I think the European Commission should also ensure that its offices in Bosnia are adequately equipped and suitably staffed to carry out their work efficiently and fast .
In this context I would also emphasize the need for better coordination between the international organizations on the ground .
When I was there recently I had the impression that the aid providers are sometimes tripping over each other ; the whole of Sarajevo is full of well equipped Land Rovers - and that many of these organizations are often working alongside each other rather than with each other .
Rapporteur Titley rightly points to the slow pace at which aid funds pledged are released .
That point too merits attention .
If the international community wants the political process to continue according to plan it will at least need to be quicker than it is now to invest in creating a material basis for political progress .
In that respect the elections are important .
IFOR 's role in the peace process is important but visible renewal , visible results of reconstruction are equally important to the success of the huge operation which the international community has set in train in Bosnia .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have now discussed the question of how extremely difficult it is to implement this much-needed aid in such a way as to ensure that within a short time these people , who have suffered all the atrocities of the war , can be given new confidence , confidence in the knowledge that they are not without protection and that they will succeed in getting the economy going again .
At the same time , as Mrs Pack has pointed out in great detail , injustice and ethnic cleansing continue , to a large extent without the authorities taking any notice , and we , the European Union , are the only ones who have fulfilled the obligations that were agreed on at the Donor Conference .
But we must be careful !
Accusations will not help those people out there who are now waiting for help . They need economic aid , but they also need psychological help .
We must not leave them alone now , but must try , together , to open up a large number of sources of aid and to show the people - not only those who stayed there , but also the refugees who still hesitate to go back - that the reconstruction of the country depends on everyone lending a hand .
Nor can we divide the population into those who were able to flee in time and are now waiting for reconstruction to get underway so that they can then go back , and those who stayed there and suffered . We cannot say to the latter , " Start building , ' so that the others will see that it 's safe to come back .
I can see the dilemma , but we also know what the results would be .
There is only one thing that we can say with any certainty , and that is that the road to peace is a long one .
We must not get impatient , and we the European Parliament must help the Commission and the Council , not by heaping accusations upon them , but by means of mutual understanding in a difficult situation .
Money is needed everywhere , but at the moment it is needed most urgently there .
We must therefore fulfil our obligations in difficult times as well , and we must not fail .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I have asked to speak for just one simple reason , not to repeat what many of my colleagues have said about our position , the difficulties , the outlook and so forth , but to raise an issue I have already raised once in the Committee on External Economic Affairs with Commissioner van den Broek present , and which is fleetingly covered in the Mendiluce report .
I am convinced we cannot wait for the revision of the financial perspectives to work out an ad hoc programme for the reconstruction of former Yugoslavia .
I believe that even the most consistent aid - and as a European Union we are certainly deeply committed to that - will be inadequate without the framework of a new programme .
We cannot regard what we are doing as adequate , not so much from the quantitative point of view , because we introduced TACIS and PHARE after the upheavals , the end of the cold war , etcetera . But after a war which has lasted four years , our reconstruction aid must be organized through an ad hoc programme .
That is fundamental to the credibility of the European Union and to strengthening our right to intervene .
In other words we need to participate in the election campaign not as observers or guarantors , but as an intrinsic component in the election campaign in Bosnia , basically saying two things , and of course there should be different spokespersons , not just for the Commission and the Council , but for all the institutions as a whole .
The first question is this : are we going to commit ourselves as soon as possible to drawing up a full reconstruction programme , a multiannual and renewable ad hoc programme ?
The second question concerns the fact that our international presence will certainly not be limited to 1996 .
In this respect the voices of the countries and the institutions that unite them should be clearer and more distinct .
If there is uncertainty about what will happen after the end of 1996 as regards the presence of IFOR in former Yugoslavia , in Bosnia , everything becomes more hazardous and even the commitments to peace with justice , rightly recalled by Mr Oostlander and so many others , become less certain , less sure and perhaps a bit hypocritical , without real impact .
Madam President , first of all I should like to make it clear that the European Union was the first and last to give help to the countries of the former Yugoslavia in their time of need .
We are on the spot , and we are also active , and that is certainly all to the good .
So what really is the problem ?
Right from the beginning the Members of the European Parliament have pointed out that the reconstruction of these countries cannot be assisted by the traditional methods and strategies of the European Commission .
The Giansily report highlights the fact that the current aid comes out of ten different budget headings , and this means that different Commission services are trying to coordinate this aid , using different procedures .
We must also look at this question in the context of the other donors and of coordination with their aid .
I fear that in many cases aid is coordinated without taking other aid coordination measures into account .
So what , in my opinion , needs to be done ?
We need to tighten up the financial aid by means of a legal basis which has yet to be created . That point has already been mentioned .
The Commission must organize efficient aid , and the process must be speeded up . That point has also been mentioned already .
Because the current procedure , and the current PHARE process - and we have pointed this out on many occasions - is totally unsuitable .
Just imagine : with this complicated process of inviting tenders , the time that passes between deciding on a project and implementing it is at least six months , and usually a whole year - and that cannot be regarded as emergency aid for the former Yugoslavia .
PHARE is negotiated by means of interaction together with the recipient country , with the recipient governments , and individual projects are negotiated with the governments .
In Bosnia-Herzegovina , elections are imminent .
The PHARE Programme can therefore be used as an election campaign tool by the present government , and that applies both to choice of project and to the possible delaying of a project .
Europe has already looked to us once , when there was war in this region .
Now the tender little shoots of peace have started to grow , and Europe is looking to us again .
Let us therefore see to it that we take care of those shoots by watering them , by watering them with money , so that they can thrive !
Madam President , I have only a minute to tell you how happy I am with these reports , and that I congratulate the rapporteurs , particularly the most political of them , Mr Mendiluce Pereiro .
Then , a few quick and blunt remarks : elections yes , because that is better than no elections , as long as they are well prepared .
To postpone them once again would be a setback .
We must see these elections as a beginning , not as giving up ; elections must be held to increase solidarity .
As for the refugees , it is of course necessary to ensure their return , but not to get rid of them nor to force them ; they must be left the choice of aid , but humanitarian aid must be separated from contributions towards reconstruction , which can be conditional , particularly on the arrest of criminals ; in other words , we should help the permanent International War Crimes Tribunal whose resources are limited .
We can do this .
We should make this aid conditional .
And then , let us not do everything in a hurry and let us not disappear after the elections .
We must prepare the European relief force , even when we know that the American troops will leave .
This is the time to say to ourselves that , after the departure of the American troops , we shall still be needed for a long time .
Let us show ourselves , we the Europeans , to be capable of making up for what could be interpreted , perhaps even for electoral reasons , as giving up .
Madam President , I must say that it is always a pleasure to hear the different views expressed .
I may not entirely agree with some of them , as in this debate when some Members have said how the resources which have been allocated for emergency aid in Yugoslavia should be used for other purposes .
I will not deny that there are many good ways of using money , and as always it is a question of priorities .
But when you have visited the area yourself and seen with your own eyes the human suffering which is taking place there every day , then as a human being you have no choice but to hold out a helping hand to those who are asking for it .
Personally , I think we should be doing much more , but what we are seeing now is at least a beginning .
The reconstruction of former Yugoslavia is a task which we should start as soon as possible .
The country is one great pile of bricks .
In most places , there is no water or electricity and , worst of all , landmines have been laid over large areas - mines which make no distinction between soldiers ' boots and children 's games .
The refugees now living in other countries naturally have no wish to go back to a country where people die from going for a walk in the woods and where you have to walk several kilometres to fetch water .
It must be possible to live in these areas before the refugees can return .
They must have a future to go back to .
We need to help make a whole country habitable once again and create a decent life for millions of people .
We must not make them dependent on our emergency aid : our task is to enable these people to become self-sufficient and to stand on their own feet .
As vice-chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I am concerned about the final management of the resources .
There is such a great need for this support that it is a crime whenever a single ECU disappears on unnecessary administration and shoddy work , not to mention outright fraud .
So we must do all we can to check that the aid is reaching those for whom it is intended .
Madam President , I shall start my contribution to this debate from the conclusion of the mid-term conference held in Florence last week , which had three significant results : in the first place , Florence was the first occasion when all the parties in the conflict agreed to sit down and talk together in the same room and thus mutually recognize each other as essential spokespersons in the peace process .
That may seem obvious , but it is so far from obvious that Florence was the first time it happened .
I believe that will be recorded as a significant political fact because recognition is the prerequisite of any peace process .
No agreement can be stable and followed through if the contracting parties do not actually recognize each other and put mutual trust in each other 's good faith and determination to seek peace .
The second significant result obtained in Florence was to set 14 September as the date for elections preceded by a very important step , the Mostar elections of 30 June .
Now it is true that setting the date is not in itself a certain guarantee that the elections will take place , but the fact that the date has been set is a spur to all , especially the parties involved in the fighting during these past years , to field all the measures - political , legislative and normative , or operational - necessary to ensure that the election date of 14 September can be kept to .
In any case , the fact that a date has been set puts pressure on the international community , especially the European Union , to do everything possible to ensure that the people can vote in the autumn and that these elections are an essential factor in strengthening the roots of the peace process .
The third result , as certain Members have already mentioned , was the signing of the arms and arms control agreement for the region . As we know , it was not possible to sign this agreement just a few days earlier in Oslo and it was only signed in Florence after difficult and lengthy negotiations , but the outcome has been positive .
I believe this may be another essential and decisive step towards ensuring that the peace process puts down roots .
Many Members have made the point that the peace process will be long and difficult and it was well-expressed in the introductory report . Of course that is true .
No peace process is straightforward . Any peace process , all the more so when it comes after four years of war , ethnic cleansing and hatreds that have consumed themselves and often turned into an insuperable inability to communicate , is clearly exposed to obstacles , holdups and risks of reversal .
And yet , frankly , I do not believe that highlighting problems , difficulties and contradictions which have not occurred means we just take note of them or draw fatalistic conclusions , when we do not know whether this peace process will reach port and succeed .
The many difficulties should multiply the initiatives , interventions and actions to ensure that these obstacles can be overcome .
The main difficulties to be faced have already been mentioned .
There is certainly a problem over the war criminals , who must be brought to justice , and I believe that the international community should make a greater effort and show more determination to do so , because this will create calmer conditions for carrying out the stages already planned , including the elections of 14 September .
The return of the refugees to their place of origin , their own villages , or , in the beautiful but rather emphatic terms of the Dayton Treaty , their own hearths , is definitely an unresolved problem .
The return of the refugees is complicated because four years of ethnic cleansing have broken down any mutual trust and destroyed the psychological and cultural assumptions that would ease that return .
However there must be no surrender to this situation and action must be taken , as gradually and patiently as need be , which is capable of returning the refugees to their original hearths , because this will be the concrete demonstration that the time of ethnic cleansing is finally over and belongs to a past we never wish to see again .
There is no doubt that it is fundamental - and many Members concentrated on this point - to accelerate reconstruction activity .
To tell the truth , as some said , it is not really a problem of financial resources : the financial resources are there and they are considerable .
What is lacking or slow in coming is the capacity to spend them , the operational capacity , the operational instruments capable of using these resources to maximum effect in terms of reconstruction .
So I think the European Union must provide the impetus to overcome the delays and put in place all the instruments necessary for the funds earmarked to be allocated to their destinations with maximum effectiveness .
Naturally - and this is a very important political point - when we speak of reconstruction I think we have to recognize that reconstruction is not just a technical matter , it is not just a matter of earmarking a certain amount of money to be spent and setting up projects to reconstruct what the war has destroyed .
Reconstruction means reconstructing the reasons for living together , the reasons for mutual recognition , the reasons for mutual trust which are not there today and which need to be reconstructed , reconstructing the reasons for cooperation and growing interdependency .
There is no nostalgia for Yugoslavia involved in emphasizing this .
Yugoslavia no longer exists and any attempt to re-establish it would be doomed to failure .
But saying this does not mean thinking peace can be stable and durable without reconstructing a framework of cooperation and interdependence between the states born of the dissolution of former Yugoslavia .
So in this respect I emphasize the importance of the reconstruction and the European Union 's whole strategy for former Yugoslavia and the states born of its dissolution , being characterized by a regional approach , an approach capable of making available to all the states in the region the financial , political and operational instruments necessary to allow reciprocal cooperation to grow . This regional approach aims to build stability founded on growth and development for all the states in the region and on the affirmation of the principles of law , the principles of democracy , and the values of free societies and the market throughout the Balkans .
From this angle , I regard the decision taken by the General Affairs Council of the European Union , at the last meeting in Luxembourg a few weeks ago , as very important , and I believe this is the clearest and most effective proof of the European Union 's determination to act firmly to give the peace process roots and work together to ensure that day by day it becomes a more irreversible process .
In other words , it seems to me that today Europe , the European Union , has a great opportunity to demonstrate , as it has begun to do , that the European Union can , if it wants to , implement a strategy which will extricate it from the mute powerlessness in which it passively watched the Balkan conflagration when this tragedy first broke .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Assistance to the NIS and Mongolia
The next item is the report ( A4-0202 / 96 ) by Mr Pex , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the outcome of the conciliation procedure provided for in the joint declaration of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission of 4 March 1975 concerning the joint guideline approved by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation ( EURATOM , EC ) concerning the provision of assistance to economic reform and recovery in the New Independent States and Mongolia ( COM ( 95 ) 0012 - C4-0242 / 95-4546 / 96 - C4-0090 / 96 - COM ( 96 ) 213-95 / 0056 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , this is the third time I have spoken as rapporteur for TACIS in the Chamber , this time in the presence of the Council of Ministers .
Before I start I should like to ask the Council to reply to the questions and remarks arising from the debate .
Because that has never yet happened , at least in the case of TACIS .
If the Council fails to respond here , as it has done in the past , I shall take that as a clear insult to Parliament .
The old TACIS regulation lapsed six months ago and there is still no new one .
The Council could not take a decision at the time it was needed .
By postponing its decision the Council has got bogged down in the furore over mad cow disease .
A British veto is now blocking TACIS , a scandalous form of blackmail which hurts the Russians and the other peoples of the CIS , and this just a few days before the elections in Russia .
So TACIS is now in trouble .
All the Member States of the European Union repeatedly say that ties between the European Union and the CIS are extremely important and that the CIS must be supported .
When it comes to the crunch , to continuing TACIS projects , for example , the Council backs out .
Twice already the European Parliament has responded promptly : to the European Commission proposal on 16 November 1995 and the Council proposal on 19 April 1996 .
In the fifteen months since the European Commission 's proposal the Council has not once contacted the European Parliament or its rapporteur to discuss the TACIS regulation .
On 14 May 1996 the Council requested conciliation , as a matter of urgency , please note .
It took the Council more than a month to ask for conciliation .
The Council then had the nerve to request a debate for 6 June , when the normal procedure is three months .
What does the word conciliation mean in our various languages ?
What does the word conciliation mean in Italian , Mr President-in-Office ?
I thought that conciliation meant talking together to see if we can reach agreement on certain points .
Was it worth seeking agreement between the Council and the EP ?
The European Parliament put down 36 amendments , of which the European Commission accepted 27 , in numerical terms alone an indication that the European Commission regarded Parliament 's amendments as not unimportant .
Perhaps the Commissioner would care to comment ?
What are these amendments about ?
First of all there is a set of amendments wanting greater accountability to Parliament on spending .
Parliament has budgetary powers here , so it is logical that the European Parliament should wish to exercise effective scrutiny over this huge sum of money .
Why is the Council unwilling to accept any of the amendments dealing with this ?
Why will the Council not even discuss it ?
A second series of amendments concern management and specifically the management exercised by the Council through the management committees .
This is the main bone of contention between Council and Parliament .
I believe that the work of the Council 's management committees is responsible for the poor state of affairs surrounding the TACIS programme .
Of course , the Council may feel differently about this , but surely , Mr President-in-Office , it is worth talking about it to Parliament .
If the Council refuses to accept these amendments it will bear full responsibility in future years if the TACIS procedure fails .
A third series of amendments concerned the improvement of tendering procedures , one of the main factors which hold projects up .
The manner in which the Council treats Parliament is utterly indefensible .
The TACIS programme , Mr President-in-Office , includes courses in democracy for the Russians .
We , as the supposed wise men of the European Union , think the Russians need to learn how to be good democrats .
Perhaps the members of the Council of Ministers could take a training course in how to apply the principles of parliamentary democracy properly .
In a way , Madam President , the blackmail perpetrated by the United Kingdom is a blessing in disguise .
The Council has now won some time , time to hold the conciliation procedure with the European Parliament again .
I suggest the Council should make use of this chance and make good its earlier omissions .
Madam President , my report is short and I hope to the point .
We consider that the conciliation procedure has not really taken place and thus has certainly not been completed .
The agreements of 4 March 1975 between the Council , Commission and Parliament , pursuant to the Treaty , have not been complied with .
I note that there is still time to restart the conciliation process .
I am available to take part in it .
We need to ensure that we have a TACIS regulation by 1 July so that the TACIS projects which we consider so important do not stagnate .
Mr President-in-Office , we are currently living in historic times .
Russia has gone through the first round of its first democratic election and we await the second round .
Since we are hoping that the development of democracy in Russia and other CIS countries will progress , the approval of this regulation is of the utmost importance .
It is also important because as a consequence we can enjoy further stability in our neighbouring areas and ensure that this stability remains .
As a practical tool for this work we have the TACIS programme , the development and improved practical applicability of which is the subject of the regulation amendment now being discussed .
The Council 's consideration of the amendment of the TACIS programme has been inexcusably slow .
The validity of the old regulation terminated early this year , and a new regulation has still not been enforced .
Parliament on the other hand has worked within the schedule given , and drawn up a report of its own , the content of which is very good . The Council has however ignored the proposals in the report .
It is difficult to understand why such an attitude has been adopted , since the amendments proposed by Parliament would have solved the very problems which have come to light on the implementation of the TACIS programme , that is lack of candour and efficiency .
A speedy acceptance of the TACIS programme is however essential , which should also be the aim of Parliament 's efforts .
I would like to thank Mr Pex for his contribution here today and also for his report .
The funds reserved for the TACIS programme in the budget should also be used effectively on programmes to ensure an increase in democracy , stability and social equality . Nor should it be forgotten that these programmes should be implemented in co-operation with regional authorities in Russia and other CIS countries .
The present central position of Moscow in these programmes should be abandoned , and the planning and implementation of the programmes should be transferred to the regions which are in practice carrying out the programmes .
I would also like to emphasize the importance of ensuring , with this regulation , that the TACIS and Interreg programmes are linked together in border areas .
In this regard I would like to put a question to the Commissioner .
In this year 's budget an amount equivalent to 30 million ecu was approved by Parliament to be used for furthering cross border co-operation in border areas .
Why has this money still not been made available ?
Mr President-in-Office , I must express the deep displeasure of the parliamentary delegation and of the committee responsible , the REX Committee .
This displeasure is due to two clear things .
Firstly , the procedure followed by the Council and , secondly , the Council 's attitude during this so-called conciliation procedure .
In my view the Council 's approach is totally unacceptable .
Only a small number of Member States were represented .
Those Member State representatives who were present were not sufficiently senior to be either willing or able to defend a politically binding position .
Without the slightest justification the Council imposed a very short time limit on Parliament , this same Council which allows weeks and months to pass before it consults Parliament .
The worst thing has been and remains the Council 's attitude during the conciliation procedure .
Even before this took place it was rumoured that the Council would in any case not accept or even discuss a single one of the amendments approved by Parliament or any of those approved by the Commission .
This rumour was confirmed at the start of the conciliation procedure by the acting President-in-Office of the Council , ambassador Cavacini .
After difficult and protracted deliberations the Council had reached a compromise whereby nothing further could or should be amended .
This attitude negates the very spirit and letter of the conciliation procedure .
What is the sense of such a procedure ?
The Council has made a real joke out of it , a farce , in effect it has insulted Parliament .
We cannot tolerate that .
Especially since this kind of attitude on the Council 's part places Parliament before a kind of moral dilemma given the understandable and urgent concern which we all have to feel for the countries concerned and their peoples .
The Council is clearly trading on this and insulting us .
In those circumstances , Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , the conciliation procedure is pointless !
If the Council will not or cannot work seriously with Parliament , if it is not prepared to take the slightest account of the views of this popularly elected body , the whole conciliation procedure will have to be revised .
The criticism that this report levels at the Council , which did not make use of opportunities of reaching agreement with Parliament , has been sufficiently well interpreted , and I fully agree with this criticism .
However , rather than quarrelling about procedures it seems to me more important to say that the support being given to the New Independent States will only be effective if it is concentrated on the restructuring of public administration so that it can provide efficient services , if the banking systems in the countries concerned start to function , and above all if small and medium-sized structures are strengthened .
It is therefore sensible , if these objectives are to be achieved , for the Member States to be involved in implementing the measures , because the countries that are being supported have very different requirements as far as support programmes are concerned , and therefore all the Member States will be able to put their own experiences to good use .
Not only Parliament , but also , and above all , the Council , must be aware that it is not only the TACIS Programme that is needed , but also the strengthening of control over the implementation of the support measures .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , previous speakers have pointed out various important points .
I should just like to emphasize certain aspects once again .
If we introduce a process such as the conciliation process , then there must be a reason for that process .
We are an institution within the European Union , which consists of three conglomerations , namely the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
But if we institutionalize such a process , regardless of what form it takes or how flexible it is , then that process must have sensible and reasonable legitimacy .
Mr De Clercq has already pointed this out . It is shameful to see how you treat us and how we all , indirectly , treat one another .
Please , allow this procedure to be taken seriously , as it should be in principle , and allow us to conduct reasonable negotiations !
We have made 36 proposals , and 27 of them have been accepted by the Commission .
Perhaps you accept only six of these proposals , but then at least allow us to talk about these six , or five , or ten , or however many you like .
And do not come to the conciliation process , like the one we have had , and present us with those proposals that you are not prepared to accept .
We want to hear about those that you are willing to accept , because those are the ones that we can talk about .
Only then - and I would ask you to really give this some thought - can the work of the institutions , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council , serve the public better .
We must present our work as serious cooperation , even if , among ourselves , this is purely symbolic .
Even symbols , as we know , have their serious side .
Please , let us enter into negotiations once more .
Let us know which proposals you are able to accept , and you will find that Parliament is willing to listen , and the committees too , as you know , are always willing to listen .
Please allow us to come up with some serious results .
Madam President , despite all the aggravation I at least would like to thank Parliament for the fact that it has twice now given an opinion on the draft regulation under extreme pressure of time .
And as you know , the Commission thinks that your proposals have significantly improved the draft regulation and , as intimated earlier , the Commission is happy to accept 27 out of the 36 amendments approved by the European Parliament .
For this reason the Commission too is sorry that the Council saw fit to reject all the amendments proposed by the European Parliament and we regret too that the conciliation procedure did not deliver the desired result .
On top of that , unfortunately , the United Kingdom blocked the approval of the regulation by the General Affairs Council on 10 June for reasons well known to us .
This sends an extremely negative political signal to the new independent states , especially Russia , which is currently experiencing a politically difficult period .
And all this may seriously delay implementation of the TACIS programme for 1996 .
It is thus most important that this legal vacuum should be filled and the new regulation approved as quickly as possible .
The European Parliament and especially its rapporteur , Mr Pex , had the same objectives as the Commission throughout this lengthy process as regards both the substance of the amendments and the timing of the two opinions .
I repeat , I am very grateful to the Commission and to Parliament for this .
So I can only hope that the right conditions will shortly be created to enable the new regulation to be implemented .
Lastly , I think it was Mrs Myller who asked why the money to be spent on cross-border cooperation has not yet been used .
This is entirely due to the fact that the new regulation has not come into force .
As you know , that sum is set aside under the new programme of TACIS 1996 ; nevertheless preparations for its disbursement are already in hand .
I can tell you that a few weeks ago I myself visited the Russo-Finnish border where a crossborder project of this kind is envisaged to improve significantly communications across the frontier between Finland and Russia .
It will also clearly serve to promote stability and facilitate considerably the resumption of contacts between the peoples to the east and west of that border .
Once the regulation has come into effect a start can be made on actually carrying out these projects .
I recognize that Parliament feels dissatisfaction and indeed irritation towards the Council .
All I can do is start my speech by repeating Bernadotte 's famous remark : I realize everything is against me except your personal kindness .
In fact , the situation with the TACIS regulation was complex and troubled and it was difficult to establish complete compatibility between a fully transparent procedure and full involvement of all the institutional levels in the decision on the regulation , and the definition of the regulation within a sufficiently short time .
I would mention that the proof of what I have said lies in the fact that the TACIS regulation was discussed from April 1995 onwards and its definition has already engaged three successive Presidencies of the Council .
This in itself is indicative of the complexity of the decisions to be taken .
Of course , it is also clear to honourable Members that adoption of this regulation is extraordinarily important to consolidate the democratic transition in Russia which we all consider essential to stability and security , not only for that country but for the whole of Europe and the whole planet .
As you will remember , a situation of deadlock had already developed by the end of 1995 , because the Council on the one hand and Parliament on the other had gradually developed a series of proposals which appeared to be difficult to reconcile .
We worked towards a compromise text and the last draft , dating from 29 January , received Council assent , but while taking account of the opinions and suggestions of the Council , it barely takes account of Parliament 's proposals because there seemed little room for compromise and consensus .
You are more familiar than I am with the various points of dissent .
There was and is dissent as to whether the TACIS funds should be used only for technical assistance or also geared to a policy of investment and financing of infrastructure projects .
There was discussion as to whether or not to include the environment in the aims of the TACIS regulation .
Compromises were sought on the principles which regulate the criteria for application of the regulation in relation to actual market conditions .
An effort was made to identify an acceptable compromise by concentrating TACIS funding finally on strengthening institutions , legislation and training .
In short , we worked to find a compromise , but undoubtedly that compromise was not such as to include all of Parliament 's suggestions .
Faced with the difficulties which gradually emerged and the new amendments , the Council decided to consult Parliament again and last March , as you know , we asked Parliament to agree to urgent procedure .
On 19 April , Parliament proposed 36 new amendments , which would have significantly altered the text agreed by the Council the previous January .
As accepting these amendments would have meant looking at the regulation all over again , re-opening the debate about structure and approach , entering into another lengthy consultation and decision procedure , and this would have further delayed the possibility of implementing the TACIS regulation , the Council did not think it was in a position to accept these amendments .
I should say that it came to this decision with regret , and in awareness of sacrificing Parliament 's absolute right to contribute to the amendment of this regulation , but bowed to the political priority of finally completing all the investigative procedures for this regulation to enter into force as soon as possible . It was also aware that the equilibrium reached with the January compromise was already very fragile and bringing any of it back into discussion would probably have meant difficulty finding another point of equilibrium and another point of consensus .
That is why we confirmed the text resulting from the January 1996 compromise in the full knowledge that this decision derives primarily from an urgent vote with the aim of putting us in a position to ensure that the TACIS regulation becomes operational and produces the benefits we are all hoping for .
Naturally this does not alter the fact that , in this case , relations between the Council and Parliament have been difficult and complex , and legitimate proposals and well-founded arguments have been sacrificed .
But a political judgement had to be made about priorities and a premium was put on urgency .
Also the progress of the political process in Russia in the last few months and weeks , and the delicacy of the current electoral process , which we naturally all hope will have the same positive outcome as last time , based on the recent first round , require the European Union to complete discussion and procedural preparation of this instrument and move on to making it fully operational .
Thank you very much , Mr Fassino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-566 / 96 ) .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor because I seek guidance from the President-in-Office of the Council .
Parliament will recall and the record shows that during the last Question Time to the Council I asked a series of questions regarding the Turkish financial cooperation agreement with the European Community .
I will not summarize these just now because that would take up time from other people 's questions .
The President-in-Office said then that he would return this Question Time and give me the answers which I sought last session but which he was unable to provide at that time .
Could he please advise me when he will be giving the answers ?
Will it be before , during or at the end of Question Time ?
I think I am in a position to reply to Mr Falconer at the end of Question Time .
Question No 1 by Mr Tillich ( H-0443 / 96 )
Subject : European voluntary service for young people
What fiscal , financial and residence permit arrangements has the Council adopted to enable the pilot project for a European voluntary service year which is endowed with a budget of ECU 15 million under budgetary heading B3-1011 actually to be implemented in 1996 ?
According to the information available to me , no arrangements have yet been made to allow young people to spend a period of more than three months abroad .
Is this one of a number of problems which have led to the postponement of the action until next year ?
In reply to the honourable Member I want to make it clear that as of today no proposal for a pilot project for a voluntary youth service has reached the Council .
I would remind you that the sum of ECU 15 million to which the honourable Member refers was entered into the 1996 budget by the European Parliament under budgetary powers conferred on it by the Treaty , but I repeat , as yet the Council has received no formal proposal on the matter so the accompanying procedures for the project have never been discussed .
I share the honourable Member 's view that an initiative to promote the European Voluntary Service is very important and as soon as the Commission has presented a proposal , the Council will be most ready to examine it .
As I understand it , the idea for the European voluntary service year for young people arose during the German presidency .
During the last six months , the Commission has succeeded in drawing up a proposal for this pilot project , naturally with the support of the European Parliament , which has made the necessary financial resources available .
I am therefore astounded to hear the Council 's representative reply that he is not aware of any proposal by the Commission , because I , on the other hand , know of a document stating the Commission 's position , in which the latter deplores the fact that certain problems with the Council have not yet been ironed out .
In my opinion there is a need for clarification here .
In case the point is not clear , let me explain that the honourable Member is referring to the presumed decision of the German presidency .
Since then there has been a Spanish presidency . A lot of time has gone by .
I say presumed because it is one thing to announce a political intention - as the German presidency did at the time - to introduce measures to encourage and promote a form of civil voluntary service , and quite another to prepare concrete proposals of a formal and procedural nature .
I confirm to you again that the Commission has never put forward proposals on the matter , and the Council does not have its own power of decision but decides on the basis of proposals put forward by the Commission .
I repeat , it may be useful to ask the Commission to put forward proposals on this matter , and when they are presented the presidency of the Council will examine them .
Question No 2 by Mr Watson ( H-0445 / 96 )
Subject : Uniform electoral procedure for elections to the European Parliament
What action does the presidency intend to take to ensure that the original commitment of the Treaty of Rome to the establishment of a uniform electoral procedure is honoured before the Treaty of Maastricht is updated ?
Will the presidency take action to fulfil its Treaty obligation to this Parliament and put an end once and for all to the ridiculous situation whereby Parliament could be elected by 16 different electoral systems in 1999 ?
This is a matter which , as you know , has been the subject of political discussions amongst Europhiles and those concerned about Europe for many years .
The adoption of a uniform electoral procedure to upgrade the current situation by which each country elects its own representatives to the European Parliament by its own procedure is a recurrent issue .
And there is no doubt that Article 138 , paragraph 3 , provides that the Council shall decide unanimously to lay down appropriate provisions to permit the election of Members of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage in accordance with a uniform procedure in all Member States , on condition , naturally , that this is done by agreement and with the prior assent of the European Parliament and subject to the subsequent adoption of those provisions by the Member States in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements .
As I said , this is a recurrent theme which has been discussed many times over the years and was considered at the last General Affairs Council of the French presidency on 10 April 1995 when it had to be recognized that the unanimity amongst Council members that was needed to secure progress on this dossier did not exist .
The reflection group which carried out the preparatory work for the Intergovernmental Conference included it amongst the institutional reform issues on which the Intergovernmental Conference could and should intervene , without going any further .
In establishing the programme for the Intergovernmental Conference , the Turin European Council included in the agenda the examination of the composition of the European Parliament and the uniform procedure for electing it .
At this point it seems to me that the matter is now the prerogative of the Intergovernmental Conference , like many other institutional reform issues .
The presidency of the Council can only hope that progress will be made in that forum in the direction of a uniform procedure for the election of the European Parliament .
Does the presidency recognize that this House has a socialist majority purely because of the operation of the United Kingdom 's electoral system ?
The United Kingdom Labour Party took only 45 % of the vote but has 75 % of the United Kingdom 's seats here .
Now a common electoral system as specified in the Treaty of Rome , under proportional representation , would not only end this disgraceful state of affairs , it would also add to pressure for reform of the United Kingdom 's domestic voting system so that Europe would no longer have to suffer British governments elected by only 40 % of those who vote in UK national elections and which are so clearly unrepresentative of Britain when it comes to matters European .
Would the presidency not therefore ensure that this item stays on the agenda of the IGC until we get a resolution ?
I can only emphasize that the presidency of the Council hopes a solution will be found at the Intergovernmental Conference , not because it is particularly interested in the type of government that rules the destinies of Great Britain , but for an institutional reason which affects the European Union and its future .
I wonder if the Italian presidency will recognize from the form of this question that this is blatantly a matter of domestic rather than European concern .
I think the presidency would agree that we have made much progress towards a common system .
We have Members elected on the basis of a similar electorate , we have elections in all the countries at the same time , and so on .
What is really being pressed , it seems here , is that the precise method of election should be the same .
Does not the presidency feel that this would be an intrusion because it would force countries to adopt for one kind of election a system they find quite inappropriate in all the other elections they have ?
I would like to see every Member elected here on the basis of the commitment and accountability of representing an individual geographical constituency , but I am not so ambitious as to suggest that everybody else should adopt the system I like .
I am perfectly prepared for each country to continue with the system it prefers .
While this debate is , of course , very interesting , I must say it is taking a rather questionable turn . But perhaps I may be allowed a personal comment , because one has some discretion when answering questions , not being able to consult the other fifteen members in real time .
I think the whole constitutional debate that has been going on for years , the debate about the European institutions and the institutional and constitutional debate in progress in many countries on the subject of electoral law , confirm the need for any electoral law to be defined in relation to the type of assembly to be elected . So it seems to me that in considering which electoral law would be best for the European Parliament and how a uniform procedure can be achieved , the essential concern should be the criterion of coherence and compatibility between the electoral system chosen and the assembly elected .
I doubt whether it would be useful to seek to bend the electoral law of the European Parliament to the internal equilibrium of this or that country , because we are already fifteen , before the end of the century we may well be twenty , and it will be difficult to find an electoral law that works well for the progressives to the detriment of the conservatives or vice versa in every country .
Furthermore I doubt that it would be useful to establish any correlation between electoral systems with a specific political and institutional history , applying to elections to regional parliaments , regional authorities , or local councils , and the system to be adopted for election to the European Parliament .
If we want to have a useful and profitable debate rather than a mechanistic one when we discuss the European Parliament and how to elect it , I think it would be wise to deal essentially with the issue of the coherence between the type of assembly the European Parliament represents , with its specific powers and prerogatives , more familiar to you than to me , and the electoral system which best corresponds to such powers and prerogatives .
I had my hand up for some considerable time before Mr Elliott .
Therefore I wonder why he was chosen .
I appreciate the President-in-Office of the Council 's answers and particularly the reply to Mr Elliott .
It shows that he is not accepting this imposition of Stalinist / Liberal views across the whole of Europe .
I appreciate that entirely .
It is a queer view for Liberals to adopt in these circumstances .
But turning to the question of ' ridiculous systems ' .
Can he advise us of what he regards as ' ridiculous systems ' ?
Does he think , for example , the PR system which operates in Germany and has produced over one million spoilt ballot papers thus defranchising one million people is ridiculous ?
Does he think that the PR system in France which has resulted in two million spoilt ballot papers is a bit ridiculous ?
Or does he think that the system in his own country , Italy , which has produced over seven million spoilt ballot papers - almost the population of London - is a bit ridiculous ?
That is what Mr Watson and his ilk are trying to impose upon the rest of us .
The United Kingdom has a clear record of the lowest number of spoilt ballot papers when people go to vote .
They understand the system .
They know what they are voting for .
( Mr von Habsburg spoke without a microphone )
Anything is possible , but we do have a strict rule which only allows two other speeches , two supplementary questions , after the Council 's reply .
As there are a great many questions , we can only succeed in dealing with some of them , so if we dwell on just one question we deprive many Members of the chance of a reply from the Council .
I therefore ask everyone to show a little tolerance and indeed fairness towards other Members .
Mr President , I simply wish to remind you that an agreement exists whereby supplementary questions should be put by Members belonging to different political groups . That has not been the case here .
I am grateful to Mr von Habsburg , but I should explain that I had called Mr Imaz , who represents a different party from the previous speaker , but then he withdrew at the last minute .
As no-one else wanted to speak I gave Mr Falconer the floor .
Mr von Habsburg 's objection is correct , however .
Question No 3 by Mr Papakyriazis ( H-0509 / 96 ) .
Subject : Blocking of EU business by the UK
During the past month the UK Government has blocked a series of decisions ( on European Year against Racism , equal participation of men and women in decision-taking , the simplification of Community legislation , the protection of the economic interests of the Community , etc . ) by invoking national interests to an unwarranted degree .
Will the Council say whether it will allow a Member State virtually to paralyse EU business by preventing all decision-taking and jeopardizing by its behaviour the attainment of Treaty objectives ?
What developments does it foresee ?
How will it address this situation and what measures does it intend to take ?
This matter has been widely discussed this week in all Community settings and has been debated in the European Parliament on several occasions , including this morning with the communications from President Santer and President Dini .
Clearly the crisis over BSE goes far beyond the disease itself , and there is a delicate balance to be established between the general interests of the Union and the specific legitimate interests of one of its Members .
Obviously such balance and compatibility was relatively easy to find when there were only six Members of the European Community . But gradually the European Union has enlarged from six to nine , from nine to twelve , from twelve to fifteen , and before the end of the century we will be twenty or twenty-four .
As the number of parties to decisions that must be taken increases , it becomes increasingly complicated to achieve compatibility and convergence around a general interest of all the players . It becomes increasingly probable that someone will express interests and sustain positions , quite legitimate from a national point of view , which make decisions very difficult .
It seems to me , then , that this is the real issue raised by the mad cow crisis .
It is no accident that one of the main items on the agenda at the Intergovernmental Conference is the reform of the decision-making mechanisms , and in particular how to move from unanimous decisions to majority decisions , recognizing that it will still be necessary to secure compatibility between the capacity of the Union to make its actions by majority decision effective , and preventing this from becoming an imposition on those supporting a different position .
Having stated the problem - and I do so because I do not want to minimize it or take a one-sided attitude - the presidency of the Council also believes , as the question suggests , that the British attitude is frankly rather incomprehensible .
In fact , while it may be legitimate to stand up for national interests which Great Britain regards as overwhelmingly important , it is less legitimate to convert this into a strategy of general noncooperation and paralyse Union decision-making across a wide range of areas totally unrelated to the issue of BSE .
British non-cooperation blocked the EUROPOL Convention when it might have gone through , and the adoption of the TACIS regulation we were talking about just now .
Perhaps the position is changing , as in the last few hours the British government appears to have dropped its opposition to signing the cooperation agreements with Chile and Uzbekistan , due to take place in Florence .
This is definitely a positive move , but it comes at the last minute and only a few days ago it looked as if this would be blocked as well .
European Year against Racism and Xenophobia and the commission that would consequently have been set up has in any case been blocked , along with a thousand other dossiers .
Naturally such an attitude is dangerous and worrying and a growing embarrassment to Europe .
That is why the Italian presidency made an oral statement in the Council , and in view of the delicacy of the issue I will give you the full details .
First the presidency expresses regret at the continuation of the British government 's attitude of non-cooperation inasmuch as it affects the adoption of initiatives necessary to ensure the ordinary progress of Community business , and urgent initiatives of the highest importance .

Secondly , the presidency considers this attitude harmful to the interests of the countries of the Union and also likely to be counterproductive for the United Kingdom itself , in that it could cause irritation in Member States and impair the maintenance of that climate of confidence and cooperation necessary to achieving agreement between the various delegations in all the main sectors of Community business .
Thirdly , in addition to appealing once again to the British government 's spirit of reasonableness and cooperation , the presidency calls on all the Member States to respect the wording of Article 5 of the Treaty , by which Member States shall abstain from any measure which could jeopardize the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty .
We can only hope , and we are encouraged by the partial progress , mentioned this morning , in the search for an agreement on the mad cow crisis , that the British government will gradually adopt a more flexible attitude , which will lead to an end to the deadlock of the last few weeks .
I am very grateful to the President -in-Office for his detailed and extensive answer , and I consider it satisfactory .
I could stop speaking now .
However , in the light of the high-level debate this morning and the decision taken by such an overwhelming - some might say , crushing - majority , I just want to say that when I tabled this question on 5 June I could not have imagined , no matter how great my powers of forecasting , that the issue would have reached its present pass .
All of this goes to show , Mr President-in-Office , that , yes , there really is an institutional issue .
I respect absolutely and agree with your academic and general political appraisal . But that is not the issue here .
The issue is that things specific and things general , for example , the Florence Summit and the intergovernmental conference , are going on under the shadow of the problem created by the government of Mr Major .
It is not just a general political matter any more , nor , certainly , an academic institutional issue . It is , rather , a question of options and decisions .
Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I am concerned for my fellow-Europeans in the British Isles .
I am concerned for my fellow-Europeans across the whole of the European Union , and for the people of the whole world .
Permit me to say , as a professor of medicine , that I understand the problems stemming from mad cow disease .
But that is not the issue .
The issue facing us is what to do about this dangerous paralysis of our general functioning .
I would appreciate a further comment from you , Mr President-in-Office , beyond the resolution that you read to us at the end and about which I am glad ; a further statement from you as to whether specific decisions have been taken , such as on exploring the possibility , with the Commission , of taking the matter to the European Court .
Because from time to time certain countries have , in fact , been habitually , and unjustifiably , depicted as the black sheep of the European Union .
But anyway , I , for my part , do not want to view the government of Mr Major as the black cow of the European Union .
I refer to what President Dini said here this morning .
We hope the way forward to solving the BSE problem will be determined in the next few hours , ending the current state of paralysis and deadlock and allowing the United Kingdom to replace non-cooperation with a more flexible attitude . If this does not happen , we believe that Florence , only forty-eight hours away , and with all the Heads of State and of Government present , will provide an authoritative political setting for examining the problem and deciding on any subsequent steps .
I raised the matter this morning with President Dini , then with President Santer .
Of course , neither has replied .
I now make a third attempt : why , faced with such an attitude , one that you yourself have just described as totally contrary to the spirit of the Treaty , do we not recognize that we find ourselves confronted by a position that can be likened to abstention ?
In the present very specific case , the British position is a non position , and therefore an abstention , which legitimately authorizes you to take decisions that are completely valid .
It is up to Great Britain to go before the Court of Justice to have these decisions ruled to be invalid .
We wish them good luck .
Why do you not do this ?
And what arguments have your lawyers so far advanced against this proposal ?
In principle there are no legal obstacles to using the instrument Parliament is calling for .
But political judgement is what is needed .
The British attitude of non-cooperation has aroused great tension in the Union .
We want this state of tension ended and perhaps this can be done through an agreement based on political logic .
I think what you are asking for should be a last resort , and before we reach that point we are trying to resolve the matter through persuasion .
That is the view of the presidency of the Council .
I do not think recourse to the Court of Justice would calm the situation down , it would just make everything more complicated and tense .
Politics is the art of negotiation !
Mr President , I believe that Mr Herman has presented the issue in its proper terms .
I welcomed the statement this morning by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Dini , and I welcome Mr Fassino 's interpretation of the issue .
I think that Mr Fassino is right when he says that this is a political matter , but that it also has a legal aspect .
And there is some truth in what Mr Herman has just said .
If the government of the United Kingdom is violating Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union , there are two possibilities : either the Council - or the Commission , since this also seems to be the Commission 's viewpoint - can appeal to the Court of Justice to declare the British Government 's action illegal ; or the Council can simply declare that the British delegation has voted against a given decision .
There are two possibilities , therefore , but I believe that the President-in-Office is also right when he says that this is above all a political matter for the moment , but that the legal aspect also has to be taken into account .
In any event , I believe that this issue is beginning to be addressed in its proper legal terms .
I can only reiterate what I have said .
I am not saying this idea is not based on a legitimate legal approach . I recognize that it is and we may even get to the point where we have to use that instrument .
But I repeat that I feel it should be the last resort and , above all , follow evaluation the immediate contingencies .
Mediation is in progress to reach an agreement , and the European Council meets in forty-eight hours . In view of these two considerations , I think we should assess , in Florence , whether the deadlock is over , and if it is not , everyone best able to take the most appropriate decision will be there , so that is the place to consider what to do next .
Question No 4 by Mr Newens ( H-0404 / 96 )
Subject : Freedom of the press
In view of the threats to freedom of the press which are implicit in the policy increasingly adopted by large media distribution companies of refusing to handle publications with limited circulation , what action can the Council take to prevent discrimination against such publications ?
This is an issue of enormous significance .
As we all know , information and full freedom of expression through information channels of every kind is of the utmost importance in today 's modern society .
Obviously we all agree that plurality of information is and must remain a fundamental principle of the state of law and democracy in our countries and in every country .
It is implicit in the concept of plurality of information that every effort should be made to prevent cultural decline or any impoverishment in the range of information media either through simple market forces or worse , through inadequate or faulty legislation .
In Europe we are witnessing an apparently contradictory phenomenon - I emphasize apparently , because the range of cultural information media has never grown so fast as in recent years . One need only think of the quantity of newspaper titles and of publishing houses of every type and quality which have flourished lately .
But on the other hand there is recognition in all the countries of the inadequacy of legislation and financial support effectively ensuring pluralism in information , above all that provided by small and medium-sized newspapers .
I think it goes without saying that it is in the interests of the European Union and all its bodies , including the presidency of the Council , to do their utmost to take all necessary and useful steps to ensure full pluralism of information .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I should really like to have it in English so it would be available for outside information .
However it really does not deal with the problem because what we are asking is what action can the Council take to prevent discrimination against such publications .
At present too few publications with limited circulation are handled by large media distribution companies and if we allow those that are available to vanish from the shelves it will be a sad state of affairs .
Therefore , I share the President-in-Office 's views on these matters .
The reality is that mergers and acquisitions are putting enormous power in the hands of distributors and newspaper publishers which means that these two cartels working together can shift magazines and newspapers off the shelves at a whim .
They will place other magazines , for example pornographic magazines and other obscene literature - and I mean obscene political literature as well as obscenity in the human decency sense - but they will prevent the distribution of political magazines considered reasonable in any civilized society .
So we are asking what action can the Council take in these matters ?
I have no difficulty in agreeing with the honourable Member on the need he raises , but I would like to emphasize that under Article 155 of the Treaty it is up to the Commission to monitor the application of the Treaty provisions and the measures taken by the institutions pursuant thereto .
So it is the responsibility of the Commission , not the Council , to monitor existing regulations , including regulations relating to information , and it is the Commission which should bring forward proposals .
The Council can only agree with the need raised by the honourable Member and hope to receive proposals from the Commission .
As the author is not present , Question No 5 lapses .
Question No 6 by Mr Theonas ( H-0407 / 96 )
Subject : Tension in Kosovo
The recent bomb attacks carried out in the suburbs of Pristina by Albanian-speaking groups and the clashes in north-eastern Bosnia between Muslims and Bosnian Serbs are reviving sources of tension and giving justifiable cause for concern that the region is once more about to erupt .
The heightened tension in Kosovo is giving rise again to the disquiet engendered by the Dayton Accord , which is so vague in many respects and fails to address significant territorial and constitutional issues that it is unsure whether it will be observed and doubtful whether it can contribute to a genuine and stable peace in the region .
Will the Council take steps to secure the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the region so that the local communities can resolve their differences by peaceful means and on just terms , on a genuinely equal footing and without foreign intervention , in order to prevent the rekindling of hostilities and the creation of further flash points ?
This is a very delicate issue and of course a very important one .
We all know that for years there has been an unresolved problem about protecting the rights of the majority Albanian population living in the Kosovo region .
Now I do not want to enter into a general discussion and will naturally restrict myself to the terms of the question .
The honourable Member makes explicit reference to the Dayton agreement .
Well , I want to emphasize - I do not know whether it is right or not , but I will start from this point - that the Dayton agreement covers the re-establishment of peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina and that the situation in Kosovo and in other possible flashpoints in the region is not directly governed by the Dayton and Paris agreements .
It is clear , however - it escapes no-one , it did not escape those who signed the peace in Dayton , nor does it escape anyone in this Chamber - that stability and peace in the Balkans depends not only on full respect for what was said and signed up to in Dayton but also on a policy to guarantee the rights of all the ethnic , religious and national communities throughout the Balkan region .
Kosovo has long been a flashpoint .
This Parliament and the presidency of the Council , in the various presidencies that have followed each other , have frequently expressed concern about the situation in Kosovo , through many periods of tension , if not open repression of the Albanian population .
I confirm what has been confirmed on many previous occasions by the Council and what has been said in numerous statements of the European Parliament , which is that the request to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to conform to the principles of international law established by the Paris Charter and by the international conventions on the rights of minority communities to full protection and respect for the rights of the Albanians in Kosovo .
I would further mention that the situation in Kosovo is being formally monitored by the working group on minorities in former Yugoslavia , chaired by Mr Lutz within the peace mission which is currently managed by the High Representative of the European Union , Carl Bildt .
I would mention that it was formally established that the condition of a progressive improvement in relations between the European Union and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is full respect for human rights , minority rights and the right to return of all refugees and displaced persons , as well as granting a large degree of autonomy to Kosovo within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
During the visit that President Santer and President Dini made to the capitals of the principal states of the region on 7 and 8 June last , they once again impressed on the Belgrade government the delicacy of the problem and the need for Belgrade to comply with that criterion if relations with the European Union are to progress .
This was also discussed a few days ago at the Florence International Conference , and it is the task of the presidency of the Council to act , in agreement and in concert with the other bodies of the Union , so that the rights of the Kosovo Albanians can be respected and a solution found to the problem which guarantees respect for the rights of minorities and protection of the individual and collective rights of those who live in that region .
I am grateful to the President-in-Office , at least for the length of his answer .
However , I would like to point out that while the Dayton Accord has no applicability to the problem in Kosovo , its general spirit may , I believe , be influencing the situation that is developing there , if one takes account of recent events in Albania itself , the approach of the Albanian Government to the situation in the region and the general climate of hostility towards the Serbs .
I think it ought to be stressed that the rights of minorities also include the rights of the Serb population of Kosovo , and we cannot accept that those people should have to suffer acts of terrorism , without so much , furthermore , as a word of sympathy from us for the victims of such acts .
So I think that we should be careful and that the European Union should be doing whatever it can , on the basis of the spirit of the Dayton Accord , to prevent the creation of a source of tension in Kosovo which could take the war further south in the Balkans .
I agree with the points that have been made . It is true , of course - and I said so myself - that even if the Kosovo case is not specifically mentioned in the Dayton agreements , the application of these agreements requires a wider framework of stability which also means working for a solution in Kosovo .
I agree with that evaluation and I confirm the commitment of the presidency of the Council to take action in all settings to encourage a solution .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , first of all I should like to thank you for your clear answers .
However , in connection with Kosovo I should like to make one comment .
You have read out to us some very fine-sounding statements , containing demands that human rights should finally be respected .
But we have a credibility problem here , because we have threatened all manner of things , but have not really taken any serious action .
Do you not think , Mr President-in-Office , that it is high time to set a real example in Kosovo , in other words to stand up , credibly , for the right of self-determination , or at least for the protection of the Albanian majority , so that the European Union will at least be standing up for something in earnest ?
On the one hand we issue statements , but on the other hand the sanctions are increasingly being relaxed , and the Serbs continue their provocative behaviour .
They are just laughing at us !
Mr President-in-Office , it is vital that we should regain our credibility .
Do you not think that this would be a good opportunity ?
I agree with you , I think you are right . The challenge is , of course , to do it more effectively .
There is no doubt that determined and clear action must be taken against Belgrade to make explicit the disquiet and dissatisfaction of the international community about the current position of the Albanians living in Kosovo , nor is there any doubt that we must go further than words because those words must be followed up with political deeds which change the situation .
It is a matter of achieving maximum effectiveness .
I am not going to pretend that it is not complicated and difficult to protect the Kosovo Albanians , especially after these four years of war in Bosnia and throughout former Yugoslavia .
Obviously the tension , conflict and open warfare in the area has made everything more complex and difficult and has certainly not made things any easier for Kosovo and the Albanians who live there either .
In any case I agree with you , and the presidency of the Council is determined to deal with this problem in a credible way .
Mr President , the collapse of Yugoslavia was triggered in Kosovo by the major deployment there of a million Serbs in 1989 , and by the abolition of autonomy .
So why has Kosovo retreated into the background ?
Because the Albanians of Kosovo , who are not a minority , but rather the majority in Kosovo , did not use force , but deliberately chose non-violent means .
I see a very dangerous development here .
If this majority , the Albanian majority , is punished because it chose non-violent methods , then this will send the message that violence is necessary in this region .
I therefore take the view that we should have a Kosovo Conference of our own , since Kosovo was omitted by mistake from the list of conditions for the recognition of what remains of Yugoslavia .
In addition , I believe that elections should be held there in the presence of international observers .
I think there is an urgent need for action here , before catastrophe strikes .
So far , this has only been done in one case , that of Macedonia , and in that case it was helpful .
We really ought to take preventive measures , because otherwise violence will flare up again there , and will spread like wildfire .
It is absolutely true that one of the initial flashpoints of this Balkan crisis was Kosovo : the repression of Kosovo and the abolition of Vojvodina 's autonomy originated the crisis in former Yugoslavia .
It is by no means a marginal flashpoint and obviously not just a consequence of the events of the last few years .
In fact it has been a flashpoint for a long time .
We are all well aware of Twentieth Century history : the problems of the Albanians and Kosovo have repeatedly sparked conflict and tension .
It seems to me that all this should increase our determination to work towards a political solution to the problem .
As the author is not present , Question No 7 lapses .
Question No 8 by Mr Lomas ( H-0410 / 96 )
Subject : Death of Mr HUSEYIN KOKU
Will the Council please press the appropriate Turkish authorities for information regarding the death of Mr Huseyin Koku , who was arrested in Elbiston on 20 October 1994 ?
Nothing further was heard of the prisoner until 27 April 1995 when the police advised his wife that his body had been found .
No details have ever been given to his wife and family .
I will reply to this question in two parts .
While certain rather inadequate information has come to the attention of the Council about the specific case raised , this event and the difficulties the presidency of the Council has encountered in obtaining any details , in my opinion confirm the delicacy of the situation in Turkey and the need for the presidency of the Council and the European Union more generally to put all possible pressure on the Turkish government to guarantee the respect for human rights , fundamental democratic rights and principles of the rule of law that governs the life of the Union . These are prior conditions for a country to become part of the Union or , as in the case of Turkey , have a special relationship with it , and of course Turkey and the European Union have signed a customs union agreement .
I would also mention that the criterion of full respect for the principles of the rule of law by all those who are either members of the European Union or have established relationships of cooperation or association with the European Union , was confirmed at the Barcelona Conference and in the final declaration of the Ravello Mediterranean Forum , and has frequently been confirmed during contacts and at meetings between the European Union and the Turkish government .
But while pressure from the European Union and the international community has achieved some results , such as the partial modification of the constitution in the direction of greater respect for fundamental democratic rights and principles , we do not think we can lower our guard yet , and the presidency of the Council remains faithful to its commitment to maintain vigilance and pressure on Turkey and every other country which violates human rights .
I am sure the Council will appreciate the anguish of the family of this murdered man .
I do not think they would use the term ' delicacy ' , as the Council did .
The last time they saw him alive he was in police custody .
Now , of course , we know , regrettably , that it is all too common in Turkey for the police and the military to murder its citizens .
But just general condemnation - while that has to be made - is really not sufficient .
I ask the Council to ask the Turkish Government - particularly in view of the fact that we now have this customs union which , we were told , would improve human rights in Turkey - whether it would institute a proper inquiry into how a man can die while in police custody and then his body be produced six months later , told it was found in some wood somewhere and the police had nothing to do with it .
It is just so blatantly unlikely .
I ask Council to press this specific case , rather than just make generalized condemnations .
I do accept the request to press for a specific enquiry into this case , and I agree with the honourable Member that signing the customs union treaty with Turkey not only does not exempt Europe from vigilance , but if anything requires it to be even more vigilant .
I have already spoken on the subject , but I will spend a few more moments confirming my conviction that when the European Union signed the agreement on a customs union with Turkey , after a very complex and lengthy debate to which this Parliament made a wide-ranging contribution , it did not do so because certain problems of law and democracy in Turkey had been overcome , but for quite the opposite reason . Aware of the existence of problems of law and democracy in Turkey , the European Union considered that a strong European anchorage would be the best way of influencing that country to resolve these problems positively and overcome the limits and contradictions relating to democracy and rights that still exist .
To put it more clearly , when there are unresolved problems of democracy and law in a country , there is a choice between two opposite strategies , both legitimate , both well-founded : one accentuates political , economic and all forms of isolation ; the other creates a kind of democratic contamination and anchorage which forces that country to change .
The European Union has not chosen a policy of isolation towards Turkey , which might not have been effective , but taken the line of democratic contamination and anchorage , in the hope that the more Turkey is integrated into Europe , the closer it will become to Europe and the more it will be induced to adopt European standards as regards democratic rights .
Naturally this is not just a hope , it is a goal the European Union is working towards by bringing pressure to bear in every necessary way .
Mr President , this is just one example that the questioner has raised concerning the situation in Turkey .
A habitat conference was held very recently in Turkey which also demonstrated police methods of dealing with their Kurdish and Turkish fellow citizens .
I would like to ask whether the Council does not draw any conclusions from the judgement which Mr Fassino says the Council made in connection with the customs union agreement with Turkey .
The judgement was , after all , as you say , that it was better to allow Turkey to conclude an agreement and to exert influence in that way .
Several months have now elapsed .
Have any of us and have you in the Council seen any improvement in conditions as regards human rights , democracy and freedom of expression ?
I have not seen any such thing .
Finally , I should like to ask the following question : if there is no improvement - and this was a requirement set by Parliament and the EU in connection with the customs union agreement with Turkey - is the Council prepared to tear up the customs union agreement with Turkey ?
No , I do not think that interpretation can be put on my position and I do not believe that is the intention of the European Union .
The argument is not of a purely legal nature and there are no suspensive conditions to be interpreted in legal terms . We have to make a political judgement .
When Europe chose to sign the customs union agreement with Turkey - after a very difficult debate , I repeat - it did so in the conviction that involving Turkey in the life of the European Union and providing a stronger European anchorage would lead that country to adopt European standards especially on democracy and human rights .
Now that the judgement has been made , the European Union feels committed to apply all forms of pressure and persuasion to ensure that the Turkish government does adopt policies better geared to full democracy .
Naturally , if we then find ourselves greeted with a deaf ear , the fears honourable Members have expressed will be proved right , but at this stage I think we should continue to act positively to obtain from the Turkish government those guarantees which have been lacking up to now .
Mr President , I understand that you are refusing me the right to ask a supplementary question to the Council on the basis of the question tabled by Mr Lomas because I previously asked a supplementary question to another question to the Council .
There is nothing in the Rules which prohibits this .
This decision is based on an interpretation of what is written there by the staff sitting on your left-hand side .
Mr President , that is wrong .
Therefore , I ask you to refer this matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , because what you are saying is that it is acceptable for Members to come here and ask their own particular questions and then leave whilst the rest of us - who have an interest in a variety of subjects - are denied the right to ask a supplementary question which is of interest to the Member who asked the question in the first place .
The Rules of Procedure are very rigid on this point .
I welcome Mr Falconer 's suggestion that it be referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities for amendment .
But that relates to the general right to ask questions .
You have already asked one and I am therefore constrained not only by the Rules but by the many questions tabled by colleagues long ago which will unfortunately not be answered because those present are taking up their time and refusing them the floor .
But I will put the question to the Committee on the Rules , Mr Falconer .
Now we must move on to the next question .
Question No 9 by Mr Kranidiotis ( H-0415 / 96 )
Subject : The Di Roberto report on Cyprus
In January the Italian presidency appointed Ambassador Di Roberto as its special representative on Cyprus .
Mr Di Roberto visited the parties concerned , heard their points of view and in April submitted his report to the Council .
Can the Council provide more information on the Di Roberto report , the response of the parties concerned , his recent contacts and activities and proposals to continue and upgrade his mission in view of the forthcoming assumption by Ireland of the presidency of the Council ?
This is another particularly delicate political issue .
We all know that the Cyprus question has dragged on for years and successive presidencies of the European Union have attempted mediation to reach a solution , but so have the United Nations and various governments , in particular the government of the United States .
Ambassador Di Roberto has made numerous missions to Cyprus and the principal capitals of the European Union on behalf of the Italian presidency , and has also kept in touch with the principal governments interested in resolving this crisis , including the United States government .
I have been asked for a report on the situation , so I want to mention , if only in summary , all the work Ambassador Di Roberto has done so far . It will be continued in the next term , no longer by Ambassador Di Roberto but by a special representative of the Irish presidency who has already been named .
Ambassador Di Roberto has made progress in several areas . On security , which is regarded as an essential priority by both sides , the Turkish Cypriots have confirmed their position on the validity of the treaty of guarantee signed some time ago , while President Cleribes has on occasion been open to and interested in the hypothesis of demilitarization , coupled with the presence of a multinational force .
As regards the institutions , the United Nations resolution calls for the establishment of a federation with single citizenship based on the principles of bizonality , bicommunality and political equality between the two parties , and these points are maintained .
But although that is accepted in principle by both parties , the efforts to achieve it have not yet produced tangible results , in fact there are fears on one side that it would result in some kind of recognition of Turkish Cypriot identity and on the other that a unified island would not give the Turkish Cypriots proper guarantees .
President Cleribes has mentioned a transition period for implementing freedom of movement for all Cypriot citizens on the reunified island , and another proposal put forward by the Turkish Cypriots , for a cantonal structure for the island , should also be looked at carefully .
As regards the renewal of the dialogue between the two communities , despite many difficulties the Turkish Cypriot leadership recently confirmed again that it was ready to renew interinstitutional dialogue without preconditions .
Traditionally Turkey is not in favour of a European Union role in Cyprus , but there is a hint that Ankara might recognize a role of facilitator to the Union . Coordination between the European Union and the United States remains crucial to any solution .
As I said just now , we understand that the Irish presidency intends to take Ambassador Di Roberto 's work forward , and an Irish diplomat has already been identified as its personal representative with mediation functions .
Obviously the Irish presidency will need to continue the action carried out in these six months by the Italian presidency and operate in close contact with the troika to monitor every possibility of a solution .
I would also mention that while positive , if only indirect , cooperation towards a solution to the situation still does not strike me as imminent , this could develop out of implementation of the activities planned by the EuroMediterranean Partenariat as agreed at Barcelona .
I am grateful to the President-in-Office for his answer .
However , I am sorry to have to say that the results of the Di Roberto mission fall short of our expectations .
I appreciate the difficulties faced by the Italian presidency and by Mr Di Roberto himself . Despite their good intentions , they were unable to achieve any progress because of the opposition of certain other Member States which had embarked on initiatives of their own which , in the final analysis , served to undermine the Italian presidency 's initiative .
Nevertheless , I am glad that the Irish presidency intends to continue with this initiative .
I want to say something else , however , and to ask about the following . As you know , the European Parliament believes , and has stated in a resolution , that the European Union should undertake a comprehensive initiative to find a solution to the Cyprus problem ; an initiative in the form of a joint action , as opposed to a mission by a representative of the presidency simply to monitor the Cyprus situation .
We believe that the time is now right for the European Union to assume its responsibilities and to embark on a joint action , which should include appointing a coordinator for Cyprus and developing ideas for a number of cooperation programmes to involve Greek and Turkish Cypriots , and also - why not - formulating a proposal for a solution to the Cyprus problem based on the resolutions of the United Nations and , in view of the fact that Cyprus is due to move towards accession to the European Union , on the Community legal order .
It has been agreed that Cyprus will be included in the next enlargement and that negotiations with it will begin six months after the end of the intergovernmental conference .
Naturally I can only concur with the demand for a wider and more effective initiative , and it will obviously be up to the Irish presidency to see how practicable this is and implement it .
If I may make a point , which is as valid for this situation as for any other conflict situation , at least in this case , at least at this stage , we are not dealing with a bloody conflict but with a political conflict , even if it has a bloody past .
It has to be said that mediation can only be effective when the parties to the conflict are reasonably ready for it . Peace can never be imposed from outside , it has to come from within .
Until those who are making war become convinced that it is better to make peace , the war will not end .
That is true of any type of conflict . So the international community must try to find a method of mediation and intervention and cannot be a passive witness or play a waiting game .
I certainly welcome the request from the honourable Member because it would mean a leap forward in the European Union 's initiative , but I emphasize that in Cyprus , as in so many other situations , mediation has been hampered by persistent and obstinate refusal to listen and be receptive to the points put forward by any mediator .
We hope things will improve in the future .
I , too , wish to thank the President-in-Office .
I would like to say first of all that we in this Parliament viewed Mr Di Roberto 's appointment as mediator , as the representative of the presidency in the search for a solution to the Cyprus problem , as a very positive step .
I regard the intention of the Irish presidency to continue with the initiative as equally positive .
I would , however , like to ask the President-in-Office whether Mr Di Roberto 's mission brought any actual gain which can further the work of the new , Irish presidency , mediator .
And something else : during the period of Mr Di Roberto 's mission , we had the statements from Denktash , of which you will be aware , about the fate of the missing Greek Cypriots in Cyprus .
Did Mr Di Roberto himself deal with that question , and what does his report say , if , in fact , he has submitted a report ?
Ambassador Di Roberto has naturally accumulated a vast amount of information which is summarized in a report presented to the General Affairs Council , and in an updated version to COREPER .
The fifteen countries of the Union therefore have all the information they need to assess the situation and this provides the acquis which will be the starting point for the Irish presidency to pursue mediation and also deal with the problem of those who have disappeared .
I just wish the House to know that I will remain here for this particular purpose .
By your absurd ruling based on the absurd advice you received from the staff next to you - nice persons though they are - you have denied representatives of this House the opportunity to ask a second supplementary question .
I hope that has been entered in the record .
Question No 10 by Mr Vieira ( H-0418 / 96 )
Subject : Poseima
Poseima is a wide-ranging programme for the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores .
It includes various measures which have quite rightly been of benefit to agriculture , fisheries , handicrafts , energy , consumers , the environment , taxation , etc .
I imagine that the Commission will seek to ensure that this programme is continued , if only because the text establishing it makes no general reference to expiry dates .
However , in some cases , the periods for the granting of aid are stipulated , e.g. in the case of the extra cost of the maritime transport of petroleum products .
Poseima should also cover other products with a major impact on the economy of these outermost regions , e.g. agricultural fertilizers , building materials ( cement , timber , roofing materials , glass , etc . ) and components of livestock feedingstuffs , which have so far not been covered .
Does the Council plan to improve the effectiveness of Poseima by continuing to support the extra cost of the transport of petroleum products , extending the expiry dates for other products and including additional products essential to the economy such as those mentioned above ?
The Council naturally concurs with the analysis the honourable Member has set out in the question as to the usefulness of the Poseima programme , launched in 1991 to overcome the distance and insular nature of Madeira and the Azores .
But we must point out , as we have already said in other cases , that it is up to the Commission to present proposals to us on the subject and so far the Commission has not submitted any proposal to the Council designed to extend the deadlines or widen the existing measures to other products not already governed by the existing rules .
So while in general nothing prevents the points in Mr Vieira 's question being taken up , it is up to the Commission to draw up a proposal covering them and submit it to the Council , and that has not happened yet .
Mr President , I thank the Council for its explanations but I think it strange that the Commission should not have referred yet to the Council , for example , for financial support for the extra cost of petrol products up to 1994 .
I should also like the Council to tell me whether the feeling is that this programme will continue beyond 1999 or whether there might be an objection to continuing this programme which , I repeat , has been very useful indeed for the peripheral regions of the Azores and Madeira .
It may well be strange that the Commission has not put forward proposals , but that is the case . What else can I say ?
The Commission has not put forward proposals on the issues raised in your question .
If the Commission will put them forward , and also give the reasons for them , then in principle nothing prevents the Council examining and welcoming them positively .
But it is not up to the Council to present the proposals or justify them , it is up to the Commission , so I agree with you on the need to ask the Commission .
There is something else I should say : when situations like this occur - and we have already had others - the European Parliament has many more ways of putting pressure on the Commission than the Council to progress certain proposals .
I say this because the inadequacy of the European Parliament 's powers is a recurrent issue . There is no question that the European Parliament has insufficient powers and everyone knows that the Italian presidency has fought and is fighting in the Intergovernmental Conference for greater powers for Parliament , but there is no doubt that Parliament and individual Members have the power to put political pressure on the Commission , especially about progressing specific proposals , so it might be worth using it with more determination .
I will stop the questions now .
But there remains Mr Fassino 's commitment to reply to Mr Falconer on a question left open from the previous Question Time .
The departments have worked hard to get me all the details I need to give Mr Falconer an answer as promised .
We have a written answer for Mr Falconer which is probably more precise and comprehensive than anything I could say here off the cuff .
I think it contains all the desired information .
If Mr Falconer is not satisfied then we can return to the discussion at the next Question Time .
So we have even satisfied Mr Falconer .
I want to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the cooperation and availability he has shown us in the past few months .
Questions not taken will be answered in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Nordic Passport Union , EEA , Schengen - Visby Summit
Ladies and gentlemen , with your permission , the sitting will now commence .
As you know , we have unfair competition from a football match - so I greet even more warmly the President-in-Office of the Council - and we also have a Provençal party , but we also have some very serious work to do here .
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
by Mr Rehn and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , to the Council ( B4-0442 / 96-0-0056 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0443 / 96-0-0057 / 96 ) , on free movement of persons in the Nordic Passport Union , the European Economic Area and the Schengen countries ; -by Mrs Cederschiöld and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council ( B40449 / 96-0-0123 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0450 / 96-0-0124 / 96 ) , on the EU , the Schengen Convention and the Nordic Passport Union ; -by Mrs Van Lancker , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission ( B40562 / 96-0-0128 / 96 ) and to the Council ( B4-0563 / 96-0-0129 / 96 ) , on free movement of persons within the European Economic Area , the Nordic Passport Union and the Schengen countries ; -by Mrs Hautala and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council ( B40564 / 96-0-0131 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0565 / 96-0-0132 / 96 ) , on the compatibility of the Nordic Passport Union , the Schengen Convention and Article 7a of the EC Treaty ; -by Mr Caccavale and Mrs Schaffner , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , to the Council ( B4-0568 / 96-0-0137 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0569 / 96-0-0138 / 96 ) , on freedom of movement , the Schengen Convention and the Nordic Passport Union ; -by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Council ( B4-0570 / 96-0-00139 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0664 / 96-0-0140 / 96 ) , on freedom of movement in the context of the European Union , the passport union of the Nordic countries , the European Economic Area and the Schengen countries ; -by Mr Krarup , on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , to the Council ( B4-0667 / 96-0-0144 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0668 / 96-0-0145 / 96 ) , on the Nordic Passport Union and the Schengen Convention ; -by Mr Sjöstedt , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Council ( B4-0669 / 96-0-0146 / 96 ) , on the Schengen Convention and the Nordic Passport Union ; -by Mr Burenstam Linder and Mr Martens , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council ( B4-0447 / 96-0-0121 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0448 / 96-0-0122 / 86 ) , on the Baltic Sea States summit meeting on 3-4 May 1996 in Visby , Sweden ; -by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council ( B4-0665 / 96-0-0141 / 96 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0666 / 96-0-0142 / 96 ) , on the conclusions of the summit of the Baltic Sea States ; -by Mr Krarup , on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , to the Commission ( B4-0670 / 96-0-0148 / 96 ) , on the Visby summit of 3-4 May in Gotland , Sweden .
Madam President , I am sorry that this is taking place at the same time as a very important European event between Germany and Italy .
I myself am also reluctantly present .
I assume that the discussions tonight will be very brief .
Behind the oral question under discussion this evening there is concern that the idea of free movement of people already included in the Treaty of Rome has not been genuinely enforced within the European Union .
The Liberal Group and the whole Parliament would therefore like an answer from the Council and the Commission , firstly , as to what measures will be taken in order to bring the regulations of the Schengen Agreement in line with the European Union 's fundamental treaties and Community decision-making , and secondly , as to what measures will be taken in order to secure the continuation of the Nordic Passport Union when Denmark , Sweden and Finland , current members of the passport union , join the Schengen Agreement at a later date .
The question should be resolved over two separate time spans .
The future of the Nordic Passport Union has to be safeguarded within the next few months of negotiations between the Schengen countries and the Nordic countries .
The Nordic countries , which besides Denmark , Sweden and Finland , all Member States of the EU , also consists of Iceland and Norway , both non-member states , have since 1954 had a passport exemption clause covering the borders between their countries .
A pragmatic and realistic solution to the problem is about to be reached .
The governments of Iceland and Norway have stated that they are prepared to abide by the terms of the present Schengen Agreement .
These countries have the right to give their opinion on any future decisions made within the Schengen Agreement .
Similar rights for Iceland and Norway to veto decisions is of course not on the agenda . The alternative for these countries is either to accept future decisions made by the Schengen countries or to withdraw from the Schengen Agreement .
Citizens of the five Nordic countries wish to be part of a wider European territory , where there are no border formalities .
On the other hand it is not acceptable to give up the passport exemption clause which has worked for decades .
The introduction of border controls between the Nordic countries , which have had a passport exemption clause on a par with that mentioned in the Treaty of Rome since the 1950 's , would be a big step backwards for the European integration .
That is something we simply cannot afford to do .
As a long-term objective the Schengen Agreement should be made part of the fundamental agreements of the EU .
This is the only way to ensure democratic decision-making and a judicial monitoring by the European Court .
The Liberal Group considers this to be one of the most important objectives of the present IGC .
The Council and the Commission should set a schedule for achieving the objective , for example by the end of year 2000 .
The answer will show how serious the Council and the Commission are about creating a people 's Europe , which essentially is what this discussion is about .
Madam President , free movement of persons is one of the Union 's most important objectives .
It should not be forgotten that it is an objective which is laid down in the Treaty , one to which all Member States have committed themselves , including those which are now saying they are against free movement and working against it .
Schengen cooperation is a special solution which should in due course be integrated in the EU and be governed by Community legislation , in order for it to operate properly , exactly as we in Parliament and the Commission want .
The same is true of more or less all other conventions which come under the third pillar .
Everyone knows that completely new legal solutions are required , new legal mechanisms to deal with many of the issues which are today taken care of through conventions which , moreover , are often not ratified and so fail to have the desired effect .
As a result , we have no success with the compensatory measures which in themselves constitute the conditions for freedom of movement .
We must in fact at least deal with the most necessary of these : the external borders and the fight against drugs .
Deadlocks in the Council often result from Member States ' mistrust of other states ' ability to take sensible political decisions .
Quite simply , there is no sense of trust and this must be established .
Here we have Nordic cooperation , which represents practical progress .
Nordic police , customs and drugs cooperation is on an everyday basis .
We trust one another , in fact .
It ought to be possible to transfer this to EU level .
Even if the methods are different , the objectives are the same , for example that drug traffickers and terrorists should not be allowed to move freely across European borders .
In the Nordic countries we do not close the borders because the other country is pursuing some policy which we perhaps do not entirely approve of .
We exercise trust rather than mistrust .
We have had a passport union for over 40 years - it must be retained .
The Nordic countries have been a forerunner of and an example to the EU in this regard .
We have achieved the goals which the EU is pursuing in this area and therefore it is only logical that the Nordic countries should be involved in continuing developments .
It is important to bind Europe together , not to split it , and so the links must become stronger .
The Union should be enlarged not only to the East but also to the North and the South .
This means stronger links with the democratic , market-oriented countries around us .
The Union must not contract .
Our values must be disseminated .
There are some technical and practical problems , concerning such things as air travel and baggage .
I believe that Sweden would be able to help in this connection .
Perhaps some of the travellers could travel via Sweden , as we have in fact solved this problem .
It is not the technical resolution of each little detail which is important and upon which we should concentrate , even though the information Parliament receives on how solutions are found needs to be clearer .
The important thing is to incorporate these new countries in a properly functioning legal system , where the Court and Parliament have a supervisory role .
To put it simply : Iceland and Norway must be part of things .
I do not doubt for a second that the Commission will be able to take the initiative in this area .
However , will the Council manage to live up to European , democratic values ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the European Parliament has not let slip any opportunity of complaining that the free movement of individuals , a Treaty requirement which should have become reality on 1 January 1993 , remains a dead letter .
Because of obstruction on the part of a number of countries , capital can move freely within the Union , but not people .
All manner of specious arguments are frequently deployed to hide the lack of the political will to make freedom of movement a reality .
Of course we know that international cooperation is needed for matters of internal security and to combat fraud and crime .
In today 's world security cannot , of course , be guaranteed by Member States , national Member States .
But internal borders are no obstacle to the criminal , ladies and gentlemen .
And my Group is very much opposed to the linking of internal security and the movement of individuals .
Parliament has also repeatedly criticized the ad hoc way in which structures have been put in place at varying speeds under the Schengen agreements .
In a democratic constitutional state , ladies and gentlemen , the principle is that the police have to be answerable to the state .
That means the safeguarding of the citizen 's rights , judicial and parliamentary scrutiny , and Schengen in no way guarantees that .
Even the national parliaments are barely able to exercise scrutiny .
So Schengen has to be replaced by European legislation .
Meantime the parliaments have made a start by coordinating parliamentary scrutiny within the Schengen area .
So I think it is crucial that the European Parliament should be associated with this coordination , because Schengen is very much a European thing .
It is also crucial that the European Commission , as an observer in Schengen and a guardian of the Treaties , should regularly and fully report to Parliament on what is happening in Schengen and the consequences for Community legislation .
But Schengen is clearly proving successful , perhaps more so than we would like .
Take the agreement currently being negotiated on the accession of the Nordic Passport Union to Schengen .
Two of these Nordic countries are not members of the European Union , though this was a requirement for signatories of the Schengen agreements .
In itself , enlargement of the area in which there is free movement of individuals is naturally a very good thing , but in this particular case I have two observations to make .
Firstly , it is inconceivable to us that new borders should be created within the Nordic Passport Union , which has existed since 1954 , just because of Schengen .
But secondly , and equally certainly , it is unacceptable that Norwegian and Icelandic membership of Schengen should , by virtue of various legal complexities , be in a position to influence European Union structures in the future , the free movement of individuals and measures of internal security , and that Norway and Iceland should have the ability to obstruct the European Union .
Schengen , ladies and gentlemen , provides for its own abolition once the Union assumes its duties . And there must be no threat to that .
So I ask the Council and Commission what they will be doing , bearing in mind the accession of all the Nordic states , to have the subject matter covered by the Schengen Agreement gradually incorporated into Community law .
Because that is what we all want .
Madam President , I agree with my fellow representative Mr Olli Rehn that there is no reason to fear that Iceland and Norway would start to sabotage Schengen decisions , if they were to join in the way presently being discussed .
Instead there is reason for concern that membership in the European Union alone and also Sweden 's and Finland 's membership in Schengen will create other new borders in northern Europe , such as between the Baltic countries and Russia on the one hand and the Nordic countries on the other hand , where movement already is clearly becoming more restricted .
People are not able to move within northern Europe as they used to .
It should also be pointed out that Finland joined the Schengen Agreement rather passively , in fact without any extensive public debate , and as far as I know even the Finnish parliament has had its doubts as to whether Finland even needs an arrangement like the present Schengen Agreement .
The Green Group feels that the fact that the Data Protection legislation is rather questionable presents a major problem for the Schengen Agreement .
It has to be said that parliamentary monitoring is not enough , but the Green Group would not like to think that the right solution would be to integrate the Schengen Agreement as such into the European Union , since there are fundamental problems related to this agreement from the citizens ' point of view , not dissimilar to those relating to the Europol co-operation . It is clear that there is no reason to create a European security state which controls and puts every citizen under suspicion .
There is also a problem regarding what would happen if Norway were to decide to stay outside the Schengen Agreement . Being Finnish myself , I feel that Finland , and possibly also Sweden and Denmark , should give careful consideration to their Schengen membership in this situation , since it would mean in effect that the Nordic Passport Union would cease .
Free movement should be developed by means other than the Schengen Agreement within the European Union , and such issues as those concerning data protection and the position of the individual are absolutely vital .
Mr President , in today 's oral questions , the passport freedom which exists in Scandinavia is referred to as the Nordic Passport Union , but that is not its proper name .
There is no Nordic Union , not even for the smoothly functioning cooperation between the Scandinavian countries .
There is a protocol on passport freedom which was adopted by the Scandinavian governments in Copenhagen in 1954 , and an agreement on passport controls concluded in 1957 .
This freedom of movement in Scandinavia , which has worked perfectly well for 40 years , forms an interesting contrast to the Schengen Convention .
The Nordic protocol is a singlepage document .
The Schengen Convention is a bureaucratic pile-up , a tragi-comic hotchpotch of monitoring and control of both the countries ' own citizens and foreign subjects .
And this contrast can be explained .
The cooperation in Scandinavia is organic ; it has grown out of legal and cultural communities which are hundreds of years old .
It has not been imposed on the Scandinavian people as a reflection of a pressure from the demands of the market economy for open frontiers .
The cooperation in Scandinavia is not centrally dictated .
It has no links with the greedy capitalism being pursued through the EU 's so-called four freedoms , which are creating far more problems than they solve .
The cooperation in Scandinavia is well balanced and works without the police accompaniment and sophisticated monitoring which are the hallmark of the Schengen Convention .
Schengen , on the other hand , is not organic .
Schengen is structured , and what a structure it is !
In an interminable legal document consisting of 143 articles , with subparagraphs and indents to subparagraphs , the authors have designed a system of monitoring and control which beats any police mechanism seen before .
It is legitimized as compensation for the removal of controls at internal frontiers referred to in Article 7a of the Treaty on European Union .
One might venture to say that the means are overshadowing the ends .
Schengen is a police state in embryo , with sensitive personal data held in information systems - which is at odds with many Member States ' traditions of protection of the individual and legal safety - and extensive and ill-defined police powers .
Note the conspiratorial way in which the Schengen structure came into existence .
The first agreement between the five governments which began the initiative was carefully kept secret for many years .
Only several years after the original agreements did the top-secret documents gradually become accessible .
It is not a system which came about as a result of a free debate .
Schengen has the kind of totalitarian features which would shock any democrat .
It is a way of establishing a fortress Europe at the same time as tightening internal controls .
There was every reason to keep the Schengen plan secret : it would not have received a great deal of popular support .
Among the many strange obsessions which are currently driving the European Union , at the expense of national self-determination , democracy and legal safety , the most inexplicable is that European politicians apparently lack any understanding of the fact that greater police powers and more controls are a failure of democracy .
We are losing the constant struggle of our peoples for democracy and legal safety when we arm ourselves with monitoring and control mechanisms and increased police powers .
Yes , but surely Schengen is a system which has been set up independently from the Union ?
Strictly speaking , that is correct , as the Norwegian Justice Minister told his country 's parliament .
According to the minister , the Schengen Convention is a separate , independent agreement under international law .
Matters can be explained in such a way , but to do so one has to choose to ignore reality and interpret the Schengen agreement in a convenient political context .
The realities behind the formal jurisprudence show that Schengen is functionally integrated into the Union .
One need only read in the Italian Government 's report to the Florence summit that one of the elements in the expansion of justice and police cooperation is the integration of the Schengen arrangement into the institutional system of the Treaty on European Union , as referred to by several speakers here today .
And the EU 's list of countries whose citizens require a visa is identical to the list adopted under the Schengen system .
For Scandinavia , this means that we shall suddenly be introducing a visa requirement for countries whose citizens have been able to travel freely to us for years .
And there is more .
Schengen is the structure , the gateway for dealing on a supranational basis with refugee and immigration policy and international crime , a system which the Danish people have rejected once , and which the people in the rest of the EU would certainly not accept either , if they were asked .
But they will not in fact be asked , it would appear from the vote today .
We have the automatic mechanism which has frequently been mentioned : one step brings another with it .
I would present Scandinavia 's compliments and say that if our peoples had to choose between Schengen and the Nordic model of free movement , they would choose the latter , but the governments have decided on behalf of their peoples to force them off the path which has been followed up to now .
For Norway , membership of the EEA and Schengen means belonging to two thirds of the EU , without having any influence .
For the other peoples of Scandinavia , joining Schengen is a tragedy in terms of democracy and their legal policy .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , another event of European significance is responsible for my lateness or at least gives me an excuse .
I want to associate myself with the demands and questions put by honourable Members and , taking advantage of Commissioner Monti 's presence , I am standing in for Mr Pradier to ask , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , the questions we all have , faced with the drift by which the system has in fact overturned one of the cornerstones of the internal market , one of the great strides of the 1985 European Single Act , which opened up the horizon to free movement not only of goods but also of people , thus establishing a great area of freedom and rights .
I consider this very dangerous and Commissioner Monti has inherited a very delicate dossier , but we know how effective he is and since he took office he has in fact been attempting to make this right a reality and honour this neglected Article of the Treaty .
But the situation now seems to be becoming particularly grave , when decision-making bodies do not even have the shame to refer to it . I am not speaking of Community bodies as such , but of the third pillar and particularly the Schengen executive committee , the body empowered to deal with issues relating to free movement , both internally and in third countries .
Obviously I am referring to the question of the countries of northern Europe , but it is a general question .
So it is reasonable to ask what can be done and how we can help the Commission to ensure that the citizens of Europe receive a message of integration and not one of liquefaction , especially in this area , from mere intergovernmental cooperation which is anyway bankrupt .
Madam President , the Nordic countries ' passport union has been in operation for more than forty years .
Unlike the Schengen Agreement , it has operated well .
But then it is completely different from the Schengen Agreement .
It means that one has the right to travel freely without a passport , though border controls are still carried out .
It is a model which has considerable popular support .
The Nordic passport union must be retained .
The Swedish government has made it clear that it would not be appropriate for Sweden to become a party to Schengen unless all the Nordic countries do .
It is impossible not only politically but also in practical terms to have a Schengen border between Sweden and Norway .
The Nordic countries have now been offered an agreement by the Schengen countries which would mean all the Nordic countries adopting the Schengen model .
For Norway and Iceland this would mean that they would have to comply but without being able to exert any influence .
They would not have voting rights on the Schengen executive committee but would on the other hand have to approve all future decisions , on pain of having to leave the entire Schengen system - immediately .
I believe that in democratic terms such a model is totally unacceptable .
It is moreover an extraordinarily unstable model ; all it needs is for Norway to say no once and a Schengen border would have to be erected between Sweden and Norway .
Never before has the Nordic passport union been so threatened as it is today by this arrangement .
My next question is this : what will happen when the Schengen Agreement becomes part of EU law ?
We know that that day is relatively close .
At the Intergovernmental Conference highly technical and highly concrete discussions are currently taking place on how Schengen should become part of EU law .
If that happens the Court of Justice will have jurisdiction and then the Norwegian constitution would have to be amended .
If such an amendment were moved , it would be sufficient for every fourth member of the Norwegian parliament to vote against for Norway not to be able to become a party to Schengen .
At present more than every fourth member of the Norwegian parliament is opposed to the Schengen Agreement .
This means that the Nordic passport union is at direct risk from the arrangements being made now and the current haste is completely incomprehensible , when we do not yet know how the Intergovernmental Conference will turn out .
It puts Nordic passport freedom at risk .
In the debate on the Schengen Agreement passport freedom is used as a bait but Schengen is so much more than that : it comprises a harmonised refugee policy with clearly inhumane characteristics , it means large registers of persons subject to weak democratic control .
In actual fact it is a central part of the European Union 's development of a common policy on justice .
This is what Iceland and Norway are to subject themselves to , without having any influence , despite having taken the democratic decision not to become members of the European Union with all its regulations .
Furthermore , the promised passport freedom may turn out to be something other than expected .
With regard to other parts of the world , such as Third World countries , it means stricter controls .
It may also mean that we are forced to carry identity documents .
Sweden has already received reminders from France and the Netherlands that Swedish citizens should have special ID cards when they travel abroad .
I therefore wonder what kind of freedom it is when a passport is simply replaced by an ID card .
As I see it , it is no freedom at all .
There is really only one solution to this for the Nordic countries , only one solution which will safeguard the Nordic passport union and only one solution which is capable of securing genuine popular support and which will allow us to determine for ourselves the future of the passport union .
It is that all five Nordic countries should decide not to accede to the Schengen Agreement .
Madam President , the Council of Baltic Sea States ' summit meeting in Visby , at which the EU was represented at the highest level , was a success and that is very important .
The Baltic region represents a compact European problem .
The former Soviet system has left much behind it and now there is direct contact between the new Russia , the new countries seeking membership of the EU and the new Western Europe , geared to the fulfilment of its historic mission .
The Baltic region has great promise but also entails considerable risks .
As one can see from the presidency declaration made by the president of the Visby summit , the Swedish prime minister , the issues discussed included economic development and economic integration , environmental problems and the fight against international crime .
Mr Santer presented what is known as the EU 's Baltic initiative , which lays a basis for further efforts on the part of the Union .
Together with the documents which the country holding the presidency of the Council of Baltic Sea States has been asked to draw up , we have here the principles for the follow-up work which will be started on 2 and 3 July at a meeting of foreign ministers in Kalmar , a town on the Swedish Baltic coast .
Security issues are not on the actual agenda for the Council of Baltic Sea States but in this respect too the Council has an important role to play .
The summit provided the first opportunity for informal discussions at the highest level between the Russian prime minister and leaders of the three Baltic states .
There will be opportunities for such contacts at subsequent meetings at ministerial level .
The security situation will also be furthered by networks of contacts at all levels involving civil servants , industrialists and academics .
The EU and the Council of Baltic Sea States can facilitate an intensification of all these networks .
The motion for a resolution to be adopted by Parliament states that the EU and the Council of Baltic Sea States should take the initiative in gathering together all the Member States of the Union , in cooperation with the European Parliament and the national parliaments for a conference of the kind which was held last year in Barcelona on Mediterranean issues .
Such an initiative would bring peoples closer .
Within a growing EU , Madam President , special measures are needed to foster contacts between Members and applicant countries , since geographical distance and differences in history and culture can make it more difficult to create a real community .
As part of the preparations for the Visby summit a group of prominent business leaders held a business summit at which they adopted an agenda of measures to stimulate increased economic activity , investment and trade .
The chair of the business leaders group was invited to give an account of this agenda at the Visby summit .
It is important that this industrial cooperation is facilitated and fostered and that industry recognises and makes the most of the opportunities .
In this way the resource flows arising from the European Union aid effort and bilateral programmes can be enlarged and vitalised .
The motion for a resolution also stresses the importance of creating better legal structures in the countries which are now undergoing political and economic transformation .
A country should be built on the basis of law .
Law faculties at universities were seriously neglected during the Soviet era .
There is an important task for the EU here , namely to support national efforts to develop legal competence .
Madam President , the Schengen Agreement was signed as long ago as 1985 but it was ten years before it came into force .
Most Schengen countries and their citizens are today extremely critical of the Agreement .
In many other countries there is also a great deal of mistrust .
In order to achieve something positive - free movement - it was felt that a great many negative measures had to be taken and this has led to the idea of Fortress Europe .
Is it not time to recognise that the Schengen Agreement which is so subject to criticism is neither the best nor the only way of achieving free movement of persons ?
The Nordic passport union is another way ; it has been in operation for over forty years and really does allow people free movement , without creating walls against the world outside , and it must be preserved .
What does free movement mean from an EU perspective ?
High walls against the outside world and advanced systems of control , replacing fixed internal border control points with peripatetic controls on the inside , exchanging passports for an obligatory Schengen ID card , and so on .
Everything being monitored by a police office we call Europol .
The Green Group wishes to express its total opposition to the integration of the Schengen model in the Union and regards it as regrettable that the Council 's working documents show that work is already being done on this .

Madam President , I just want to mention what the citizens of Europe have been waiting for since January 1993 : economic growth , especially free movement and cooperation between national governments on security and the fight against crime , but I would say primarily a Europe that is a leading world player , and it seems to me that we are very far from achieving these objectives .
We cannot calculate the negative effects of the fact that these objectives are not being achieved in the Union .
I think we are all , or almost all , in favour of the Nordic countries joining the Schengen Agreement , but our criticism is about a two-speed Europe , more than two speeds , and in open order , with some Member States going ahead on free movement and security and the fight against crime in their own ways .
That is why we are so critical .
Not of the aims of Schengen which are perfectly correct , but of the fact that this agreement might discourage or slow down bringing the third pillar into the Community sphere , which is what we all want .
Great commitment is required of us all on this subject and I wonder if the importance of the objective of free movement of persons is comparable to the territorial issue of Gibraltar or the powers of the Court of Justice , which is also of absolute importance .
Now the convention is blocked and it is also blocking other important acts , for instance the Dublin Convention on the right of asylum .
So I would like us all to give this our attention and I hope that the Commission and the Council take positions on this .
As regards accelerating the implementation of free movement of persons in the European Union , the Council 's organizations are working on three proposals presented last year by Commissioner Monti on the right of citizens of third countries to travel inside the Community , the abolition of controls on persons at internal frontiers and the adaptation of the derived right of free movement of workers , self-employed workers and beneficiaries of services .
Furthermore , the Council is devoting attention to the draft convention on the crossing by persons of the external frontiers of the Member States of the European Union .
However there are still unresolved problems on this text including in particular the area of territorial application and the possible attribution to the Court of Justice of powers to make preliminary judgements on the interpretation of the provisions of the convention and to rule on controversies relating to its application .
The opinion expressed by Parliament on this draft convention in April 1994 has naturally received the Council 's attention , and successive Presidencies of the Council have not failed to inform Parliament step by step of the progress made on this issue .
The Council is also looking at the relationship between the Nordic Passport Union and the draft convention on the crossing by persons of the external frontiers of Member States .
It is not up to the Council to take a position on the implications of the Nordic Passport Union and the extension of the provisions of the Schengen agreement .
Any communitization of such sectors , envisaged by the Schengen agreement , can only be achieved in accordance with the procedures laid down by Article K.9 or Article M of the Treaty on European Union .
Article K.9 provides that the Council , acting unanimously on the initiative of the Commission or a Member State , may decide to apply Article 100c of the Treaty to certain areas covered by cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs determining the relevant voting conditions .
These decisions should later be adopted by the Member States in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements .
The Commission has already announced that it does not intend to present an initiative along these lines in a communication to Parliament and the Council of November 1995 , as it believes the objective of the communitization of the sector in question is more likely to be achieved under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Conference for the revision of the treaties rather than through an initiative based on Article K.9.
So it is clear that as the Intergovernmental Conference has started its work , it is up to that forum convened under Article N of the Treaty on European Union , to examine the possibility of incorporating the provisions of the Schengen agreements into the Treaty on European Union , bringing them under the control of the European Parliament and the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Community .
I would now like to dwell briefly on the Baltic Sea States Summit of 3 and 4 May at Visby .
I want to emphasize that the Council naturally sets great store by strengthening the stability and the economic development of the Baltic region and , in line with the conclusions of the Essen European Council , it confirms the importance of regional cooperation initiatives in Europe .
As regards cooperation , in particular with the Baltic Sea region , on 29 May 1995 the Council drew up conclusions on European Union policy towards this region based on guidelines in a Commission communication .
Before coming to the contents of these conclusions , I would like to record that the presidency of the Council has actually spoken on the Visby summit in Parliament already , in a debate here on 17 April .
The Union 's interest in the whole area bordering on the Baltic was stressed at Visby . I am thinking in particular of the European association agreements with four countries in the area - Poland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania - and of the intense political dialogue that has now developed on the basis of the Italian-British initiative of 1993 .
Indeed , the European Parliament contributes significantly to this political dialogue .
At the Warsaw meeting of the joint parliamentary committees of the European Parliament and the Polish Parliament on 22 January , and the analogous meeting held with Estonia in Brussels on 26 March , where the Italian presidency intervened at the political level .
There was also the information mission made by the Italian presidency at the beginning of April to Riga , Vilnius , Tallinn and Warsaw to explain the priorities of our term to those countries .
There was also the participation of Poland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania in the WEU as associated partners , a qualitative leap achieved by moving forward from the old consultative forum with the countries of central and eastern Europe and granting associated partner States participation with a reasonable degree of involvement in many WEU activities .
What I have mentioned so far is part of the general framework of Union support to the various forms of regional cooperation discussed and approved at Essen , intended to promote the pre-membership strategy and bring groups of States closer to the Union , in particular the States in the area concerned .
I have already mentioned the Nordic Council ; I would also like to mention the Central European initiative which also specifically targets the Baltic because Poland has been involved from the start .
At the ministerial meeting in Vienna a few weeks ago , the INCE decided to enlarge its organization to fifteen members , making it the strongest and largest example of regional cooperation in Europe .
The Council and the Commission has entered into relations with the INCE , and this will be reflected in the final document from the Florence European Council .
I have mentioned all this to remind you that the 29 May Cooperation Council with the Baltic Sea States was not an isolated event but part of a strategy on relations between the European Union and the countries of the Baltic Sea , which is already well advanced .
In particular , the Council stresses the importance of integrating the region into the European and world economy through the possibility of trade and investment , and this integration is in the interests of the Union .
The European Union already contributes through existing instruments , in particular the PHARE , TACIS and cross-border cooperation programmes , to economic growth and freer trade , encouraging new investment possibilities .
It has also concluded agreements with coastal third countries to reduce port barriers in particular ways .
Many of the plans that emerged from the Visby Conference are already under way with the assistance of the European Union and with bilateral assistance from Member States .
There is , for example , assistance in the administrative and customs sectors , support to coastal third countries to join the World Trade Organization , support for establishing a free trade area between Baltic countries and Poland , assistance in cross-border cooperation .
In conclusion , the Commission will report to the Florence European Council on the results of the Visby Conference , where it presented its initiative for the Baltic Sea region .
The framework guidelines of this initiative must now be converted into action and the Council will of course make a statement on that , in the light of the conclusions of the European Council and with a view to the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Baltic Sea Council , which will take place in Kalmar on 2 and 3 July 1996 .
Madam President , the European Parliament has always strongly supported the abolition of internal frontier controls on persons , an aim written into the Treaty under Article 7a . So I find it logical that honourable Members are interested in the development of Schengen , especially the relationship between the Schengen Agreement and the achievement of this objective throughout the Union .
The oral questions tabled demonstrate this interest , and seem to me to revolve around three essential issues . First , how the Commission now intends to achieve the objective of abolishing internal frontier checks on persons in the Union ; second , whether the acquis of the Nordic Union will be maintained , hence including Norway and Iceland when this objective is achieved at Union level ; third , the role the Intergovernmental Conference could and should play in achieving the objective of integrating Schengen into the Treaty on European Union .
On the first point , while the Commission welcomes the Schengen Agreement as the Union 's precursor to achieving abolition of controls on persons , it recognizes that Schengen is only a partial implementation of the objective of Article 7a of the Treaty on European Union .
This is in fact a Community objective , to be achieved throughout the European Union using European Union instruments and drawn up in accordance with the provisions of the treaties and in full respect of the role of the various institutions .
From this viewpoint , Schengen currently suffers from an institutional deficit .
Personally I have to say I find it particularly unacceptable that , of the four great freedoms of movement on which the European single market is based , it is actually free movement of persons which remains most in arrears .
So it is hardly surprising if the citizens do not have a real and positive perception of European integration .
That is why the Commission put forward three proposals last July to complement the legislative instruments which will allow us to abolish internal frontier controls throughout the European Union , and Parliament 's opinion on those proposals is expected shortly .
Mr Dell 'Alba , whom I thank for his appreciation of these proposals , wonders how the European Parliament can help the Commission .
First of all , I would say , by giving the requested opinion on the Commission 's three proposals for directives which is scheduled for the July session , and then , with the specific proposals on the table , by exercising all that welcome and timely pressure which the European Parliament has historically brought to bear on this issue .
On the second point - cooperation between Schengen and Norway and Iceland - I recognize that , at the appropriate time , the Union will have to deal with the same problem already encountered by the Schengen group .
The Schengen Member States and the countries of the Nordic Union are of the opinion that Denmark , Finland and Sweden being party to the agreement must not compromise the acquis of the Nordic Union .
Their involvement must therefore be accompanied by cooperation between Schengen on the one hand , and Norway and Iceland on the other , which cannot join Schengen because the convention is restricted to Member States of the European Union , in twinning the two areas without frontiers , Schengen and the Nordic Union .
When we are close to achieving abolition of internal frontier controls on persons in the European Union , that clearly should not become a reason for eliminating the acquis of the Nordic Union , which dates back forty years .
So we must find appropriate solutions for this .
I believe Schengen may , and indeed should , also function as precursor in terms of twinning the areas without frontiers of the Nordic Union and the European Union .
Political agreement on the cooperation to be established for this purpose exists , but the negotiations on technical solutions between the Schengen States and Norway and Iceland have only just begun .
The Commission is involved in these negotiations , and I guarantee that it will ensure that any cooperation agreements between Schengen and Norway and Iceland do not compromise existing Community law or constitute an obstacle of any kind to its future development .
Madam President , I come to the third issue raised in the various questions : the role that the Intergovernmental Conference could or should play in the context of the achievement of this fundamental objective .
The European Parliament is kept informed of the work of the Intergovernmental Conference so honourable Members know about the three hypotheses under consideration . One is about bringing into the Community sphere a number of policy areas which currently appear in Title VI of the Treaty on European Union , so that they can benefit from Community mechanisms and all the institutions can fulfil their traditional roles , which is the aim the Commission supports .
Then the mechanisms established in Title VI need to be strengthened for the matters it continues to cover , and in particular the institutions should be assigned a more important role .
Finally there is the possibility of integrating the content of Schengen into the Treaty on European Union , some of it in the first and some in the third pillar as appropriate .
These options are not mutually exclusive : for example possible integration of the content of Schengen into the Treaty on European Union should in no way interfere with increasing the effectiveness of the decision-making procedures set out in Title VI at the same time .
However , and this concludes my reply to the first group of questions , in the Commission 's view , the Intergovernmental Conference - let me stress this - cannot serve as an alibi or pretext for holding up work in progress .
The objective of abolishing internal frontier controls on persons is already in the Treaty on European Union and together we must do our utmost to achieve it on the basis of the Commission proposals currently under examination .
We cannot yet foresee the content of the new Treaty , it will take time for it to be ratified by all the countries , and if we wait for that we will inevitably get even further away from the date initially set for the completion of the single market and free movement of persons constitutes an essential factor in that .
I come now , much more briefly , to the questions on the Baltic Sea States Summit held in Visby .
On 17 April Commissioner Van den Broek explained to Parliament the objective of the Visby meeting and the role the Commission would play there .
It is superfluous to stress the political importance of cooperation between all the countries of the Baltic Sea .
The informal and open dialogue between the Heads of Government of the Baltic Sea States , in which the Presidents of the European Council and Commission took part , has contributed to strengthening cooperation and , I would say , trust in the region .
The meeting supported the efforts made by Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania and Poland to join the European Union .
On the specific questions by Mr Burenstam Linder and Mr Martens , I have pleasure in confirming that the Commission 's document ' Initiative ' has been favourably received , both as regards the support of the Community to priority cooperation sectors defined by the Baltic Sea States , and as regards the efforts made by the Commission to strengthen coordination .
On the questions by Mr Roth and others , I want to confirm that nuclear safety is one of the Commission 's priorities .
We are trying to strengthen international collaboration in this field but we must not forget that this is primarily a matter for national governments .
As to the future of reactors which do not meet current safety criteria , the Commission believes that they must be brought up to standard or deactivated as soon as possible .
Finally , on protection of the identity of the Nordic countries , the subject of a question by Mr Krarup , I can only say that the Visby meeting looked at cooperation in the whole Baltic region , including strengthening democracy and the security of citizens .
I thank Commissioner Monti for his very detailed replies and I give the floor to Mrs Iivari , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Madam President , I am going to talk about the summit in Visby , and I would like to take the opportunity to thank the Council 's and the Commission 's representatives for their contributions here today .
The development in the Baltic and the Mediterranean areas is important for the stability and prosperity of the whole of Europe .
The European Union 's active involvement in creating democracy , strengthening economies and overcoming environmental problems is essential both in the south and in the north .
It is essential that the political results reached regarding the Baltic area at the summit held in Visby are put into practice without delay .
It was of great value that all states in the Baltic area , including Russia , participated in the summit , in addition to the European Union .
Let that be a start to a strengthening of the Nordic dimension within the Union .
The Council and the Commission should now draw up a programme as soon as possible for the initiatives required to implement the decisions made at the summit .
In the Baltic area widespread co-operation is required in order to counteract international crime and resolve severe environmental problems , amongst other things .
An energy network comprising the whole of Europe , linking Norway 's and Russia 's gas resources , should be extended to this area .
The PHARE and Interreg programmes should also be integrated and implemented in such a way that they offer real benefits in creating democracy and public well-being in the Baltic countries .
The European Union 's Baltic policy should be based on existing Europe agreements as well as a full implementation of co-operation and partnership agreements .
The Baltic area , which in many respects is in a very delicately balanced , requires a framework for co-operation which respects the independence of all countries and guarantees human rights for citizens in the whole area .
This co-operation cannot be left to words alone .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I have listened with pleasure to the comments made concerning Baltic cooperation .
I was visited today by some television people who work a great deal on media cooperation in the East .
We talked about the cultural aspects too , and I would recommend that those aspects should also be addressed in all the discussions on the economy .
I think that on this Scandinavian evening , a welcoming voice should be heard from Denmark among the chorus of speeches which have been made .
I myself live near the Danish-German border .
This is not only the border between Denmark and Germany , but also the border between Germany and the other countries of Scandinavia .
The Nordic Passport Union , which my fellow countryman Mr Krarup says must not be called that , but referred to as a Nordic passport-free area , is not just a practical question , but in fact a political one as well , which says something about the Nordic context and also about Nordic solidarity .
As a Dane , I think it is important to draw attention to this , in these days of Europe and Schengen .
I hope - and I welcome what the Commissioner said in this respect - that Norway and Iceland can be brought into this cooperation , so that the Nordic Passport Union is preserved intact .
The delegation from Parliament will be going to Norway and Iceland shortly .
It would be very good to be able to say in Oslo and Reykjavik from the European Parliament - and this is what I understood from the Commissioner - that there is every chance of the Nordic Passport Union surviving intact within the system in Europe .
Madam President , it is undoubtedly necessary both to widen the Schengen area to cover as many countries as possible and to improve the free movement of persons between the Nordic Union and the European Union , provided that minimum guarantees are demanded from Iceland and Norway .
But haste is one thing and speed another .
In the first place , to accept the complete ' communitization ' of the third pillar today , as the resolution of 13 March 1996 would wish , while negotiations in the Intergovernmental Conference are still going on , seems to me premature .
Although harmonization with the Community sphere , particularly for points 1 to 6 of Article 1 , is desirable , we should nevertheless consider it point by point and take the necessary precautions .
We must always hold fast to the idea that the European citizen should be at the heart of European integration .
The Union has an unconditional obligation to look at its citizens ' needs in practical terms , but also at their concerns .
Similarly , there can be no question of creating a European space with no frontiers without the accompanying measures needed to deal with internal security .
Measures relating to free movement and those relating to the security of external frontiers should be applied simultaneously .
Ladies and gentlemen , for the sake of the well-being and freedom of all citizens of the Union , let us avoid ( in the words of a well-known saying ) ' putting the cart before the horse ' .
Besides , these same citizens would accept the idea of freedom linked to free movement more enthusiastically if the European decision-maker framed this plan with due allowance for aspects essential to the security of the external frontiers .
Let us never forget that security for us all is as much a right as freedom of movement .
Madam President , I should also like to thank the Council and the Commission for the interesting answers .
I should like to begin with Baltic cooperation .
It is good that the Council supports Baltic cooperation so actively .
It is important that this cooperation should become a matter for the whole of the EU ; it is quite likely that the subject will also be discussed further in Florence .
It is good , however , that we have already been able to confirm that active Baltic cooperation is a matter for the whole of the EU and that it is not simply a question of cooperation with the Baltic states and Poland but can also become an important bridge to Russia .
As regards the free movement of persons , I believe it is worth stressing that this is something that the single market stands for and is intended to achieve .
This was completely clear both to those who created the single market and to those of us who joined the Community later .
I am also one of those who complains that free movement has not been achieved and that it is quite possible to criticise the often highly technical and convoluted solutions , or detours , which it has been necessary to adopt via Schengen .
However , I also believe that everyone who is in favour of such free movement understands us in the Nordic countries , that we are afraid for the community which we have in the form of the passport union and a free and common labour market .
This can of course , as has already been pointed out , serve as a good example of how free movement can operate at its best .
I am quite convinced that if the Member States of the EU and the Nordic countries which are not part of the EU can only find the will it will be possible to resolve the difficulties associated with the achievement of free movement throughout the Nordic countries and the EU .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the questions raised this evening show that the only realistic Europe , which is at last being built , will necessarily be one that is sometimes scornfully called an ' à la carte ' Europe .
Because there is both dogma and reality .
The dogma , of course , is expressed in Article 7a of the EU Treaty , for example .
The reality is the setting up of specific systems like that established for the Schengen agreement .
The reality is also the existence of autonomous machinery for regionalized spaces for free movement of persons like that of the Nordic Passport Union .
But it is by no means certain that it is possible or even desirable to harmonize these different systems and , from this point of view , plurality , originating from a previous historical development , should not necessarily be automatically criticized .
Moreover , we have here a unilateral idea .
Freedom of movement is always favoured at the expense of security , and it is in the face of this situation that some States found themselves prey to a kind of anxiety which led them to set up the Schengen agreements .
I do not think this situation will disappear overnight .
Thirdly , the Visby conference proved that frameworks for cooperation much wider than those of the European Union alone had to be found .
All this clearly shows that it is unreal to pretend that Europe should be organized only in the rigid framework of the European Union .
I should like to emphasize in passing that Europe will always be mutilated as long as it excludes Russia , and for the very simple reason that the present Europe is increasingly becoming a privileged space for economic and cultural colonization by the United States .
Faced with this transatlantic world superpower , it will be absolutely essential to find a counterweight some day .
Of course , I do not think that Russia and the CIS can be included in the rigid framework of the European Union , but this means that that framework cannot take priority .
Other , more flexible , forms of cooperation will have to be set up : this is what is happening gradually under the pressure of necessity .
Consequently , for all these reasons , I truly think that the Europe of the future will be an ' à la carte ' Europe , which may or may not please those who , on doctrinal grounds , are opposed to it .
Madam President , it is perfectly understandable of course that the countries of Denmark , Sweden and Finland should be seeking to join the Schengen group .
It is equally understandable that they will want to preserve the existing Nordic free movement arrangements and that their membership of Schengen will be contingent upon the willingness to accept that Norway and Iceland should be included in that as well , expanding Schengen to some 13 members .
Indeed , in the negotiations on accession by Norway , which came to naught because of the referendum decision , this was an important consideration .
Some speakers here have dwelt , quite understandably , on the problems that would arise from the fact that Iceland and Norway , through not being Member States of the European Union , will be excluded from discussions on the future development of the free movement area if it were to be incorporated into the Union treaties .
I would like to add another angle to that , namely the question of the three or four Member States which at the moment do not seek to join the Schengen arrangement and which are insisting on retaining the right to exercise border controls because they do not accept that non-citizens of the Union have the right of free movement .
They would be in a peculiar position because they would find that non-Member States were involved in a free movement arrangement which as Member States they were not part of .
It is all a very unhappy situation .
I hope that it will not be a permanent difficulty , that one day it may be possible for all the Member States of the Union to be part of the free movement area .
But it is a reality at the moment that Britain and one or two others certainly do not see that happening in the immediate future .
And that must be recognized .
In conclusion , some of us may have to abstain on this common text .
There are certain points in paragraphs 1 , 2 , 6 and 10 which we cannot at the moment fully accept , although I must say that there is an enormous amount in this resolution with which we could all agree .
First let me emphasize once more that the Visby meeting promoted regional cooperation and also identified , as an example of such regional cooperation , the Baltic way - the road corridor between Helsinki and Warsaw-Tallinn-Riga-Kaunas - which is one of the trans-European network priorities .
Then there are two groups of questions which I will briefly follow up .
As regards the Nordic Union countries , I believe it is very important for the European Union to keep in mind the experience on passports acquired over a long period by the Nordic Union and I think it is appropriate to mention the question of compatibility between the Nordic Union arrangements and the Treaty on European Union .
The Commission is not aware of any provisions in the Nordic Union agreement which might be incompatible with existing Community law or existing European Union arrangements .
Everything naturally needs to be explored in the new situation which we hope will shortly be created when the abolition of the controls on persons enters into force for the whole of the European Union .
Some people have stressed the issue of security .
I want to dispel any doubt immediately : the three proposals formulated by the Commission in July 1995 are all inspired by full recognition that security is just as important as freedom of movement , which is why a link has been planned between the accompanying measures and the abolition of controls at the internal frontiers of the European Union .
So I would not want anyone to think the Commission is so preoccupied with achieving the objective of freedom of movement that it would neglect security .
That is certainly not the case .
Finally , on Mr Elliott 's speech , some Member States , probably very few , which are not interested in taking part in Schengen and have certain reservations of principle about the interpretation of freedom of movement of persons in the European Union , may indeed find themselves in a peculiar situation , when other states which are not members of the European Union are participating , through Schengen , in this great area of freedom of movement in security .
I have received 11 motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Economic and social reform in the Mediterranean
The next item is the report ( A4-0198 / 96 ) by Mr Barón Crespo , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0113 - C40253 / 96-95 / 0127 ( CNS ) ) on financial and technical measures to accompany the reform of economic and social structures in the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership ( MEDA ) .
Madam President , I take the floor with great concern because the Union 's credibility is at stake .
This morning Mr Dini , President-in-Office of the Council , said that he too was concerned about it but , at the moment , it would seem that the Council is more concerned with leaving the Chamber than following the debate .
But , after all , we are used to this kind of shenanigans .
I am concerned that at this moment the Union 's credibility is at stake vis-à-vis the Mediterranean countries because we have approved a Euro-Mediterranean policy and we must honour our commitments .
The Council , in principle , claimed to refer to the European Parliament and , for the first time , there has had to be a fresh consultation of the European Parliament and we have tried to help to unblock a situation where - I must acknowledge - the Commission has shown sensitivity towards our proposals .
The issue has been blocked for some months now in Council for two reasons : one concerns the situation of the human rights clause - and I must say that we maintain an amendment referring precisely to the way of assessing developments in the situation , and our proposals is that in cases where a Mediterranean partner fails to meet the obligations set out in Article 3 , i.e. there is a situation of massive human rights violation , the measures including the suspension of planned aid , should be determine by qualified majority , on the Commission 's proposal and following the prior opinion of the European Parliament , by 30 June 1997 .
Our committee 's proposal to refer the issue to the IGC has succeeded in unblocking a situation in which the government of one Member State has vetoed the situation .
I think that this proposal will meet with the agreement of the Commission because , inter alia , the Commission itself has been proposing it in a general way to the IGC and we think that it is important that , in that case , we should make some progress in turning human rights into an important rallying point and in a democratic way .
There is the other extreme that we must not forget : the concern with safeguarding and protecting one Member State , namely Greece .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs has been sensitive to the concerns of our Greek fellow Europeans , about what I might call certain territorial disputes which have worsened this year and we have therefore accepted an amendment referring to the territorial integrity of the Member States and their external borders and of the Union .
The resolution which the European Parliament has approved concerning the Florence summit also mentions this matter and it is also in the Treaties .
However , with respect to this and the EuroMediterranean Conference , it is worth making it quite clear .
I should like to launch an appeal although I am not sure if it will be heeded , reiterating the words of Mr Pangalos , when he stayed away from the Council meeting at the end of May , revindicating for Greece the fatherhood of the Euro-Mediterranean policy .
It is certain that many things were born in Greece , not just the Euro-Mediterranean policy .
There is no doubt that it was at the Corfu summit that a boost was given to it , when the Commission proposal was accepted despite reservations by the Council and the European Parliament .
It would therefore be very positive if we could count , having shown our solidarity , on the real and effective support that would enable us to unblock this situation and , above all , enable us - and here I turn full circle - to honour our commitments and keep to our word since , at this moment , this is now the end of June and we must be able to spend effectively nearly 900 million ECU that we have promised for this year .
The agreements which we have reached , albeit multilaterally , always imply services in return .
Our Mediterranean partners have taken a step and now we must in turn we able to face up to our responsibilities and keep to our word .
Therefore I think it is important that this regulation be approved once and for all , through consultation , at this plenary session .
Madam President , I should like to take the floor very briefly since we already examined this report last November .
First of all , I think that , although this is a fresh consultation , the opinion of the Committees on Budgets and Budgetary Control should have been sought , and this was not done .
Secondly , I should like to ask why it is not the Committee on Budgets at this moment in time that is the right one to deal with the fundamentals of this issue , since this is a regulation with an essentially financial content .
Thirdly , I should like to comment that , as far as the overall chapter is concerned , this is acceptable , with the rider that the Council does not take any decisions that might affect the fragile balance struck in category 4 without first consulting the European Parliament .
On the other hand , I should also like to comment that six months have gone by , as the rapporteur said , and yet the issue is still being held up in Council .
Fourthly , the European Parliament - and this too has already been mentioned - has respected for 1996 the sum of 900 million ECU decided at the Cannes summit .
Yet the execution of the MEDA budgetary line for this year is still at the starting-point .
Time goes by and we shall reach the end of the year and , Commissioner , you know what we shall be told - ' You will not be able to spend this money in this or that zone ... ' .
We know what the cost of propelling the MEDA programme has been and we know what is at stake in the area .
Fifth point : I think that reference must be made to the fact that in the past financial protocols with the countries in the Mediterranean zone have been submitted to the European Parliament for the opinion procedure , enabling it to exert some control .
This regulation , however , only provides for a consultation of the European Parliament .
This means that the European Parliament must develop effective instruments so that it can exert control over the application of the programme , as well as proper budgetary management .
I should like to end by thanking once again - because I thanked him in November - Mr Barón for accepting our amendments and I must say that they were purely technical , drawn from the experience of PHARE and TACIS .
Thanks to them , with the permission of those whose task it is to unblock the procedure and with the speed that must be applied by the Commission , I am sure that we shall be able to keep to our commitments for 1996 and , in accordance with Article 205 , obliging the Commission to deal with proposals approved in the European Parliament , I am convinced that we shall finally succeed in implementing the MEDA programme .
Madam President , the Socialist Group supports the report of our rapporteur , Enrique Barón Crespo .
My group campaigned for a Mediterranean policy for the EU and insisted on parallelism between our approach to the east and to the south .
It is the Mediterranean policy and its funding which we are talking about tonight and , in our view , the MEDA programme must be seen in the light of our commitment to the development of democracy , economic advancement and the cause of human rights in the Mediterranean basin .
The Socialist Group will support the approach to global MEDA funding .
But it is fair to give warning that we believe that the Government of Turkey has yet to deliver on the promises made to this Parliament before the ratification of the customs union in December last year .
We know that in the field of democratic reform and human rights abuses the situation has not only stalled but has actually deteriorated since the Turkish general election in December .
Not one of the constitutional reforms brought in to charm us last year has yet found its way onto the statute book .
The continuing stream of arrests for freedom of thought and speech continues to give Turkey an internationally bad name and the recent wave of unrest and hunger strikes in Turkish prisons is a demonstration of the violation of natural rights and common decency .
Nor has Turkey made any effort to deal with the political problems of Cyprus and the Kurdish area .
In all these ways Turkey is found wanting , and yet it has an exceptionally close relationship with our Union and we have a right to expect more .
My group will therefore be looking to use our budgetary powers this autumn to keep up the pressure on Turkey .
We have a substantial right as the co-authority on the Union 's budget .
We intend to use it and to invite other groups to join us .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to compliment Mr Barón Crespo on his work and , also , on the way he handled this delicate matter in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The MEDA programme must be implemented quickly - immediately , I would say - even though one country , Turkey , is systematically creating problems , in contravention of the philosophy and principles both of the Barcelona procedure and of the MEDA programme itself , not only for one Member State of the European Union but also for at least one other country in the Mediterranean basin , namely Syria .
You are all aware of the problems that Turkey is creating for Syria , at least as far as water is concerned .
Even so , the MEDA programme must be implemented . It is the financial instrument of the Mediterranean policy , and both we and the Mediterranean countries are looking forward to it with some impatience because everyone is of the view that it can bring overall improvement to those countries and turn them into genuine and full members of the new Euro-Mediterranean partnership , which is something that we all want .
Further to that , I would be failing in my duty if I did not emphasize the special relevance that the implementation of the MEDA programme will have for the Middle East peace process .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the MEDA programme encompasses many important actions covering nearly every sector of civil life : energy , transport infrastructures , regional cooperation , small and medium-sized enterprises , and a whole variety of other activities within that bracket .
The four amendments that have been tabled are all , I think , very important .
I will mention just two of them : the amendment concerning the definitive procedure for adopting appropriate measures when such are deemed necessary and the amendment on synergy .
As regards the first of those two , Commissioner , I hardly need to say how important it is that the decision on the adoption of appropriate measures must be approved by qualified majority .
In fact , that is what you , and the Commission , recommended in your original proposal .
As regards the other amendment , I feel that I should draw attention again to the importance of ensuring transparency in this programme , particularly given the undesirable precedents that have occurred in certain other sectors .
I remind you , Commissioner , that you yourself - and I commend you for it - have on many occasions given verbal assurances to committees of the European Parliament about the safeguarding of transparency .
To conclude , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I inform you that my group will be voting in favour , will be supporting the regulation , that is .
Madam President , in addition to congratulating Mr Barón Crespo on his report , I should like to emphasize that the MEDA programme , promoting the development of and closer contacts between countries on the southern flanks of the Mediterranean , can only merit our full support .
This is a neighbouring area , closely linked to us throughout our history , where the lack of resources and demographic growth are now triggering extremely tricky problems .
As well as the most important aspect , the fact that the well-being of the area 's peoples is in jeopardy , this is also leading to an obvious migratory pressure with people seeking employment in our countries , leading in many cases to serious problems of integration .
This is the case not only in the southern countries of the Union but also in the North ( which is where the highest percentages of immigrants are to be found ) , and they should be as or more involved in finding a solution that , indeed in the overriding interest of the migrant populations themselves , will encourage them to stay in their countries of origin .
Given this humanitarian , social , economic and political interest we must all have a broad view when it comes to finding the funds needed , while recognising the existing difficulties .
The existing rules must be kept to but it is equally necessary to stop using the need to stick to the rules as a pretext for dragging our feet over the basic problem , a problem that instead of being a reason for widespread concern could be turned into a factor of enrichment for both of these neighbouring regions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report concerns the Euro-Mediterranean policy which fully illustrates the ultimate wish to communitarize all fields of external policy .
Everything proposed here could just as well have been regulated by bilateral agreements , with all the flexibility that such agreements between the various countries around the Mediterranean could have given .
Moreover , bilateral agreements would probably have ensured a much more genuine democratic control than the control exercised in the context of the European Union , that is , the control of national parliaments over the foreign policies of Member States .
It is true that in this case the main objective is perhaps less legitimate cooperation between the different States than the ultimate creation of a kind of enormous free trade area extending over the whole Mediterranean basin .
However , in the light of the differing economic structures north and south of the Mediterranean , it is not certain that it has to go in this direction without precautions .
We have seen the disastrous consequences for Mexico which have followed from the NAFTA agreements in North America , for example .
As for human rights , I cannot speak about the Mediterranean without recalling at the same time that our Parliament was considerably misled last autumn , or last winter , during the negotiations on a customs union between Europe and Turkey , and I note that the fears of our Greek colleagues were fully justified in this respect .
To return to the MEDA programme itself , we are not sure that it will not in fact ultimately be economically counterproductive , and in any case we are convinced that it is contrary to the wholehearted application of the principle of subsidiarity .
There is no need , in this respect , to eliminate the role of Member States in this type of cooperation policy .
That is why we shall vote against the report in the hope that this kind of policy will henceforth come within the competence of Member States , with all the flexibility which that will allow in comparison with the rigid programmes planned at present .
Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Barón for his report and congratulating him and , above all , the European Parliament and its various committees for having agreed to carry out the second reading so quickly .
There is no doubt that the Commission backed the European Parliament 's criterion and I must say that , after some hesitation , the Council has also finally come round to the idea of a further consultation of the European Parliament , because there would undoubtedly have been one or two points that would have had quite obvious political repercussions vis-à-vis the original proposal and , at the same time , a series of new decisions that were the difference between the Council 's final decision and what would have been the European Parliament 's proposal and report .
To sum up - as I think that Mr Barón has said this very well - we accept what he pointed out .
It is true that at the moment , in terms of the MEDA regulation , regardless of the fact that it is - it is true - a strictly financial regulation of great technical complexity , this is a political moment when what Mr Barón said is quite right : what is at stake is the credibility of the Union 's capability in terms of foreign relations .
I share the concerns of the Committee on Budgets and Budgetary Control .
I should like to respond to those concerns .
Three agreements have already been finalised .
In chronological order they are : Tunisia , Israel and Morocco .
In all cases both parties have agreed upon a free trade zone .
Each party has stood up for itself .
One of the main demands of the European Union has been precisely the lifting of trade barriers .
This stems from the retrospective clause of 1 January 1996 and has already begun but I cannot go on , as Commissioner responsible , receiving more and more visits from the ministers of those countries asking for their share .
We cannot go on until the end of the year with a situation in which one party - with a far weaker industrial base and economy than us , after all - has done its duty and completed its work and the European Union has not .
In other words , Mr Barón is right .
This is a problem that goes beyond the financial aspect or technicalities of the MEDA programme .
As for the amendments , the Commission thinks that in the case of three of them this is not the right moment to introduce them because that would presuppose changing the proposal and that would take us another three or four months .
But there is a political amendment which I see no reason for the Commission to refuse since it has already put it forward at the IGC .
Indeed , in the procedural framework for decision-taking in the new CFSP , as I envisage it , the Commission 's position will be that all cases relating to human rights will always be decided on the basis of qualified majority .
Over this there is no doubt : the Commission is quite against the idea of unanimity .
It is a problem of time .
If the MEDA regulation had been approved by qualified majority , it would have been a good precedent for the European Parliament and the Commission , but it would now provoke a negative attitude on the part of certain delegations to the IGC .
You might say : what is the link between these ?
Many of the tactical positions of the Member States are interlinked at this moment in time , and it would only need the principle of qualified majority to be applied just now for some of them to block everything .
We hope that , in the framework of the IGC , the human rights dossier will have its rightful place in terms of possible sanctions and the application of qualified majority and the Commission will stick to its previous position .
As for what was said earlier , I should like to make a few remarks , which might be bad for my health .
I hope that the mad cow miracle will take place in Florence and I hope that the MEDA miracle will also take place .
I hope the IGC will get off the ground in Florence .
We are expecting so much of Florence that I think we might be disappointed .
I should like to make this point : the situation for the Committee on Budgets and Budgetary Control has become so schizophrenic that I have to point it out to the European Parliament .
The Commission and the European Parliament reached agreement over financial programming for the next three years .
For this year , the Commission and the European Parliament reached agreement over a figure : 600 million ECU . It was the Council which increased that amount to 900 million ECU .
That is the truth . It is true , however , that the Council has denied us , by various blockages , the legal basis since last November , when the Barcelona Conference took place .
That will last until July .
In other words the same institution that increased the financial ceiling has also prevented us from spending a single ecu .
You will understand that , supposing that an miracle does take place in Florence , the Commission knows what decisions the Committee on Budgetary Control will take in October , and all unspent reserves will be cancelled , making the situation even more schizophrenic because we have been prevented from spending that money for lack of a legal basis .
Try and explain that to the Mediterranean non-member states - that not only are we not going to honour our commitments under an international agreement but , in October , we are going to lower the financial commitment too .
That is totally schizophrenic and it highlights how rotten this so-called CFSP instrument is .
I therefore hope that , on the basis of many concrete cases , there can be some lessons learned among the various institutions as to how to find a compromise solution for something that is clearly difficult to comprehend .
And understand this : I prefer the political sanction of being prevented from spending that money - although it seems unfair since we have not been allowed to - to a situation in which the Commission spends everything in September in order to escape the regulation 's guillotine clause .
That would be irresponsible of the Commission and so I am not going to propose that the Commission spend all of the 900 million ECU programmed for this year because this would not be possible , it would not be credible , it would not be serious and in the end it would kill of any remnant of credibility remaining in the MEDA programme .
In other words , the situation is very serious , Mr Barón .
I am not over-dramatizing .
We cannot go on working like this and I think that the TACIS and MEDA programmes both demonstrate perfectly , for the benefit of the IGC , that with the Treaty as it stands it is quite impossible to carry out serious and solid work on foreign policy in the European Union .
Madam President , I should first of all like to thank Commissioner Marín for the frankness and clarity of his answer .
As for his position on amendments that cannot be approved , I must nonetheless thank him for the Commission 's favourable stance vis-à-vis the most important one and I agree that this amendment does not only refer to this programme and this report , but is a fundamental political criterion for the Commission which the European Parliament has always agreed with ; decisions must always be taken by majority including those referring to the CFSP .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Workers ' health and safety in explosive atmospheres
The next item is the report ( A4-0158 / 96 ) by Mr Mather , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 95 ) 0310 - C4-0508 / 95-95 / 0235 ( SYN ) ) on minimum requirements for improving the safety and health protection of workers potentially at risk from explosive atmospheres .
Madam President , the Commission has put forward a basically sound and progressive proposal on improving the health and safety protection of workers who are potentially at risk from explosive atmospheres .
The directive is produced in accordance with the Framework Directive No 391 / 89 .
It places three main obligations on employers .
Firstly , they must prevent the formation of explosive atmospheres .
Secondly , they must prevent the ignition of any such atmospheres .
Thirdly , they must reduce the effects of explosions to a minimum .
Our report from the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment insists that employers must treat each of these three obligations as high priorities and observe each of them .
The Commission 's purpose in this report balances the need to protect workers with a balanced approach to regulation .
This really is an area where preventative measures can help to safeguard human lives .
In due course this sign - if I may show it to colleagues in the Chamber - will signify the presence of explosive atmospheres .
This black and yellow warning will help protect workers from unexpected explosive atmospheres and warn them to take care in those environments .
The directive is also necessary because in some Member States regulation is non-existent or at best rudimentary .
The Commission 's set of minimum standards is an effective one .
It is important to note that the consultative process on which the Commission embarked was both thorough and exhaustive and this has lent credibility to their conclusions .
All these points have been kept in mind by the committee when it reviewed the comments and suggestions of various associations and institutions and worker representatives and including the opinion of ECOSOC and other parliamentary committees .
I am glad to say that the committee voted unanimously for this report .
There are some important amendments including the one which highlights the triple responsibility of employers .
It is necessary to ensure that Member States which already meet minimum requirements should not be subject to excessive administrative provisions from such a directive .
Therefore the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment has suggested that the documentation and classification systems advocated by the Commission could instead be fulfilled in these circumstances by using current documents or practices at the Member State level .
This , however , does not amount in any way to a lessening of effective control and it is important to note that some of the committee 's amendments strengthen the Commission 's proposals , in particular the requirement in Amendment No 12 that employers should constantly monitor the protective systems , not just engage in an annual review but maintain constant supervision that protective measures are up to scratch .
Some amendments concerned the implementation periods which are appropriate for this directive .
It is clearly enormously important that small and medium-sized enterprises across the Union are given adequate time and information to bring into force effective preventative measures .
The committee has drawn again on ECOSOC opinions written by the workers ' group representative there to strengthen the proposals in the directive .
These are a few general points about the report and I look forward to hearing the observations of colleagues and of the Commissioner .
The importance of this directive must be clear to all of us and it rests in the fact that this measure can improve the prospects of health and safety in the workplace with the real possibility of saving lives across the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , I will begin roughly where the rapporteur left off .
I heartily agree that this regulation substantially augments the armoury of the European Union , of the Member States and of our people in the combating of workplace hazards .
And that is not the only point on which assent is forthcoming from this side .
In the case of this report , Commissioner , common points of agreement were found very easily , and we worked through it in the Committee on Social Affairs and , I venture to say , improved it , and finally approved it , unanimously , without any difficulty at all .
We think that this Commission proposal provides a significant advance in the definition of what is meant by an explosive atmosphere ; an advance , that is , which , as well as augmenting the armoury of the European Union and imposing equipment requirements that bring the approach that we have been working on for quite some time to completion , fills the gaps that exist at Member State level .
And let me remind the rapporteur that the need for a common approach , for common measures at the European Union level , in order to safeguard the safety of workers in what is , by definition , a dangerous environment , was never a source of contention .
We believe , Commissioner , that the amendments , as finally formulated after exhaustive but quite easy discussion in our committee , from which many compromise positions emerged , genuinely improve the regulation .
I must stress that the emphasis is placed where we believe it to be necessary ; that is to say , not on the officially large corporations , which are pretty obviously not a problem in that monitoring is easy , but on the many instances in which small and medium-sized enterprises have to deal with these phenomena on a daily basis and right alongside us .
In addition , I believe that the implementation timetable in our proposal strikes a good compromise between the immediate future and the time that undertakings actually need to adjust to the new equipment .
On behalf of my group I can inform you that we shall be very happy to vote for Mr Mather 's report .
Madam President , Mr Flynn , in businesses and factories in Europe there are often no instructions at all about how to handle explosive atmospheres , or at best they exist only in rudimentary form .
An explosive atmosphere is a highly inflammable mixture of air and flammable substances , and constitutes a potential danger to workers .
Therefore there is a need for a European directive .
Organizational measures and technical specifications should be laid down in order to improve protection for workers ' health and to ensure greater safety .
Graham Mather has done some excellent work here on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
What are the principles to be observed in order to avoid explosions and provide adequate protection ?
The formation of explosive atmospheres must be prevented .
The igniting of explosive atmospheres must be avoided .
The effects of explosions must be limited so that they no longer constitute a hazard .
By observing each separate principle , the necessary protection can be achieved .
Rooms in factories should be divided up into various zones , depending on the level of risk .
Employers must be aware of their duty to inform and involve their employees and their representatives , and to listen in good time to what they have to say .
The safety measures must be checked at least once a year , using suitable instruments and modern technology , and must be under the constant supervision of a responsible person , to be appointed on the basis of their professional training and experience .
In order to provide equality of opportunity for small and medium-sized enterprises , this directive must be implemented within a reasonable time .
Last but not least , a vade-mecum should be drawn up , in agreement with the Council , in order to explore the options for putting the minimum requirements into practice .
Our unanimity within the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment certainly sends a positive signal to workers , and also to the Commission and the Council .
Madam President , the Commission 's proposal regarding the minimum requirements for the protection of workers potentially at risk from explosive atmospheres is absolutely vital .
Far too many workers have been injured in explosions and far too many workers have died in explosions .
Stringent safety measures are required to prevent explosions .
Detailed regulations are also required in order to minimize the damages caused , if explosions occur despite safety measures .
Mr Mather pointed out in committee that regulation is required .
I am glad to hear that Mr Mather has come to this conclusion after reading the Commission 's proposal , considering that the British government formed by the party he represents has systematically opposed the health and safety regulations drawn up by the European Union .
It has been mentioned that the report was accepted unanimously by the committee .
I did indeed vote for the report in the final vote , but I could not support all of Mr Mather 's proposals , which unfortunately were accepted by the majority of the committee .
On many issues it would have been better to rely on the Commission 's expertise , instead of proposing apparent amendments .
These amendments do not however change the situation so much that it would be dangerous if they were accepted .
I cannot however recommend to my group the acceptance of Amendments Nos 1-8 , whereas I warmly support Mr Mather 's proposal to provide more information for employees , especially those working in small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , on the dangers caused by explosions .
On the whole I congratulate Mr Mather on this report .
First of all I should like to express my thanks to you , Mr Mather , for the remarkably good job you have done on this very technical matter .
The Commission is prepared to accept the majority of the proposed amendments , in total or in part .
Let me start with the four amendments which we find are not acceptable to the Commission : Amendments Nos 6 , 9 , 10 and 12 .
Amendment No 6 is unacceptable to the Commission since Article 9 covers requirements on both workplaces and work equipment .
Concerning Amendment No 9 the Commission considers that it introduces uncertainty regarding the entry into force of the directive .
However , the Commission supports the concept underlying the amendment and during the interinstitutional negotiations it will bear this in mind and seek to ensure that information is properly provided to all of the parties concerned .
Indeed the question of good information being supplied has been mentioned by many of those who have contributed .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 10 .
However it would consider modifying its original text by adding the phrase ' and the assessment of the anticipated effects ' in order to bring the text more into line with the ISO texts .
Regarding Amendment No 12 , the Commission thinks that this amendment renders the text too restrictive and imposes an unnecessary burden on industry , in particular on small and medium-size enterprises , and therefore it cannot be accepted .
Secondly , I would like to enumerate the five amendments that are partially acceptable to the Commission .
Regarding Amendment No 2 , the Commission feels that the first part of the amendment clarifies the text of the Commission 's proposal and therefore it can be accepted .
In contrast , the last paragraph runs contrary to the risk assessment philosophy as it imposes the application concurrently and simultaneously of all three basic principles , rendering the text unnecessarily stringent .
Regarding Amendment No 3 , the replacement of ' responsible supervision ' by ' appropriate supervision ' also reflects the opinion of ECOSOC and is acceptable to the Commission .
However , including training and education in this context is rather meaningless as far as supervision is concerned .
So the last paragraph of the amendment cannot be accepted since it adds nothing to what has already been laid down in Article 4 ( 4 ) of the proposal and Article 6 of Framework Directive 89 / 391 .
Regarding Amendment No 4 , the Commission considers that the amendment can be accepted with a slightly different wording in line with the Commission 's original text which specifies that the employer shall ensure that a health and safety plan is drawn up and kept up to date , otherwise the employer will be obliged to draw up the health and safety plan himself or herself , which would impose unacceptable constraints on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Regarding Amendment No 7 the Commission considers that the deletion of ' work equipment ' is a logical consequence of the wording of Article 9 , paragraphs 1 and 2 , and can be accepted .
However , workplaces already in use before entry into force of this directive have to comply with the minimum requirements specified in the proposal and not only those of Article 4 .
With respect to Amendment No 8 , the Commission is of the view that the deletion of the reference to Article 17 of the framework directive renders the text imprecise since the amendment does not specify who draws up the vademecum .
As a consequence it should be complemented with the words : ' by the Commission ' .


Lastly - and this was something that was mentioned both by you , Mr Mather , and by Mr Papakyriazis - I am pleased to inform you that there are five amendments which are totally acceptable to the Commission .
The Commission 's view is that these amendments , namely Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 11 and 13 , improve the original text by providing a better formulation and that Amendment No 14 in particular , by providing for early information , particularly to small and medium-sized enterprises , facilitates their adaptation to the requirements of that directive .
Indeed Mr Thomas Mann very rightly draws our attention to the basic principles involved here , which firstly , are , to prevent the formation , in the first instance , of such atmospheres , which requires certain elements of venting .
Then there is the question of preventing the ignition causing the explosion .
And we must , of course , always seek to take mitigating action if the explosion occurs .
These are the fundamentals of what we are seeking to do here .
Mr Papakyriazis , you are quite right to say that this is a good step forward .
We have to provide the right kind of information , as Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen said , because this is the way to move forward in the interest of protection of workers .
Thank you for your attention .
There are not many here but at the same time this is important legislation and we look forward to its early adoption .
Madam President , I wish to thank Commissioner Flynn for what he said and , indeed , all my colleagues for their remarks , which have been most helpful .
As the Commissioner said , this is a very technical measure indeed and the points which have arisen show that .
The committee , as Mr Papakyriazis said , has spent a great deal of time and paid enormous attention to detail .
I am most grateful for that and for the comments of my colleague , Thomas Mann .
I must say a word in response to Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen , who gave me a slightly mixed score on the amendments .
They are , indeed , stringent and , as my witness , I would call the Commissioner who , in his comments , observed that a number of the measures were slightly too stringent for the Commission 's taste .
So perhaps I am not stringent enough for Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen and a little too stringent for the Commissioner .
I hope the report is therefore pitched about right .
I will not abuse the hospitality of the Chamber to defend the honour of the UK Government in response to Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen 's comments , other than simply to say that it is the view of my colleagues in London that they assiduously comply with and support what they consider to be genuine health and safety measures , but take quite a firm view when health and safety procedures are used for other measures they do not think properly fall within that boundary .
Thank you once again for a debate which I hope will be helpful .
We look forward to taking this very important subject further .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Protection of workers against carcinogens
The next item is the report ( A4-0103 / 96 ) by Mrs Stenuis-Kaukonen , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 95 ) 0425 - C4-0433 / 95-95 / 0229 ( SYN ) ) amending for the first time Directive 90 / 394 / EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens at work .
Madam President , in this proposal by the Commission the objective is to set an occupational limit values for exposure to benzene , extend the scope of the directive and clarify the wording of two clauses in the directive .
This amendment is a clear improvement of the directive .
Extension of the scope of this directive is particularly important , since it brings medicinal preparations , cosmetics , waste , fertilizers , explosives and foodstuffs into the remit of the directive .
The choice of benzene as the first substance for which a limit value is proposed is justified , because benzene exposure is extremely widespread and its tolerance risks clearly stated .
Benzene exposure occurs for example in oil refineries , in connection with petrol transport and distribution , that is at service stations and garages , and in the petrochemical industry .
Users of power saws may also be exposed to benzene .
The Committee on Social Affairs proposes 16 amendments .
The European Parliament has already demanded that limit values be set for all carcinogens .
This has however not been implemented .
Although in its report the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment does support the Commission 's proposal to set a limit value only for benzene as the first substance , it makes a strong recommendation for the Commission to draw up a proposal as to how the required limit value could be set as soon as possible for all substances classified as carcinogens .
The Commission has already drawn up a priority list of substances for which limit values should subsequently be set .
The committee considers it important that limit values are also set for heavy metals without delay , and proposes that arsenic and certain arsenic compounds should top the priority list .
The committee also proposes that the Commission examines the possibility of simplifying the setting of limit values particularly for substances for which the limit values , based on scientific information and solid research , are purely health-based .
A considerable weakness in the Commission 's proposal is that skin absorption has not sufficiently been taken into account .
Although the consequences of skin absorption are highlighted in the report , no biological measurements are mentioned in the directive , nor any limit values .
In its report the committee requests that the concept of biological limit value is defined and that the Commission should present the biological tolerance limits for benzene without delay .
The definition of limit values in the report is taken from the Commission 's proposal for a directive on chemical substances .
The Committee on Social Affairs and Employment recommends that the definition for limit values as a concept is clarified .
In the Commission 's proposal the spatial measurements area is regulated using the expression ' the employee 's breathing area ' .
Legislation should make a clear distinction between two concepts , the air of the workplace and the breathing air of the employee .
The committee has consequently made an amendment to the clause in question , in line with a recent recommendation of the European committee on standardization , in which breathing area is defined as an area from which the worker takes his breathing air .
Exceeding this value would be prohibited .
The committee 's report also recommends that a common measuring practice is created for defining limit values for benzene content .
If the concept of limit values is defined in the form presented by the committee , there are no grounds for granting provisional exceptions as suggested by the Commission .
They are not satisfactory as legislation .
They are also in contravention of the health and safety regulations .
If the proposal of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment is accepted , that is the exceptions are removed , there is no need for Amendments Nos 18 and 19 proposed by the Committee on the Environment .
It should be emphasized that benzene is considered to be a substance for which no limit value can be set beneath which there would be no health risks .
Decrease in exposure however also decreases the risks .
The limit value of 1 ppm proposed by the Commission may , if exposed to over a working life , cause 0.5-6.6 more cases of leukemia per 1000 workers .
This involves a too great a risk , and therefore this limit value should be gradually lowered .
The Committee on the Environment has proposed a limit value of 0.1 ppm by the beginning of year 2001 , and I myself put this proposal forward to the Committee on Social Affairs , but it was not accepted .
I now propose a compromise of 0.5 ppm by the beginning of year 2003 , and hope that at least this could be accepted .
The benzene content can be lowered mainly by reducing the amount of benzene in petrol , and the Commission has today put forward a proposal , but I do not find it adequate .
I would like to thank the Commission for their willingness to co-operate , and I am happy that Ireland will bring this issue to the Council for consideration as soon as their period of presidency begins .
Madam President , the opinion of the Committee on the Environment is not very different from that of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
Our task will be easier as a result , but I should like to draw attention to a few aspects of this proposal for a Directive .
Firstly , we ought to be delighted that the field of application is widened so as to include all carcinogens present in the workplace - this is excellent - and also so that it takes into account all the possible ways in which workers can be exposed .
Fixing limit values for benzene is also a good thing .
What is less good is the fixing of the limit value at one part per million , that is , 3.25 mg per m3 on average over eight hours .
This value in fact corresponds to the present situation in all workplaces where benzene is used , except for certain types of enterprise related to the oil industry , precisely where the proposal aims to grant a derogation with a limit value three times as great .
When it has been known for a hundred years that benzene is a carcinogen , when it is also known that there is no value below which there is zero risk , in other words , as soon as one is exposed to benzene there is a risk of cancer , I think - along with the Committee on the Environment - that the proposal is completely inadequate .
The derogation is unacceptable .
It is entirely possible to limit the working time if , in the short term , it is technically impossible to prevent a worker who works eight hours from getting an exposure of more than one part per million .
Thus , the short term solution is to reduce his hours of work .
Another solution would be to reduce the benzene content of fuels .
We know that the United States tolerates only 1 % of benzene in petrol , while Europe accepts a maximum of 5 % .
Quite clearly therefore the need would be to make a major effort in that direction rather than to grant derogations which will only confirm an existing situation .
One last remark : since logically we should like it to be laid down that exposure to benzene should ultimately be reduced as much as possible , it is essential that , after the year 2000 - and this is the proposal from the Committee on the Environment - the limit value for exposure should be reduced by a factor of 10 , in other words to 0.1 part per million .
Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen has produced an insightful and thorough report which has been done practically through hard work in our committee .
She knows that I accept nearly everything that she has done , and we in the Socialist Group will accept the entire committee 's report as it was voted .
I have a particular direct question to put to the Commissioner on the limit values which have been set by the Commission at 1 ppm .
We accept them as being those which the industry can attain and can afford .
I wonder whether the Commissioner could confirm that any further reduction , which I believe is unlikely in the short term , is unrealistic as an objective and possibly too severe a burden on the chemical industry as a whole .
I do not believe it offers the hope of saving more lives , because I do not think in the short term that this will be achieved , but the possibility of the destruction of many small businesses .
Millions become ill each year in work-related illnesses and this report will have a direct effect on reducing that industrial carnage and misery .
That is why we need this report to succeed and we should underline any significant achievements and support them where they occur .
It is easy perhaps to dismiss it saying that we have not gone all the way down the line but we know that 5 ppm exists at the moment .
To come down to 1 ppm is a significant achievement .
I apologize for using the jargon but it is good solid progress .
I hope that all my colleagues in the House , wherever they might be tonight , will take a pragmatic and sincere approach to this problem in tomorrow 's vote .
No-one should play silly games with health and safety and I should say , without fear of reproach , that this report is one of the most important directives made in health and safety .
I warn anyone who thinks that he can play fast and loose with this kind of report that the gloves will come off .
The challenge is here to achieve a limit which has never been achieved before , and it is within our grasp to do it .
I want the report to be a success .
Let there be no difference between us and the Commission on this issue .
We want to return this jointly to the Council and we want the Council to accept our opinion .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen , the rapporteur , on her report .
This is a field about which she knows a great deal and which she understands thoroughly .
I regard the amendments to the Commission 's proposal which are proposed in the report and the amendments by the Greens as a necessary tightening up of the Commission proposal .
It should really be self-evident that we should do all we can to ensure that people 's health is protected and that they are not exposed to substances which we know to be highly carcinogenic , such as benzene , either at the workplace or anywhere else .
Where toxic substances and substances of this kind are concerned the first question should always be whether the substance or product is needed at all ; then we can ask whether it can be replaced by anything else . Only thirdly should it be a question of minimising risks .
It is of course extremely good that the Commission has tabled this proposal and that we are going to have a limit value .
However , I must at the same time express my regret that limit values have not also been set for all the other substances that have also been found to be highly carcinogenic .
It would be preferable for as many of these substances as possible to be got rid of and for limit values to be established for all those which we absolutely have to have .
The limit values should also be binding , with a maximum permissible level which may not be exceeded .
In this connection the Commission proposal should be formulated in such a way that there can be no ambiguity and no possibility of it being interpreted in different ways .
In order for limit values not to be merely empty figures , the directive should also indicate what will be required of employers if those values are exceeded or what sanctions or consequences will ensue if the maximum permissible levels are not respected .
I also believe it would be regrettable if the directive did not at this stage already lay down a considerably lower limit , exactly as the rapporteur has proposed .
It would be a pity if this compromise were to be reached , that is to say 0.1 ppm by the year 2000 .
After all , there are already countries which have in fact decided to implement it .
I do not therefore believe that it would be so impossible .
Nor can the Greens accept that an exception be made of the petrol sector , that is to say its storage and distribution , with a limit value of 3 ppm .
We will of course support this proposal but only with the amendments which the Greens have also tabled .
Madam President , cancer is a serious disease among the population .
It severely affects many people , and claims many human lives .
Leukaemia is one of the most serious forms of cancer ; we know from countless studies that there is a link between exposure to benzene and leukaemia .
It is therefore extremely welcome that the Commission is now seeking to introduce a higher degree of protection for workers .
There is a need for a directive on carcinogens , and for the scope of the current directive to be extended to include medicinal preparations , cosmetics and pesticides .
We should do what is politically and humanly possible to limit cancer and protect workers , and this can only be done by taking preventive measures .
So I do not think that introducing biological limit values is a good idea .
We should ensure that the working conditions as a whole are satisfactory , so that there is no reason to take measurements for individuals .
If we go that far , there is already a risk that people will have become ill .
We should measure for the workplace , and not for individuals .
The limit values should not stand alone , and we must take care not to focus exclusively on limit values .
The other measures in the framework directive should be given higher priority , and there needs to be an overall solution , providing for a safer working environment in general .
We must not allow any kind of dangerous substances or machinery in an undertaking .
If a substance is dangerous , it should be replaced by another .
I would therefore ask the Commission to step up the work in the Scientific Committee .
Things are moving far too slowly as regards the study of the various carcinogens .
There is a disgraceful lack of speed about this work , Mr Flynn .
It is not enough simply to check that the limit values are respected .
In some work situations , even the proposed limit value of 0.1 ppm would be too high .
The workplace should be completely safe and free of risk .
That should be our starting-point .
And lastly , I would commend the rapporteur on what is an excellent report .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mrs Stenius-Kaukonen for her good work on this proposal and for her support of the Commission for some time in the fight against occupational cancers .
The Commission appreciates it very much as I do personally .
The objectives of the Commission proposal are quite simple .
Firstly , we want to extend the scope of the directive to a whole series of preparations which the rapporteur has mentioned , such as medicinal preparations , cosmetics and pesticides .
Secondly , for the first time we want to set an occupational limit value for a well-known carcinogen , namely benzene .
Both these measures represent significant new initiatives in the Community 's efforts to provide protection for workers from occupational exposure to carcinogens and the Commission is grateful for the support given by Parliament to its proposal .
I am pleased to say that the majority of the amendments proposed are acceptable to the Commission .
However , I regret that Amendments Nos 11 , 14 and 15 cannot be accepted .
These call for the deletion of the temporary derogations for selective sectors of activities as far as the limit value for benzene is concerned .
These derogations , which were agreed by the social partners in the advisory committee , are necessary to ensure a little more time for some industrial sectors to comply with the provisions of the directive .
The Commission accepts that these derogations are necessary .
Obviously it would be ideal if all sectors were in a position to meet the revised requirements immediately .
However , in the case of these sectors it is simply not possible .
It is important to note that the derogations are restricted both with respect to the number of industrial sectors concerned and in time .
Thus the derogation will expire two years after the transposition by the Member State .
The Commission is ready to consider any proposal for a reduction of the time limit for benzene in the future .
The figures included in the present text , as I have already said , are the result of a comprehensive consultation with the advisory committee for safety , hygiene and health protection at work .
Any further reduction could be part of a further updating of the directive in the future .
Mr Skinner is right : this is real progress and he states the position correctly so far as limit values are concerned .
There are countries with the 5 ppm situation in existence so going down to 1 ppm is considerable progress .
Mr Skinner was quite right in what he said .
For this reason , Amendments Nos 17 and 20 cannot be accepted .
Amendments Nos 18 and 19 which intend to reduce the work-time for workers in the case of higher exposure level , even if scientifically sound , would be very difficult to put into practice in the situations provided for in the derogations .
For that reason the Commission cannot accept them .
The Commission considers that Amendment No 10 is not appropriate to the text .
It is superfluous , given the provisions of the Framework Directive 89 / 391 from which the current text is derived .
The Commission can understand the basis for Amendments Nos 3 and 4 .
These require simplification for setting limit values for carcinogens and ask for a plan on how to set up these values as quickly as possible for all carcinogens .
However , the simplification of the process involved not only included the Commission but also the social partners and the Council .
As far as Amendment No 4 is concerned , adequate scientific data is not available .
That is a key point and many of you will understand this , in particular the rapporteur .
It is not available just now for all carcinogens .
However , the Commission would like to assure the House that when the data is available it will not hesitate to act .
In addition , Amendments Nos 3 and 4 which refer to the recitals have no legal follow-up in the text of the decision .
This applies also to Amendment No 7 .
I consider that it would , therefore , be preferable to take note sympathetically of the ideas in these amendments without commitment at this point as to how we might put the principles into practice .
Amongst the amendments which are acceptable , I would in particular like to express my agreement with Amendment No 16 which requires a uniform , measuring procedure for benzene .
The Commission will find the appropriate wording to include that particular idea in the text .
I should like to thank all those who have contributed and say that we regard it as an extremely important amendment to Directive No 90 / 394 .
I am happy to say that the matter has been given priority by the Irish presidency and I sincerely hope we can progress it further in the immediate future .
I should like to thank you in my turn , Commissioner Flynn .
Mrs Stenuis-Kaukonen , you wish to comment ?
Madam President , perhaps a few comments would be in order .
The exceptions are not in my opinion necessary , not even for the two years proposed by the Commission , but the Commission has its own view on this and I hope that Parliament takes a different view .
Most importantly the benzene content in petrol should be lowered in order to achieve lower benzene contents in the air . I referred earlier today to the package on engine oils for cars accepted by the Commission , but unfortunately the target set for the content of benzene in petrol is 2 % , which is far too high .
If this target were to be set at 1 % , as many countries have already done , it would be considerably easier to reach the 1 ppm target particularly at service stations , where petrol of course is handled a lot .
In this connection I would merely like to point out that the scientific information on the dangers of all carcinogens - as we know there is not sufficient information regarding all substances - but clearly the Commission has not understood my intentions behind the proposal of this plan .
For the substances about which we have sufficient information a detailed proposal should be drawn up regarding when limit values should be set , and for those substances which require more research , this research should be carried out and targets should be set for the schedule of the research .
This would speed up these issues considerably .
It was said here today that it had taken too long to set these limit values .
I would like to remind you of the fact that several years ago now Parliament put forward measures on these issues .
On the whole , as I said before , I would like to thank the Commission for its co-operation on this issue and hope that we can now move forward .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.35 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I notice there are a lot of roll-call votes accompanying the Minutes .
I notice that yesterday you did not tell us who had asked for the roll-call votes .
It might help if today 's Minutes showed the average cost of one of those and possibly , by extension , the amount of trees we consume in a year , often for quite frivolous reasons .
Annual report of the Ombudsman ( Presentation )
The next item is the presentation by the European Ombudsman of his annual report for 1995 .
Madam President , distinguished Members of the European Parliament , I should like to begin by thanking you for creating time in a busy parliamentary schedule for the Ombudsman to present his report .
By establishing the practice that the Ombudsman presents his report in person , the European Parliament is following the best parliamentary traditions of those Member States that have established a classic Ombudsman institution .
I am convinced that this practice will prove beneficial in terms of our common ideals of an open and democratic European Union .
I would also like to draw attention to the serious and dedicated attitude that I have observed in the Committee on Petitions and in Parliament as a whole towards the rights of European citizens .
This is a promising sign for a fruitful and effective cooperation between the Ombudsman and the European Parliament , especially the Committee on Petitions , to the benefit of the European citizens .
This is the first annual report by the European Ombudsman .
At this early stage in the development of the office it is very important for me to have the views of you , the Members of the European Parliament , about what I have done so far and about what should be done .
Furthermore you have the opportunity to make observations on my report as well as on the report of the Committee on Petitions .
This will be of great value to me in my future work .
There have been voices saying that the Ombudsman 's office has not achieved results .
My annual report covers only a short period from September 1995 , when I took up my duties , to December 1995 .
The report also includes statistics about complaints up to the end of March .
Since then the situation has changed considerably .
My office has now been active in producing decisions and solutions .
As of yesterday my office had received a total of 647 complaints .
An examination of admissibility had already been completed in 599 cases , that is in over 90 % of the cases .
In 132 cases a preliminary inquiry has been initiated .
16 inquiries have been closed , 6 with a favourable solution for the complainant , 1 with a critical remark addressed to the institution .
In one instance the complainant dropped the case and in 8 cases no instance of maladministration was found .
My office was only able to start the work with the complainants at full speed from the beginning of this year .
The institution in question is usually given three months to comment on the complaint .
This time limit is mentioned in the statute .
After that the complainant has one month to react to what the institution has said .
Only last month , therefore , did it become possible to take further action in the first cases .
There has also been criticism of the high number of inadmissible cases .
You have to remember that the mandate ' maladministration in Community institutions and bodies ' is a limited one .
Only about 40 % of the complaints are within the mandate .
The statute of the European Ombudsman contains additional requirements before I can investigate the complaint .
The limited mandate given by the Treaty and the further restrictions in the statute which Parliament has laid down for me explains why only about 20 % of complaints reach the stage of an inquiry .
I am bound to act in accordance with these provisions .
The procedures of work and statistics are presented in the annual report .
I am sure that the figures will be much more favourable in the next annual report .
Article 8 ( d ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community creates two important rights for the European citizens , namely the right to petition the European Parliament and the right to complain to the European Ombudsman .
Citizens enjoy both these rights and it is for them to choose whether to address a petition to Parliament or apply to the Ombudsman .
However , it may not always be obvious to the citizen which course of action is more appropriate .
For this reason my office and the Committee on Petitions have cooperated closely to clarify our respective functions and to establish methods of cooperation .
There is a procedure for the transfer of cases between the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman with the agreement of the petitioner or complainant .
The Ombudsman does not , as a rule , deal with a matter pending before the Committee on Petitions unless the committee transfers it to the Ombudsman .
Nor does the Ombudsman deal with cases that have been examined and dealt with by the committee unless there are relevant new elements that justify recourse to the Ombudsman .
Complaints about decisions of the Committee on Petitions itself are considered inadmissible since its decisions , like those of Parliament , are political matters .
The right to petition created by the Treaty is a right to petition the European Parliament .
The Committee on Petitions acts on its behalf .
It is for Parliament to supervise the work of its own committee and , for example , to make sure that the committee 's resources are adequate to perform the tasks entrusted to it .
The mandate of the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman are different and complementary .
Together they constitute a unique possibility to promote the rights of the European citizens .
My experience of cooperation with the Committee on Petitions has been very positive .
I am ready to monitor the established procedure for cooperation .
I look for ways to enhance cooperation in favour of the rights of the European citizen .
The Ombudsman himself should act in as transparent a way as possible so that the European citizens can fully understand what he does and to set a good example to others .
For this reason it has been decided that the register of complaints is to be open to the public .
The complaint , the first opinion from the institutional body as well as the decision that finally closes this complaint will also be publicly available .
The inquiries following the first opinion from an institutional body are carried out in private , however , so as to ensure full cooperation and to promote a friendly solution in the case .
The complainant 's right to privacy must be respected .
If confidentiality is requested then the complaint and all the documents relating to it are treated as confidential .
The entry on the register , the decision that finally closes the complaint as well as any report or recommendations to the European Parliament will be made anonymous so that the complainant cannot be identified .
But the Ombudsman should do more than just seek transparency in his own office .
Part of his mission is to enhance the relationship between the Community institutions and bodies and European citizens .
The creation of the office was meant to underline the commitment of the European Union to an open , democratic and accountable administration .
The need for transparency in the Union is emphasized by Mrs Ahern in her report and by the Committee on Petitions in its motion for a resolution .
During my first months in office I have received a number of complaints concerning public access to documents held by Community institutions and bodies .
The Commission and Council have already issued a code of conduct about public access to documents they hold .
But I have no information that any other Community institutional body has adopted general rules on public access to documents .
I have therefore launched an initiative by asking the other Community institutions and bodies to inform me about the position in respect of public access to documents .
The initiative covers all institutions and bodies except the Council and Commission .
For example , it covers Parliament , the Court of Justice but only in relation to administrative documents , the Court of Auditors , the European Investment Bank and the European Monetary Institute .
I hope that this initiative will be well received and that it will lead to more transparency in these institutions and bodies .
Creating a new office takes time .
So far the establishment of the office of the European Ombudsman has proceeded relatively smoothly .
That is in large part because of the helpful and cooperative attitude shown by the European Parliament and its administration , by the Commission and the Council and by the other Community institutions and bodies .
The proportion of inadmissible complaints I have received is relatively high .
European citizens need time and information to understand what the Ombudsman can and cannot do .
For this reason , a leaflet about how to complain to the European Ombudsman has been published .
It includes a standard form on which the complaint can be made .
The leaflet is being widely distributed through the national offices of Parliament and the Commission , the offices of the national ombudsmen and similar bodies and through a large number of organizations involved in European affairs .
Since last week the text of the leaflet is also available on the Internet .
There is nothing unusual about inadmissible complaints .
Ombudsmen at all levels receive many of them .
Whenever I am unable to deal with a complaint , I try to advise the complainant to go to another body which can help .
Very often the advice is to petition the European Parliament .
In some cases it is appropriate to refer complainants to the Commission as the guardian of the Treaties .
The Commission 's own complaints procedure has great potential to help European citizens to protect their rights under Community law when national authorities are involved .
I hope that this important activity of the Commission will become better known to the public .
Finally , I attach great importance to cooperation with national ombudsmen and similar bodies .
Such cooperation in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity will be of great importance in promoting the full implementation of Community law at all levels of the Union .
A seminar is being organized next September here in Strasbourg to discuss with them the principles for such cooperation and to agree on common activities in the future .
The work of the European Ombudsman is only one element in the process for ensuring that European citizens enjoy the benefits of an open , democratic and accountable administration .
The Ombudsman 's office can succeed only if the Community institutions and bodies are firmly committed both to these principles and to the full cooperation with the Ombudsman .
From my experience so far I believe that this commitment exists .
I look forward with confidence to continuing to develop a partnership with the other Community institutions and bodies to protect the rights of European citizens .
Madam President and Members of the European Parliament , thank you for your attention .
( Loud applause )
Annual report of the Ombudsman ( Debate )
The next item is the report ( A4-0176 / 96 ) by Mrs Ahern , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual activity report ( 1995 ) of the Ombudsman of the European Union ( C4-0257 / 96 ) .
Madam President , I very much welcome the statement of the European Ombudsman here today and thank him for the serious cooperation we have had in this Parliament , particularly with the committee responsible , the Committee on Petitions , over the last year while he has been establishing his office .
The Treaty on European Union created this new office of Ombudsman of the European Union and it ensures that the new body can autonomously defend citizens against maladministration in the Union institutions and bodies .
The Ombudsman is nevertheless a parliamentary Ombudsman and his presence here today is an indication of that .
He is appointed by Parliament , he reports to Parliament and he cooperates , of course , with Parliament , and we want Parliament very much to cooperate with him .
In particular , we welcome his powers to investigate : it is a useful protection for the people of Europe against maladministration in the Council , the Commission and Parliament itself .
People have rightly said that the institutions are closed , elitist and impenetrable to the citizens .
The challenge now for the Ombudsman is to shake up the Commission , the Council and , indeed , Parliament , so that the closed shop of the European Union institutions can become open for anyone to see .
The European Union is a complex of opposing tendencies .
The conflict between the idea of Europe as a collaboration of sovereign states and the ideal of a federal Europe has retarded the development of modern , democratic and citizen-friendly European Union institutions .
If we are to create such democratic institutions , the next step is to make access to information an explicit commitment of the institutions , along the lines of the code of conduct concerning access to documents .
In this report before you today we have asked you to endorse this explicit commitment from the institutions and see that it is carried out .
We already have a commitment by Mrs Gradin , the Commissioner responsible , that she will pursue this very strongly during the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Committee on Petitions is the parliamentary organ to which the Ombudsman submits his reports and which needs to establish a complementary working relationship in view of their various responsibilities on petitions and complaints of the citizens .
In practice , this means an additional role for the committee in overseeing the functions of the Ombudsman in relation to Parliament .
I now wish to comment more on his report .
The first part of the report is particularly useful since it explains the conditions in which a complaint can be introduced and the procedural decisions taken by the Ombudsman for dealing with complaints .
Thus the report illustrates who can complain - citizens or residents - against whom - the institutions and bodies of the Community - and here we can note that the Ombudsman himself constitutes a further body of the Community .
About what ?
A definition of maladministration is wisely not attempted .
I am sure that we shall have very interesting reports in due course as to exactly what constitutes maladministration when the Ombudsman reports concretely to us on issues that he has not been able to resolve .
Of course , his ability to resolve complaints by mediation is an important aspect of his work .
The procedure followed : complaints declared admissible and prima facie founded are communicated to the institution or body in question , which is asked to give a first opinion .
Once this has been considered , together with any comments by the complainant , a solution is sought between the two parties .
If , after appropriate draft recommendations from the Ombudsman , this mediating role fails , then the Ombudsman reports to the European Parliament and Parliament will then take appropriate action and , hopefully , the institution concerned will take appropriate action as well .
The power of the Ombudsman to conduct own-initiative inquiries is the key to the opening up of the institutions .
For example , he may look into the files of yourself , Madam President , Mr Santer , President Hänsch , any Member of Parliament or member of the Commission , as he sees fit .
This form of inquiry may acquire far greater importance in the years to come to the benefit of the democratic functioning of the Union and , therefore , of Parliament and citizens .
To conclude , we hope that the special cooperation which we have established with the Ombudsman will continue in the years to come .
Madam President , Mr Ombudsman , Madam Rapporteur , as the Treaty states , the Ombudsman 's annual report is made to Parliament .
Perhaps you will allow me , nevertheless , to tell you , on behalf of the Commission - and in particular of my colleague , Mrs Anita Gradin , whom I am representing - the Commission 's view of this institution and of the work it has done .
It is obvious that with the creation of the office of Ombudsman , the people of Europe and the concept of European citizenship , have been substantially enriched since the sound administration of the European institutions , the transparency and the fairness of their operations correspond to fundamental rights of the people of Europe , and the European Ombudsman can help to guarantee that those rights are effectively exercised in practice .
The Commission feels sure that with the European citizen able to exercise control through the Ombudsman over how our administration works , we can only be encouraged to work better , to put right our shortcomings and our mistakes and of course to work more transparently .
The Ombudsman 's report quite rightly states that harmonious relations between the Commission and the Ombudsman himself are fundamental , amongst other things because - as is also stated in his report - the great majority of the complaints made to the Ombudsman concern the Commission or its work .
The Commission has also had an opportunity to reply to the requests for information concerning complaints querying the Commission 's administration or its day-to-day running .
On behalf of the Commission I think I can say that the Commission has replied without holding anything back , in a spirit of transparency and respecting the prerogatives of every institution .
Although some problems have arisen in a limited number of cases -in particular as regards the length of time it takes to get a reply from the Commission - I can assure you that the Commission has undertaken to overcome those problems without delay .
I should like to tell you that the Commission , knowing that the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , is particularly concerned about the problem of delays , has taken the appropriate measures to ensure that the time-limits fixed for replying when a complaint reaches the Ombudsman 's office are observed .

I should like to end by congratulating Mr Södermann , the rapporteur and the European Parliament on behalf of the Commission and of course by wishing Mr Södermann the best of success in his task of protecting citizens ' rights and assuring him of the Commission 's full collaboration .
Rest assured that we shall remedy the shortcomings you have pointed out in your report , which we think in fact will be an easy mater .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists I want to congratulate the European Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , on his excellent first report .
I also want to congratulate the Committee on Petitions ' vice-chair and rapporteur , Mrs Ahern , on her excellent report on behalf of the committee .
The Ombudsman has proved to be a serious , assiduous and determined person committed to protecting the rights of the people of the European Union .
An excellent working relationship has already developed over the past months between Mr Söderman and myself , who at the moment hold the office of chair of the Committee on Petitions .
I am sure such a relationship will continue with any future chair as well .
The Committee on Petitions is , as has been said , the committee responsible both for relations with the European Ombudsman and for monitoring the work of the European Ombudsman .
The European Ombudsman is independent and so we , as the Petitions Committee , do not interfere in the ongoing investigations of complaints .
When in future the committee gets reports of maladministration relating to the outcome of individual complaints we will discuss them with interest .
We welcome his initiative to call for greater access to public documentation of European Union organizations .
The work of the European Ombudsman and the Petitions Committee is complementary .
One deals with allegations of maladministration in European Community institutions and bodies , the other , the Committee on Petitions , deals with the general area of European Union fields of activity , particularly non-implementation by Member States of European Union law and proposals to improve European Union policies .
Turning to the amendments , the Socialist Group will be opposing all the amendments because we think the report is excellent as it stands .
Mr Pex 's amendments in particular are not helpful and were rightly rejected by the Petitions Committee .
They turn a report on the Ombudsman 's report into a report on relations between the Ombudsman and the Petitions Committee .
In particular Amendment No 4 encourages the Ombudsman to challenge decisions of the Petitions Committee taken on so-called improper grounds .
How are we to decide if members of the Petitions Committee have taken a decision on improper grounds ?
Presumably , if a Member disagrees with a majority decision of his colleagues or if he is too busy elsewhere to take part in a decision of the committee with which he disagrees .
Finally , and more positively , I want to make it clear on behalf of the Socialist Group that we will support the work of the European Union Ombudsman , respecting his independence , with friendly criticism where appropriate , but primarily backing him and assisting him in pressing the European Union institutions and bodies to implement the recommendations in his reports particularly when he has found maladministration .
He can be assisted by the democratically elected representatives of the people in ensuring that his work in combating maladministration in the European Community is supported strongly .
Madam President , on behalf of the European People 's Party I too am pleased to congratulate Mr Söderman on his first report to Parliament and Mrs Ahern on her report .
The post of European Ombudsman is one of the most valuable and least controversial fruits of the Treaty of Maastricht .
Since national posts of ombudsman originated in Scandinavia , we are particularly fortunate in having not just an experienced postholder in Mr Söderman but an ombudsman who brings all the accumulated experience of Finland to the exercise of such a role .
It is important that the institutions of the Union serve the European citizen and not the other way around .
That is what makes the post of ombudsman so valuable .
Citizens need to know there is someone , a real human being , who will take their side if bureaucracy threatens to ignore the rights of the citizen .
Experienced parliamentarians in this House will have no difficulty in understanding the concept of maladministration and will easily know what is the ombudsman 's sphere of responsibility .
MEPs will appreciate the different responsibilities of national ombudsmen , the European Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .
However , these are not easy concepts and that is why a maximum of simple , colourful publicity is required to explain in straightforward terms how the ombudsman can help citizens and how his role differs from the Petitions Committee .
Mr Söderman referred to his pamphlet , ' How to Complain to the European Ombudsman ' .
In terms of simplicity and colourfulness , I give this a mark of 2 out of 10 .
I have received tax demands that are more colourful and more inspiring than this document .
Just compare it for instance with the document I picked up last night at the party celebrating the wines of Provence : that makes me want to drink a glass of Provençal wine , I am not too sure this pamphlet does much for the European Ombudsman .
Do we not have anybody within the European Community , better graphic artists , who could give the boost that is needed to bring this down to a personal level ?
To turn to Mrs Ahern 's report , I welcome Amendment No 1 , which refers to the use of new technology to apply to the ombudsman .
We need to make use of modern and easy means of communication , but please do not make that an excuse for having dismal paper means for publicising and contacting the ombudsman .
Cooperation , communication between the ombudsman and the Petitions Committee , is also very important if we are to protect more fully our citizens ' rights .
In that respect I believe Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 help the report by underlining the complementary role of ombudsman and Petitions Committee .
I would add that this House , as one of the institutions of the European Community , should certainly not be shy of allowing the ombudsman to investigate our procedures .
In conclusion , and on reflection , I give the ombudsman 9 out of 10 for his first report , but I have to say I reduce the score for his pamphlet to 1 out of 10 and plead with somebody to make that more attractive so that the citizens know that they have the ombudsman and Parliament on their side .
Madam President , in my view , this report by Ms Ahern has many merits : the first being the ability to get right to the heart of the Ombudsman 's report and to do so with great accuracy ; meantime the Ombudsman , for his part , has presented to us a document that is simple and relevant - a document that is accessible to all .
It is right to stress that , as Ms Ahern said , this report has an educational purpose also : explaining to us what the Ombudsman is and , above all , how he can help all of the citizens of the Union .
The report given to us by Ms Ahern is also excellent because it is concise .
I think , however , that the final text could be improved , and that is why my group will be voting for all of the amendments that have been tabled and which have the effect of making the text more transparent and closer to what citizens are demanding , that is above all to be able to understand and participate .
When it comes to citizens , I should really like to find a rather more up-to-date way of bringing this Institution to their attention , and when I refer to ' citizens ' I of course mean not only those born in the Union but also those who have come here to live and work and who may find it more difficult to have access to the Ombudsman .
I wish you well , Mr Söderman !
Madam President , I should also like to express my thanks for the Ombudsman 's activity report and the report by Mrs Ahern .
The former is called an annual report , but in fact it covers three months , since the Ombudsman has not actually been in office that long , although I think he has achieved a good deal in the time he has been working .
I also think that the Ombudsman has adopted the right approach to his work , namely dealing with citizens ' complaints and in particular not making political capital at the expense of the institution - the Union as such - even if that would have been very easy , but in the long term not very likely to improve the understanding of the Union 's work .
Having said that , I would agree with Mr Perry that one might perhaps wish to see a rather more colourful form of publicity for the Ombudsman , but we can try to provide some inspiration for that in the course of the coming year .
I shall now turn to the amendments , the budget and the question of the office in Brussels .
We can support Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 and 5 .
I am not sure if these are particularly necessary , but on the other hand they do no harm .
As for Amendment No 3 , I am sorry that the Conservative group has not made the amendment somewhat clearer .
In a way , we agree that it should be possible to make use of Article 169 , but we do not think that involving the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman is particularly appropriate , and so we shall be abstaining on this amendment .
When it comes to the budget , the Ombudsman has of course like everyone else had some tough discussions with the Committee on Budgets .
These will no doubt continue , and I would advise the Ombudsman to explain as well as he possibly can at present the need for an increased staff and also what kind of tasks it will not be possible to carry out unless sufficient budgetary resources are made available .
As regards the office in Brussels , the discussions will be resumed .
We understand the Ombudsman 's views on the need for an office in Brussels in order to make his work in Strasbourg more effective , and in the course of the coming year we shall therefore be pleased to discuss the scope for setting up such an office , without creating any conflict with the location in Strasbourg , where the Ombudsman himself also wishes to remain .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the annual report of the Ombudsman , Mr Södermann , covering the year 1995 , has two features which I think warrant attention , namely that this is the first report of the Ombudsman to the European Parliament and that the period which it covers is very short .
Those two features give this document a basically pedagogic role , as the Ombudsman was no doubt aware when he was drafting it .
Therefore , apart from serving as an instrument of information and as a balance sheet , Mr Södermann 's report makes an important contribution to our knowledge both of the new European institution and of its objectives and the means of access to it for bringing about its intervention .
But in spite of the short period covered by the report , Mr Södermann 's previous experience as Ombudsman in Finland has enabled him to present us with a remarkable ethical study on actions taken , which rightly lead Mrs Ahern , in the excellent report she presents on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , to congratulate Mr Södermann on his interesting and detailed report .

Special mention should be made of the considerations put forward by the European Ombudsman with regard to his relations with the Committee on Petitions on the basis of a clear definition of the scope of the powers of each , laying the foundations for a fruitful collaboration which in practice has already begun , as Mr Newman , who speaks with greater authority than I do , has reminded us .
Everything shows , Madam President , that this new parliamentary institution set up in the Maastricht agreements , has started off in the right direction .
Now , in the fresh modification of the Treaties expected at the outcome of the present Intergovernmental Conference , we must progress to a more open and democratic operation of all the European institutions , as Mrs Ahern 's report states in its conclusions .
Finally , Madam President , it is appropriate to say that , if Mr Södermann 's report is widely publicized , it will not only help to put an effective instrument in the hands of European citizens in the event of possible cases of maladministration in the European field , but it will in addition help to widen and consolidate the identity of European citizenship .
For all those reasons I think the European Parliament must express its entire agreement with the contents of the European Ombudsman 's First Annual Report and must encourage Mr Södermann to keep on working with the same sensitivity and the same meticulousness as he has done so far .
Madam President , I must extend my congratulations and those of the Green Group to the European Ombudsman , Mr Sönderman , for his report , and also to Ms Ahern for the report she has presented on behalf of the Committee on Petitions .
This first report by the Ombudsman clarifies , albeit within the limits of the period during which he was in office last year , those problems which citizens might encounter in seeking access to this new body of the European Union .
I wish also to stress the importance of the interaction between the European Ombudsman and the European Parliament via its Committee on Petitions in guaranteeing those rights of citizens which these two Institutions are required to protect .
This is an important step towards the concept of European citizenship and also a way of guaranteeing transparency and the proper functioning of the institutions of our European administration .
The concept of citizenship is , as we know , also being considered by the Intergovernmental Conference that is currently under way , and I think it important for the purpose of giving specific definition to this concept of European citizenship that the Ombudsman 's report should be presented to the Intergovernmental Conference which should then take it properly into consideration .
I therefore think we should make an effort to make all Europe 's citizens aware of the possibility they have of approaching both the Ombudsman , by petitioning him , or Parliament , by submitting a petition to the committee set up for that purpose .
I think it important to explain to Europe 's citizens when it is appropriate to approach the Ombudsman and when to approach the Committee on Petitions .
That is something we should all try to do and that is why the Greens are completely in favour of and will be voting for this report .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate the Ombudsman on this first report .
Admittedly , three months is far too short a period to draw up an initial balance sheet for what is a completely new activity for our institutions .
Even so , I think it is worth emphasizing a number of points that clearly suggest that the citizens of the Union will have access to an independent , transparent yet discreet institution to which they can turn in the event of a conflict with the European administration and when they feel their rights have been infringed .
Mrs Ahern , in her excellent report , carefully analyses these three conditions , and I approve her efforts without reservation , especially when she outlines the cooperation that will need to exist between the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman .
That leaves , Mr Söderman , the massive problem of informing the public , creating public awareness , of this new institution whose work you are pioneering today .
This seems to me to be the most important factor .
First , a suggestion .
Would you not agree that we could make things easier for those who want to apply to you by enabling them to do so through the channels provided by the new technologies ?
My group has tabled an amendment to that effect , and I hope honourable Members will support it .
I believe that by enabling citizens and residents of the Union to address the Ombudsman telematically we shall make it easier for them , in practice , to exercise their rights .
It would be a step forward - an advance .
In any case , providing information to Europe 's citizens on the institution you represent is a major factor and I must admit that I myself would like to have more information on how you are planning to publicize your service to that public .
I know , Mr Söderman , that you have had some experience of this function in your own country , but it would be unfortunate to see your strengths changed into weaknesses because Europe 's citizens have neither the experience nor the knowledge of the institution of mediation that they were able to acquire in their own Member States .
However , the institution of an Ombudsman and his recognition have a very important part to play in the emergence of that European citizenship which is so close to our hearts .
And Articles 8 ( d ) , 138 ( d ) and ( e ) of our Treaty will only really justify their existence if European citizens become aware that their institutions - of which , incidentally , they know very little - can also safeguard them against maladministration or injustice .
Now , you have a leading part to play .
Remember that you are the first Ombudsman , and that as such it is up to you to give that fine institution its initial image .
However , Mr Söderman , we have no doubt that you are fully aware of that responsibility .
Madam President , Mr Söderman , ladies and gentlemen , although the first report by the European Ombudsman covers a period of only three months it does supply us with some very useful indications about this new institution and about the way in which Mr Söderman intends to fulfil his mandate , with the benefit of his experience as a national Ombudsman .
I am particularly pleased by the close cooperation that is developing between the Ombudsman and Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
Even so , there is one question I would like to raise which is of the greatest interest to me : where is the Ombudsman going to exercise his function ?
At the time of his election , Mr Söderman clearly stated his intention of basing his secretariat in Strasbourg , the seat of the European Parliament .
This decision was in line with the spirit of the Treaties .
Yet we have now learnt , a few days ago , that the Ombudsman has asked the Committee on Budgets to increase his operating budget by 150 % , virtually doubling his staff from 10 to 17 jobs .
It would be easy enough to understand this increase , ladies and gentlemen , if it occurred in the course of the normal growth of his activities , but it seems that the real purpose of this request is gradually to transfer the office of the Ombudsman from Strasbourg to Brussels , opening up a second secretariat in the Belgian capital from 1997 .
So , as I know that Mr Söderman is to give a press conference very shortly , I would like to know whether this step really does form part of his intentions and what the reasons for it are .
If this trend were to become established , ladies and gentlemen , we would once again be seeing an anomaly in the matter of the seat and of the institutions and organs of the European Union , and in that case my group would be firmly opposed to it .
Madam President , the European ombudsman , Mr Jacob Söderman , states in his concluding remarks to the annual activity report for last year currently under discussion , that the formal duties and the qualifications of the Ombudsman are only one factor in a process whose object is to guarantee that the advantages of an open , democratic and responsible administration are made available to European citizens .
In his opinion the Ombudsman and his office can succeed in this only if the Community 's bodies and institutions are totally committed to these principles and to co-operation with the Ombudsman .
Having read these documents I conclude that the Ombudsman believes that such a commitment has already been made , even though his term of office is still too short to make a reasoned assessment .
The European Ombudsman deals particularly with maladministration .
From this point of view he has the opportunity to bring his influence to bear on the development of sound administration .
It is the constitutional right of each citizen of the Union to file complaints with the Ombudsman concerning the activities of Community bodies and institutions , if the complainant feels that he has been subject to neglect , carelessness , faulty advice , procedural fault , discrimination , unnecessary delay or unfair action .
The annual activity report clearly states how the Ombudsman 's office works and what citizens should do if they want to take matters to the Ombudsman for consideration .
The Ombudsman 's policy of advising and guiding citizens is positive and especially important during the first stages of a new institution .
The proposal of the rapporteur concerning widespread distribution of the annual activity report in the Member States should be supported .
The guidebook written by the Ombudsman serves the same purpose .
It is excellent news that the guidebook has been published so soon , and its content is in my view good .
I feel that we should encourage citizens of the European Union and also citizens from outside the Union staying in the area as well as enterprises , associations and communities in the Union to familiarize themselves with the Ombudsman institution and if necessary to use the services it provides .
I would also like to point out that the activity report reflects the Ombudsman 's search for co-operation .
An absolute precondition for reliability is that the Ombudsman in his activity is independent .
Despite this , co-operation is also required .
Parliament should support the Ombudsman in his work .
I would like to congratulate the committee and thank the Ombudsman for his valuable efforts .
Madam President , the Ombudsman Mr Jacob Söderman 's first annual activity report is , as Mrs Ahern points out in her report , most interesting and informative .
The annual report should definitely be circulated as widely as possible , since it includes a clear description of the area of authority of the European Ombudsman and thus forms an important source of information for all citizens .
Since for practical reasons it will probably not be possible to distribute the annual activity report widely , it is much appreciated that the Ombudsman as one of his first tasks has prepared a guidebook on ' How to complain to the European Ombudsman ? ' to be distributed to all citizens .
The guidebook has been published in all Community languages , and is available both at the national ombudsmen 's offices and at Community offices .
Increased information will rapidly lead to more complaints .
This is a fact that should be taken into consideration when resources are allocated .
From the point of view of legal protection it is essential that the complainant receives a reply within a reasonable time .
Therefore the Ombudsman 's office should have personnel in proportion to the amount of complaints .
The Ombudsman 's office is located in Strasbourg , but the Ombudsman hopes to get an additional office , with staff , in Brussels .
The statistics concerning complaints from March 1996 shows that of 86 complaints taken up for consideration 78 concerned the European Commission .
It would therefore seem natural to have the Ombudsman 's office in Brussels , even if Parliament 's official domicile is Strasbourg .
The list of tasks to be performed by the Ombudsman states that it is his duty to continue to implement efficiently citizens ' rights at all levels of Union administration and a openness of the work carried out by Community bodies and institutions .
The first annual activity report suggests that good results will be achieved in both areas .
Madam president , I agree that the Ombudsman 's report is important . I think , though , that his initiative to promote transparency is not enough to solve the problems that could compromise the importance of his action vis-à-vis European citizens .
The first aspect concerns limitations stemming from the Treaty . Indeed , the Ombudsman has no powers to assess those acts of Member States that are tantamount to maladministration of Community law .
The second aspect concerns the public visibility of the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , and his linkage with national Ombudsmen and national parliaments .
The people of our countries must be able to see that there is an Ombudsman and that he can receive their complaints .
This is vital .
I think that the fact that the Ombudsman and his department are stranded in Strasbourg , far away from the other Community institutions and their day-today operations , and from the European press specialising in Community affairs , will do nothing to help that visibility .
Mr Söderman , I wish you all the best in your new job and , in particular , as a Portuguese Member of this Parliament , I hope that you will deal properly with your first Portuguese cases , because the way in which you deal with them will be important for convincing the people of my country that it is worthwhile calling on your services .
Madam President , I think that democracy in the European Union was improved and its citizens ' rights safeguarded when it was decided in the Maastricht Treaty to create the European Ombudsman as an institution .
The Ombudsman is vital if we are to ensure that our citizens are more closely associated with the Union and that they can present their grievances when they feel they are being wronged .
With the appointment by the European Parliament of Mr Söderman from Finland , I believe we have chosen very much the right man for the job .
Mr Söderman has only been in office for a short while .
He has dealt with 131 of the 298 complaints which he received in 1995 .
On the other hand , I think that it is a matter of some concern that 80 % of these 131 cases had to be dismissed because they did not relate to matters falling within the Ombudsman 's terms of reference .
It is essential for our citizens to be aware of the Ombudsman 's existence , and I therefore fully support the rapporteur 's proposal for the Ombudsman 's report to be distributed widely .
Finally , I would call on all the EU institutions and others to show respect for the Ombudsman , and to demonstrate all the willingness to cooperate which is needed for his work .
Madam President , I , too , wish to thank and congratulate Mr Söderman .
I congratulate him for presenting us , initially in the Committee on Petitions and now here , with a report which is painstaking , comprehensive , analytic and helpful .
I must not forget also to mention the important contribution of Mrs Ahern , our rapporteur , in presenting us with her report which we approved unanimously in the Committee on Petitions .
I venture to describe this report , in a word , as historic , because it is the first report submitted to the European Parliament by the first European Ombudsman .
I believe that the account it provides , together with the actions initiated by the Ombudsman and the presence and influence that he has brought to bear since the post was introduced , vindicate and re-endorse the confidence shown by the European Parliament and give the best possible guarantee of the institution 's future .
The institution is totally consistent with and fundamental to the ideal of the European Union ; because , in the final analysis , it is the European Union that concerns us , rather than the individual institutions .
In my view , the confirmed , fundamental right of the European citizen to submit a petition and the real entitlement to direct participation and influence via the bringing of life 's experiences to the European Union 's attention for the purpose of achieving change are two hugely important pillars .
I , also , agree that , for these reasons , the institution must be given publicity and made more widely known .
Not as a pretext for boosting our prestige , but in order that we can demonstrate convincingly that we are fighting for full democracy in the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Traffic in radioactive substances
The next item is the report ( A4-0066 / 96 ) by Mr Schulz , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the illicit traffic in radioactive substances and nuclear materials ( COM ( 94 ) 0383 - C4-0227 / 94 ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in presenting this report today I have come to the end of a very major undertaking .
I drew up this report following a communication from the Commission on the illicit traffic in radioactive substances and nuclear materials in the European Union .
Let me say from the outset that the Commission report is incomplete .
It is tendentious and does not match up to the real threat posed by illicit traffic in nuclear materials in the European Union .
For this traffic supposedly and allegedly occurs not just in the European Union but worldwide .
My job - and I have considered the question in depth - was to establish what the real situation is .
Is it indeed the case that nuclear material is constantly being stolen in all CIS and Central and Eastern European nuclear facilities ?
Is it indeed the case that organized crime , terrorists , are those most involved in procuring themselves these nuclear materials ?
Is it really the case that there is a flourishing traffic in these materials , which allows organized crime to make a great deal of money ?
The answer is that this may be the case but it is scarcely possible to prove it .
I am saying that from the outset because we must draw a distinction between fact and fiction when we look at the question of illicit traffic in nuclear materials .
We must distinguish between fiction , such as science fiction and thrillers , and the description of fact .
The first area , science fiction , is no doubt more interesting than prosaic fact .
However it is to the latter that I will devote particular attention today .
There are real potential threats that must not be ignored but have to be taken seriously .
Criminal elements appear again and again , there are constant attempts by dubious business people to procure plutonium , uranium or some other nuclear material and to sell it to whoever is interested in order to make themselves money .
But is this so easy to do ?
Can a Spanish , German or Italian criminal just take a quick trip to Russia , fill his suitcase full of plutonium , fly off to another country and open his case at some black market and say : ' take a look inside , I 've got 400 grammes of plutonium in there , you can have it for DM 2 million ' ?
That is not possible !
Why not ?
Who in this Chamber , except perhaps Mr Gmelin , is able to tell plutonium from household dust at a glance ?
What gun-runner , with no scientific knowledge , is in a position to say just like that : ' this is highly enriched , weapons-grade uranium ' ?
Who is in a position to set up this kind of deal with the necessary equipment and scientific knowledge ?
The target group we had to investigate , i.e. , ordinary organized crime , which attempted to deal in these materials in the European Union , was not in a position to do so , because it had neither the necessary scientific training nor the necessary technical know-how needed for concluding deals of that kind .
That leads to an important insight .
Traffic in these materials is only interesting for buyers who really have the necessary technical and scientific know-how for then achieving a certain objective with the material they have bought .
We have to devote particular attention to them , for these interested buyers do exist .
There are of course countries that want to by-pass the Non-Proliferation Treaty and carry out nuclear weapons programmes .
They will of course attempt to procure material for carrying out their illegal nuclear weapons programmes by any means they can .
They may also procure it in the grey area between legal , state action and illegal criminal activity .
The secret services normally operate in that grey area .
Let me say that quite plainly !
I only wonder what would induce a country that is setting up an illegal nuclear weapons programme to instruct a bunch of criminals to procure plutonium in the Central and Eastern European countries or the CIS states and then actually to smuggle it through a country like the Federal German Republic which has high-level technical precautions at the airports , the ports and the borders , where there are authorities , where there are institutions that have the necessary technical equipment for checking whether someone has radioactive material , when at the same time a human life is only worth a few paltry dollars at the border between Afghanistan and Russia .
It would be far easier for a country such as Iraq or Iran to smuggle such material across the Khyber Pass than through a German airport .
That brings us to an important fact : this traffic exists !
It exists without any doubt at all in the sphere of the secret services , otherwise countries like Pakistan or India would not have been able to gain possession of nuclear weapons after circumventing the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty !
Yet this traffic probably does not exist in the form described in the Commission communication or by Member State governments and interested journalists .
Of course it is a threat if criminals get hold of plutonium or uranium or terrorist organizations procure themselves these materials in order to threaten the state .
Of course it is a threat if a sect such as the Aum-Shinriko sect in Japan , for instance , with its apocalyptic fantasies , procures materials which could poison the groundwater of a town of more than a million inhabitants or which could pose a huge threat by dispersion in the air or by fire .
That is why we must do our utmost to close down the potential sources of danger ; these are indeed the nuclear facilities in the former Central and Eastern European states and the CIS states , where some nuclear technicians have not been paid for two years and are therefore susceptible to corruption .
At the same time they are of course the people who know what substances are available and how to handle them and offer them for sale .
That is why we must do our utmost to close down that source .
But given that we must do utmost to close down that source I wonder , as I said in my report , why the Commission produces a communication which rightly describes these scenarios as they are , while at the same time we read in the draft budget that the staff , financial and technical standards , which urgently need raising , are to be cut by 30 % !
Let the Commission explain that .
That is certainly the wrong place to economize .
But we also need a realistic assessment of what is happening .
I produced a statistic in my report which I know the right-hand side of this House in particular will try not to have included in the report , and I am rather surprised that one is not even allowed to give statistics any more .
But let me give you one .
The Institute for Transuranium , i.e. , the Euratom analysis centre in Karlsruhe , has investigated 34 cases of seized nuclear material .
Since 1991 the police has seized radioactive material in 34 cases and then handed it over to the Institute for Transuranium for analysis .
One not so dramatic case was recorded in Belgium , 3 cases in Italy and 30 cases in the Federal Republic of Germany .
That means that to date not a single seizure of radioactive material has been recorded in 12 Member States of the European Union .
Some of the 30 cases in Germany are so dramatic that I want to describe one of them to you .
A suitcase is checked with a Geiger counter and the customs officer says : ' it 's registering , this is radioactive ' .
Then the case is opened and smoke alarms are found from sprinkler systems in the former GDR .
For some of these alarms were equipped with plutonium in preparation for the nuclear weapons programme .
Then the newspaper headlines read : ' more nuclear material find , another case of smuggling ! '
Some dodgy character has procured these smoke alarm rods , packed a whole lot of them into a suitcase and pretended he had something to sell .
Dangerous as it is to ignore a real threat , it is just as dangerous to misrepresent a real threat .
That is why it is urgently necessary for the Commission , for us as Parliament , but also for the governments of the Member States to point out where the real threat lies .
There is no point in the German secret service , working with the criminal investigation office of the Federal Land of Bavaria , instructing Spanish criminals to fly to Russia , as happened in the case of Munich , and then to import plutonium into the Federal Republic , so that the same police officers who gave these criminals their orders can then arrest them and can go before the public and say : ' Look , we have got a grip on the illicit market in nuclear materials ' .
That is totally counterproductive and does not help us really to clarify matters .
The way to clarify matters is to show them as they really are .
I have tried to do so .
But we cannot accept one Member State government treating such a serious matter as casually as it has done .
Some people carrying 400 grammes of plutonium in a Samsonite suitcase flew from Moscow to Munich in a Lufthansa plane with several hundred passengers , and no-one told the people in Munich or the passengers on that plane what a threat they were facing because plutonium happens not to be household dust .
Plutonium is an extremely dangerous material and I cannot understand why a government that did not inform Euratom about this incident at the right time , although it should have done so , and then actually asserts it had informed Euratom , should not be asked by the Commission : ' What did you do about it ?
Did you really circumvent European law and put several hundred people at risk simply to ensure that your political calculation of what was only an apparently accurate representation of a real threat worked out ? '
I have tried to present a detailed report on the real threats , together with comprehensive proposals on how to deal with them .
I would ask you to endorse my report and the amendments .
Mr President , there can be no doubt that illicit trafficking in radioactive substances and nuclear materials is both wrong and a cause for concern , which this report rightly addresses .
Yet it must also be a cause for regret that instead of focusing on the main issue this report has sought to widen the debate by including matters of national defence policy which are not within the competence of this Parliament , by attacking the competence of a Member State in the justice field and by using this as an opportunity , yet again , to open up a more general anti-nuclear debate .
This report contains some very questionable assertions about both scientific and legal matters .
I welcome the amendments brought forward to remove many of them .
Most of all I welcome those amendments which remove references to the military stocks and defence competences of EU Member States .
Not even this report is suggesting that any illicit trafficking originates in the EU in connection with Member States ' stocks .
The problem originates outside the EU .
And by the way , that means outside our competence .
So it seems silly to try to link external problems with Member State competence in defence and security .
As to some of the scientific assertions I believe there is a sizeable body of opinion that would challenge the view expressed in Recital C. And there is certainly a widespread view in the industry that would disagree with the view in Paragraph 3 concerning MOX fuel .
I note in the list of recommendations in the report for action there is a call for the Commission to reorganize the internal structure of those of its departments responsible for nuclear matters .
I wonder how many times this call has gone out to the Commission for other issues and just what chaos might ensue within the Commission if all such suggestions were implemented .
In conclusion , let me reiterate the risk that we run as a Parliament if we dilute our effort by not concentrating on the main issue and insist on poking our nose into matters which are not our competence .
The risk is that Parliament will continue to be taken less seriously than it should be and will not gain any additional powers in the IGC .
Mr President , it was with some surprise that I listened to the previous speakers , in view of the fact that the opinion of the committee which in the first instance has responsibility for foreign affairs and security policy was adopted unanimously .
In that unanimous opinion we state , among other things , that there would naturally be a greater incentive to abolish nuclear weapons if those states which possess such weapons undertook to destroy their own nuclear arsenals .
We also say that all states should naturally refrain from nuclear weapons testing pending international agreement on a total test ban .
As regards nuclear power , we also state that over and above this , bearing in mind the ecological risks entailed in nuclear power , it is the whole way of producing energy which should be changed .
This will be the major task of the next century .
So this was the view taken by a committee which is primarily responsible not for environmental and energy issues but for foreign policy aspects .
I have read with considerable interest the record of attendance for the meeting at which we unanimously backed it .
The list includes Mr Matutes , Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse , Mrs Aelvoet , Mr Bertens , Mr Caccavale , Mr Colajanni , Mr Goerens , Mr Von Habsburg , Mr König , Mrs Lenz , Mr McGowan , Mr Poettering , Mr Sakellariou , Mr Viola and myself .
These include quite a number of Members who in other contexts would perhaps have adopted different standpoints .
When I then see that Mr Schultz 's main report has been adopted by only 12 votes for and 2 against , with 16 abstentions , I begin to wonder a little about how the decision-making system in this parliament operates .
One must surely be able to assume that Members who participated in a unanimous report did not sleep through the entire proceedings but actually support it .
I trust that they will act accordingly in the vote here today too .
Mr President , I wish to compliment Mr Schulz not only on the quality of his report but also on his presentation this morning , which was excellent .
Surely the future well-being of the human race is within the competence of this Parliament ?
I want to see the world which my granddaughter will inherit handed over in a better form than it is just now .
I believe we should deal with the threats we face .
Without any doubt there has been , as Mr Schulz said , a disturbing and dramatic rise in the number of documented cases of illicit traffic in nuclear materials .
What remains unreported or unknown is anybody 's guess .
But what is clear is that serious questions have to be raised about the effectiveness of international controls over nuclear materials .
I listened very intently to what the Commission said in response to the calls for action which Mr Schulz outlines in his report .
I just wish to take this opportunity to return to a question I asked the Commission recently regarding allegations that nuclear materials covered by safeguards at the ITREC facility near Rotondella in southern Italy were illegally removed from that facility .
Now that is not in the former USSR , it is part of the European Union !
I would be extremely interested to know if the Commission could provide me with any further update on that situation , primarily because this incident typifies some of the concerns we have about the nuclear industry .
First among these is public information .
A well-informed public is one of the greatest safeguards we could possibly hope for .
So information about storage , transport or processing must be in the public domain .
Secondly , this close and dubious relationship between the nuclear and the civil nuclear industries : the very genesis of the civil nuclear industry was in the nuclear industry and the blanket of national security still weighs heavily there .
We should lift that blanket and let some light in .
Thirdly , the risks associated with radioactive substances which are not covered by safeguards : there is a case to be made for re-examining the controls over these particular substances .
In conclusion , I plead for more active cooperation between nations and for more stringent and effective international controls in order to contain some of the gravest threats we face .
Mr Schulz 's report has opened our eyes to some of these threats and we must act on it now .

Ladies and gentlemen , the charm of Mr Schulz 's statements lies in their inconsistency .
On the one hand Mr Schulz rightly pointed out that international crime is one of the greatest threats of the present and the future , on the other hand he tried to play down its importance in an unacceptable manner for internal political motives .
In my view his statements today have made this very plain , because he keeps confusing the fire-fighters with the arsonists .
Of course secret services operate in the grey area , because it is only in the grey area that they can pick up the criminal elements operating there .
The statistic he gave is therefore most informative , which is why I am glad he produced it , even if I do not endorse the way he worded his proposal .
It is informative because it proves that middle Europe , i.e. , the countries along the former iron curtain , are particularly exposed to cross-frontier bands of criminals and nuclear crime .
That is why we should be glad that the German and Austrian security services , like the Hungarian , Czech and Polish security services , are making particular efforts to control this crime , and we should be grateful that the Bavarian police and the Bavarian Minister of the Interior , Mr Beckstein , have taken up this challenge and thereby done a service to the European Union as a whole .
In this area Bavaria is quite definitely in the front line of the fight against international crime on behalf of the entire European Union and if you try to knock the security services that can only destabilize these police forces who do such excellent work , which has long since been the practice in the regions of North-Rhine-Westphalia and Lower Saxony , as we have seen from the internal security situation there .
This is a most important subject .
It is a European subject , and that is why I am sorry that you have dragged it down to the level of internal politics with your proposals .
It is a threat !
Attali spoke of hundreds of cases of nuclear smuggling in a report for the United Nations .
The United Nations is assuming that Russia and many former CIS states are not in a position legally or in terms of staffing to combat the spread of this crime .
That is why we must endeavour to do so .
It was not just some flight of the imagination that persuaded the Council , the individual Member States and the Commission to increase and coordinate their efforts and to discuss an increase in funding .
That is why we do support your operative proposals , which are in stark contrast to the opinions you are disseminating here for demagogical reasons .
You know full well that it is necessary to combat international crime on a European basis , and that is the purpose of our amendments and those by Mr Caccavale .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking Mr Schulz for his report and for the great commitment he has shown in dealing with this issue .
Just how much detailed work he has devoted to it is clear from range of documentation and statistics which indicate to us the scale of the problem .
On the other hand , I have also to share in part the reservations expressed by some of those who spoke earlier .
I think that the report has moved a little beyond what is strictly within the area of competence of the House and the committee which has produced the document .
In point of fact the subject-matter of the report - I remind you that the title of the document is ' the illicit traffic in radioactive substances and nuclear materials ' - has been extended to cover what are really energy and defence policies .
That clearly does not mean that the problems are not linked .
I realize , as Mr Schulz says , that the problem involves not only nuclear materials as such but the question of experts , particularly from the former Soviet Union , who are smuggling their experience in this field around the world as well as the technologies .
In my view , furthermore , there is no precise list detailing the problem .
We do not in fact know how many people there are posing this great threat that is spreading throughout the world , nor can we identify them .
And it really is a great threat because many of the countries that lack proper democratic control are likely to pose a serious and very great threat to us and to the future of humanity , as a result of the traffic in those materials and the development of nuclear powers .
Nor can we hide away behind the fact that this is now a major business .
And to consider that it can be resolved by making proclamations seems to me to be an absolute non-starter .
We have to realize that this is a difficult form of trafficking , that sales are not as easy as in the case of drugs , for example .
It is therefore plain that attitude of the secret services has an important part to play .
I believe that it is our responsibility , the responsibility of the democratic countries represented in this House , and the Members of this House to secure scrupulous monitoring of this activity , this grey area involving the secret services .
The problem cannot just be one of organized crime !
Mr President , up to now there have not been any real accidents as a result of illicit dealings in nuclear materials but just imagine if nuclear materials got into the hands of a dictator or a terrorist group bent on mischief , then there would be every chance of a disaster .
That means that we have to do everything possible to prevent trafficking in nuclear materials and , if it happens , to combat it .
The Liberal Group believes that today 's debate must focus on this , and that our debate and the resolution too must not address the pros and cons of nuclear energy as such , as I have just been hearing from the Green Group .
Mr President , it goes without saying that we must help the countries of Eastern Europe to solve their problems in this regard .
The resolution quite rightly calls on the European Commission to tell us what the financial implications of that support for Eastern Europe are and Parliament is entitled to be informed of them .
Mr President , in connection with measures to counter trafficking I will say just one word : Europol . It is of course a scandal that Europol is not yet able to function properly .
In the Internal Affairs Committee it seemed as if we were holding a German domestic political debate and I have to say in all honesty that I do not care over much for the high tone taken by our honourable friends , the German Members .
The subject is far too important .
The European Parliament must not meddle in German domestic politics but we must have a European Parliament resolution because if we do not Parliament will have achieved nothing and the matter is far too serious to allow that to happen .
Mr President , the discussion on the illicit traffic in radioactive material in fact raises far more questions than we have answers to at present .
First , we keep just hearing about the sellers .
Who and where are the buyers ?
Where there are sellers there are also buyers .
Secondly , it is unclear why on earth 30 out of the 35 cases - for we have to include the recent seizure in a garage in Bavaria of 277 kg of highly enriched uranium - have occurred in Germany .
Does that mean that the German police are particularly good or that the market there is particularly large ?
Or are the police not so efficient in other countries ?
Third question : how is it that the German Federal Government says that it informed Euratom on 27 July while Euratom says it was informed on 10 August , namely when the aircraft arrived ?
There is something odd here .
The call for the use of Europol misses the point .
Let me remind you that by law nuclear material comes under the control of Euratom .
So Euratom Safeguards must at last be put in a staffing and financial position that enables it finally to carry out proper controls .
We are rightly upset at the 400 g of plutonium , but we have tonnes of plutonium in England and France .
In France there are 265 facilities with nuclear material , only 116 of them can be inspected by Euratom , of which 30 are so-called mixed facilities , meaning facilities used for civil and military purposes , which we have to deduct too , of which France can say : ' No , not today ' .
And there are 103 facilities in which only foreign material , i.e. , nuclear material from foreign countries , is stored .
And another thing : the IAEA can only inspect one facility per year in France .
Surely that is the real scandal !
So we must make the following demand : the disclosure by all nuclear states of all their civil and military fissile material and of course a complete stop to the further use of plutonium and a stop to this senseless transportation from one country to another .
That is the real , genuine threat in Europe , and I have not even mentioned the CIS states yet .
We only have a vague inkling of this threat .
We should have spent far more money on this area in order to enable the Euratom Safeguards departments to be up to date .
They have to live on crumbs , with which they cannot carry out any controls .
Mr President , the Commission communication gives a balanced account of how the collapse of the Soviet Union has created a dangerous situation with regard to the illicit trading of nuclear substances .
In a structured manner the Commission explores ways in which the Union can tackle these problems .
Mr Schulz 's report , however , is downright disappointing .
Instead of a report containing valuable recommendations to the Commission , we have a chaotic document in which all manner of irrelevant hobbyhorses are ridden to death .
Insistence on nuclear disarmament , the ending of nuclear energy policy , insinuations against the German police .
As a result the Committee on Civil Liberties approved the report by only the slightest of margins , which ought not in principle to be the case in matters dealing with this issue .
Significantly , the Socialist Group only decided to vote in favour of the report once it became apparent that the Christian Democrats would be abstaining .
Because , I ask you , who is there in this House who is not anxious to counter the illicit trading of nuclear substances ?
A broadly based resolution should not be a problem and would certainly enhance the credibility of Parliament .
Regretfully I have to say that the present resolution in no way meets that need .
I hope that all its shortcomings will be rectified as a result of the amendments , but if not I shall certainly be voting against this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schulz 's report contains some interesting points .
Yes , the traffic in nuclear materials represents a deadly danger ; yes , that traffic has grown alarmingly since the break-up of the Soviet Union .
But we should not conclude from that that it was the USSR that was preserving Europe from the atomic threat .
After all , we have nuclear power stations in danger of exploding , atomic submarines in the North Sea , tons of radioactive wastes discharged into the oceans - and all these things are the work of the Communists who held power until 1991 .
Today , other countries are in the process of providing themselves with atomic weapons , notably Iran - a terrorist state - aided by the old Communist nomenklatura .
The American Government , too , bears some responsibility for this process .
The Gulf War has destroyed Iraq , the only power in that region capable of counterbalancing the power of the Ayatollahs in Tehran .
So the scale of the risk is significant , and it was the Front National which , during the 1970s , was the first political party in France to caution governments against their all-nuclear policy .
Yet , in an increasingly dangerous world where new atomic powers are coming into existence , the protection of our nations depends , sir , on the acquisition of a credible nuclear deterrent , a civil defence system comparable to that enjoyed by the Swiss , and the reestablishment of border controls .
Mr Schulz , in his report , recommends the nuclear disarmament of France and the United Kingdom .
This is a far cry from trafficking in nuclear materials .
He also passes over civil defence , and of course when he talks about borders he means the borders of the Europe of Maastricht .
Moreover , the desire to give extended powers to the Commission and to Euratom is inspired by the same philosophy .
On the pretext of a threat on a global scale , the Member States are to be deprived of their powers in favour of supranational institutions .
Well , today we have the crisis of mad cow disease , which is first and foremost a failure on the part of the Commission , to serve as a dramatic illustration of the inability of Europe 's institutions to protect the public , and the threat represented by the unrestricted opening of our borders .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the spectre of international organized crime is one of the greatest challenges facing all the Member States of the European Union .
In the past it was traffic in human beings and drugs , and now it is increasingly also traffic in nuclear materials , which is of course also encouraged by countries that want to procure themselves nuclear weapons by illicit means .
The problem is a very serious one .
The Commission has presented a good communication .
But the discussion will be brought into discredit if it is used for internal policy purposes and distorted into a kind of story time or unworldly energy policy .
That is of course totally unworldly and does not take account of the fact that in the view of most of the countries in the world , without nuclear energy it is simply not possible to satisfy the energy requirements of a world that is growing by 260 000 inhabitants a day .
And that is why 55 nuclear plants are currently under construction .
But that is not the issue here .
In 1992 Parliament proposed international monitoring plans , the classification of certain acts as a serious form of international crime and the training of experts .
The Commission 's recommendations and Parliament 's discussions follow the same line : secure storage , accurate monitoring , early detection , identification and prosecution , specialist technical assistance for the countries mainly affected , stocktaking , accounting and monitoring .
In other words a transparent system , together with cooperation between Member States on safety technology and of course building up Europol .
Let me draw particular attention to paragraphs 11 and 14 of the conclusions of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , which points out that the incentives can be reduced by offering scientists opportunities to apply their expertise to peaceful activities .
In particular , plutonium must be rendered harmless by conversion into MOX fuel elements .
We can expect 100 tonnes of weapons-grade plutonium from disarmament over the next few years .
It has to be reprocessed and made safe .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Schulz on his report this morning and his presentation and for pointing out to us the problems that we have in this area .
It is horrifying to think that substances such as high-grade plutonium could get into the wrong hands , like those of terrorists and criminals ; it is appalling to think of the spectre of nuclear explosive devices being available to them .
We have the concern in Ireland that there are millions of tonnes of plutonium available in the UK and naturally enough it is worrying for us .
Furthermore , it is no secret that countries such as Iraq and North Korea have made attempts to obtain bomb-building capacity .
So for all these reasons it is important to guarantee that we control the supervisory measures over nuclear materials .
It is well known - indeed Germany informed the International Conference - that 19 cases of thefts involving nuclear materials have been discovered over the last two years .
Those were in Russia ; but in addition the German authorities uncovered 267 cases involving either indirect traffic or fraudulent offers to sell nuclear substances in 1994 , the most spectacular being the seizure of plutonium in Munich of course .
The response of the Commission has been adequate in proposing to beef up the EURATOM Safeguards inspectorate and to develop closer links with the International Science and Technology Centre under the TACIS Programme .
However , there is a need to improve the legal cooperation between Member States of the European Union and the Republics of the former Soviet Union to deal with the illicit trafficking of nuclear materials .
This should come under the articles of Europol , the European police agency in The Hague .
There is also the option of strengthening the controls of the European Union borders with Eastern Europe and finally , we should consider the formulation of various partnership agreements with the Eastern European States to deal with this issue .
Joint action to help combat this growing problem could also be taken under the European Union 's common foreign and security policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by underlining that my group and I remain highly disturbed at the extent of the lack of reactor safety in the former USSR and the ineffective control of nuclear materials .
That is why we are also concerned about the smuggling of nuclear materials and other radioactive substances .
But we must certainly also endeavour to resolve this problem through cooperation with the Russian authorities and not through confrontation .
However , my group finds a number of arguments incomprehensible and hard to understand .
Firstly , the report does not distinguish clearly between questions of nuclear weapons proliferation and nuclear smuggling .
The differences between the two questions should be made much clearer .
Nor do we understand why the report postulates the abolition of nuclear energy while at the same time emphasizing the usefulness of plutonium for peaceful purposes in the European Union .
In my view that is pure nonsense , for why should the reactors in the former USSR become safer , the nuclear materials be supervised better and the smuggling stop if the safe reactors in our country are shut down ?
We are dealing here purely with problems in the former USSR , with problems which have indeed taken on dramatic dimensions .
The countries of the former USSR , especially Russia , urgently need energy in order to survive , so they cannot abandon nuclear energy .
At the same time , their control systems urgently need modernizing , since they are no longer able to ensure adequate supervision of the nuclear materials and radioactive substances .
I discovered that myself a fortnight ago in Novosibirsk where I attended a conference on cooperation between Russia and Euratom on the control of nuclear materials and also had an opportunity to visit a Russian fuel elements factory .
The situation is dramatic !
On the question of combating the threat of nuclear smuggling , my group calls for the Union to make every effort to link up the various executive authorities and thus finally to establish comprehensive cooperation .
Furthermore , we call for closer cooperation with Russia on the prevention of nuclear smuggling .
We must raise the necessary funds for this which , we believe , would be well invested .
For it is without doubt cheaper and better to give full support to the Russian authorities concerned in their efforts to modernize or set up their control systems than for us here in the European Union to pick up the nuclear materials and other radioactive substances one by one .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from the viewpoint of a nuclear-free Member State the plain facts - I emphasize ' facts ' - presented by the rapporteur look twice as serious .
We are dealing here with what is no less than a European and international mega-problem .
Combatting the illicit traffic in radioactive substances and nuclear materials is of course the concern of every country and should therefore be dealt with by the United Nations and be classified as a crime against humanity , as genocide was in the 1948 UN Convention .
Given the growth of illicit nuclear trafficking , it still seems legitimate to ask whether the European Union should not regard it as an urgent task to endeavour to get out of the nuclear industry .
At any rate , during the negotiations on the accession of new Member States , we will have to examine the safety aspect of their nuclear power stations very carefully indeed .
Mr President , I will take less than two minutes .
I would like to ask you to give me an opportunity to clarify something .
I can just accept terms such as utter nonsense or similar interpretations , but not the word ' demagogical ' for my statement !
That is why I would like to make a statement of fact that is not demagogical .
Twelve Member States of our Union are not familiar with the problem of nuclear trafficking , three are .
The police authorities of all three countries have confirmed to me as rapporteur that in no case could they establish the involvement of organized crime .
That statement was made by the German , the Italian and the Belgian police .
That is what I have to say on the subject of ' organized crime ' and ' demagogy ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since my colleague Christos Papoutsis is not here , as he could not miss the Energy Council now being held in Luxembourg , and since the important decision on the first stage of liberalizing the energy market may perhaps be taken today , it falls to me , representing the Commission on his behalf , to reply to you on the most complex problems of trafficking in nuclear materials which may be used to manufacture atomic explosives and in other radioactive substances .
As you know , since the outset the Commission has dealt - we think seriously - with this subject , as may be seen in the communication of 7 September 1994 to Parliament and the Council of Ministers , with which Mr Schulz 's report deals .
Since that first communication in September 1994 , the Commission has spared no efforts to solve the problem and has had various opportunities to report , both in plenary sitting and in the relevant parliamentary committees , on the initiatives and measures it has been taking .
Moreover following the presentation of Mr Schulz 's report on 1 March 1996 , the Commission adopted , on 19 April in the context of the G7 Summit at Moscow on nuclear security , a second communication addressed to the Council and to Parliament with regard to the application of the guidelines laid down in the previous communication and in the conclusions of the Essen European Council in December 1994 .
I should like to remind you here that the G7 , at the Moscow Summit , agreed an ambitious programme for preventing and combating illicit traffic in nuclear material and made a call to the governments of other countries to join the G7 in implementing that programme .
The Commission is already implementing , within the limit of its powers , the programme drawn up at the G7 Summit in Moscow .
Against that background you will understand that the Commission has considered with great interest the report drawn up by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
In the first place the Commission would like to thank Parliament for its great interest and support in this matter and particularly congratulates the rapporteur , Mr Schulz , on the important work he has done in preparing this report .
The Commission appreciates the great effort made by all honourable Members to make an in-depth analysis of the various aspects of a complex problem of world-wide importance .
And on that point I should like to emphasize one aspect brought out in the speeches of Mr Schulz and others : naturally the Commission is very concerned about the question of the illicit traffic in atomic material ; of course we are very concerned about it and obviously crime or rather the phenomenon of organized crime at world level does worry us - of course it does !
The Commission , then , approves Parliament 's commitment and agrees with most of the passages in Mr Schulz 's report calling for cooperation , coordination of measures , the effective use of resources and the rationalization of efforts .
I can tell you that throughout recent years and to the extent of our financial limits - and within the bounds of our powers - the Commission has made profound endeavours to move in that direction .
However , the Commission would also like to express its concern regarding certain information given in the report discussion today : first , it must be borne in mind , quite apart from the ideological or political view of each one of us , that the European Union plays a major rôle in the nuclear sector .
One may be for or against the nuclear sector , as some honourable Members have pointed out ; one may be for or against but the reality - at least for the Commission - is to make it clear that the European Union , at least in the nuclear sector , is a force to be reckoned with at world level .
Secondly another feature of the European Union is that , as you know , apart from the predominantly civil nuclear energy sector , there is another sector of a military nature .
All civil nuclear material is subject to the Commission 's security control and is also to a large extent also subject to the control of the International Atomic Energy Agency in the 13 States which do not have nuclear weapons .
Only control of military nuclear material has been expressly excluded according to the Euratom Treaty and the specific agreements with the IAEA .
Nevertheless it must be pointed out that according to the Euratom Treaty all nuclear material outside the military sector is to be automatically included in the ambit of Euratom safeguards .
The Commission 's present thinking is that the system is working well and that history shows that illicit traffic has not arisen owing to the use of plutonium or highly-enriched uranium in the European Union .
Of course the Commission agrees with the idea of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs of continuing to encourage nuclear disarmament and to process nuclear materials with high strategic value into other less dangerous materials , but the Commission has to consider all options and cannot exclude the possibility of recycling plutonium or highly-enriched uranium of military origin for use specifically in civil nuclear reactors .
It is worth mentioning that whatever may be the final options - vitrification , transmutation , recycling , mixed oxide , - the appropriate safeguards will have to be maintained and even strengthened .
The Commission has taken note , Mr Schulz , of your concern regarding the possible involvement of the secret services in illicit traffic in contraband .
Without going into the details of this question , which has already been exhaustively debated in the committees , the Commission would like to stress that it has always complied strictly with the agreements in force made with the national authorities .
And apart from this particular incident , faced with the constant rise in the number of cases of illicit traffic in general , which implies a considerable risk for the population and the environment , the Commission wishes to emphasize that we and the European Parliament need to be constantly working on this .
For the moment and taking into account all the information available to the Commission , we are convinced that the origin of trafficking lies fundamentally in the serious economic situation of the former Soviet Union .
So , although it needs a great effort - including sufficient human and financial resources - and although there are many practical difficulties , the Commission still believes that prevention through cooperation is called for .
And on this point again , Mr Schulz , I should like to come up with another consideration of a political nature .
If the basis is cooperation between all the Member States to control not only trafficking in nuclear material but also drugs and terrorism , we should have to ask how it is possible that although the need for cooperation is obvious , we should still not have approved to this very day the final Europol statute , because presumably Europol would be the very mechanism to make cooperation between the Member States effective .
Consequently I think it is possible to agree on the objective and what we have to manage is to put the instruments for cooperation into force as soon as possible .
There is one internal consideration regarding the Commission .
Many of you have made it clear that this is a question which , because of its delicacy and importance , would need more material , human and financial resources .
In view of the fact that the European Parliament is also the second branch of the budgetary authority , I can assure you that the Commission would be most gratified if the European Parliament were to take the initiative , within the budgetary margin , of increasing the funds available to provide the Commission with more officials and more logistic and more financial means .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be held at noon .
Votes
Mr President , concerning paragraph 4 there is an alteration to amendment 5 which would read , following the oral amendment that everyone knows of , as follows : ' Urges that reductions in the fishing fleet should not depend only on reductions in vessels but also on active policies top defend fishery resources ' .
This is the wording of my amendment on behalf of my group .
Mr President , this oral addition does nothing to change the meaning of the paragraph , and we decided to reject it , not because of the merits of this amendment but because these same ideas can already be found in several other passages of the report .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would ask that we not do proceed to the vote on the oral amendment .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , we have already overrun our time and we still have four motions for resolutions on the Schulz report .
This report is most important and in view of the crumbling attendance here I request on behalf of my group that we vote on the Schulz report at the next part-session .
I ask you to put that to the vote .
Mr President , looking at the voting list I see that we currently do not have all that many votes still remaining , so that with a bit of goodwill we could well be finished by 1.30 p.m.
Our Group thus prefers to complete the voting .
Mr President , I find it unfortunate that we never manage to organize our voting time in a way that allows us to make best use of our sittings .
In recent months we have repeatedly seen voting time extending far into the lunch break .
I think we have to organize ourselves better .
So I agree with the Socialist Group 's suggestion that the Schulz report be voted on in two weeks ' time at our next Brussels meeting .
Mr President , it is very late in any case .
I want to support the request by Mrs Hoff and Mr De Vries , for this report really is too important for us to try to get through it now .
I too am in favour of voting on it during the next part-session .
Mr President , if I understand correctly , the agenda which has been proposed for us provides for any unfinished morning votes to continue at 6 p.m.
So I gather , Mr President , that a convenient slot is envisaged from 6 in the evening .
The House will vote on the proposal that the vote on the Schulz report be postponed from this afternoon or from tomorrow morning to the Brussels part-session .
( Parliament decided to postpone the vote )
Mr President , the same obviously applies to the Titley report as to the Schulz report .
However , I would have nothing against our continuing the vote through to the end now .
The House will vote on the proposal that voting continue on the Giansily and Titley reports .
( Parliament agreed to the proposal )
I want to take what has been expected of us again today , namely to work here for hours and then not to vote , as an opportunity to request that we finally reinstate voting time on Thursday evening .
We will not be able to do our parliamentary work here properly without that voting time .
I ask you to put this to the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents .
The Nordic passport union which has been in existence for just over forty years has functioned excellently .
The Nordic countries have abolished passport requirements for their citizens , but not border controls .
The Nordic passport union should not be put at risk for the sake of such a hazardous undertaking as accession to the Schengen Agreement .
Should Norway for whatever reason not be able to participate in Schengen cooperation or be compelled to cease being a party to it in the future , this would put Sweden in an extremely difficult and in practical terms impossible position if the long land border with Norway had to be guarded .
Accession to Schengen by Sweden would threaten the Nordic passport union and establish new borders with the Baltic states , Eastern Europe and the rest of the world .
Sweden risks becoming part of a European security state which keeps records on and monitors the citizens of the Union and prevents others from entering ' Fortress Europe ' .
In both Sweden and Norway Schengen is being marketed as an enlargement of the Nordic passport union .
This is wrong , since the Nordic countries have abolished passport requirements but not border controls .
If border controls are abolished ' monitoring measures ' will be needed in the form of common police activities .
This will require an enormous control system , the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) in Strasbourg , Europol , which is moving in the direction of a federal police force modelled on the American FBI .
There is also a risk that the passport union will be replaced by an obligation to carry a special ID card at all times and in all places .
Schengen also means stricter asylum , visa and refugee policies , with Sweden having to introduce stricter visa requirements for several countries .
The risks of arms and drug smuggling will also increase if border controls are abolished .
We have voted against this resolution because there are all too many question marks involving Sweden .
We dissociate ourselves completely from the idea of the Schengen Agreement being incorporated in the EU Treaty .
The Nordic passport union has worked incredibly well and should not be put at risk for the sake of the huge gamble which accession to the Schengen Agreement in many ways represents .
Should Norway for whatever reason not be able to be party to the Schengen Agreement or be forced to withdraw from it in the future , Sweden would find itself in a precarious and practically impossible situation as regards control of the long land border between Sweden and Norway .
Another reason not to proceed with Sweden 's accession to the Schengen Agreement until further notice is the compensatory measures which Sweden would have to take when border controls vis-à-vis the Schengen countries were abolished .
It has still not been said what these compensatory measures would be .
It is therefore impossible to vote for this resolution since far too many questions remain unanswered as far as Sweden is concerned .
For example , through the Schengen Agreement Sweden would be part of a common territory for the free movement of goods and persons .
For our part , to share such a common area with the Netherlands , which takes a totally different view of the cultivation of narcotic crops , is an incredibly risky undertaking .
Péry report
Mr President , on the Péry report , I am most amazed .
We tabled an amendment on how Member States get round the multiannual guidance programme by transferring their vessels to third countries and by using flags of convenience .
I am surprised that there were only 47 votes in favour of this amendment , despite the fact that even my own country of Ireland complains about it .
The British , for example , are always complaining about the flags of convenience and the fact that their own government has failed to decommission and , instead , has sold off its flags of convenience to countries like Spain and France .
This is quite appalling because it represents a failure to recognize that European fleets are far too large and need to be reduced .
Member States have to recognize that fact .
But some Member States are exploiting this situation and the people representing Member States suffering as a result do not even realize this .
It is a disgrace that only 47 Members voted in favour of my amendment which criticized Member States which transferred their vessels to third countries which are already overexploited by the fisheries agreements or transferred their vessels to countries like Britain .
They fly flags of convenience and then , when they break the rules , Member States , for example Spain , turn around and say : ' Oh , well , it was flying a British flag ' , when the reality is that it was a Spanish-owned vessel .
The Member States who are doing this have to acknowledge that they are not meeting their obligations .
No-one would dispute that there is an urgent need to conserve fishing stocks by reducing fleet capacity .
However what is in dispute is the size of the reduction and the particular manner in which it is to be applied .
Ireland , since its accession to the EEC , has never been treated fairly with regard to our total allowable catch .
Despite the fact that we have 20 % of European coastal waters we have only been allocated 4 % of fishing quotas .
The proposed reduction in the European Union fishing fleet should be used to redress this balance and Ireland should therefore not be subjected to pro rata cuts .
Furthermore if there is to be a major reduction in fishing activity it must be vigorously policed to ensure that there is no illegal fishing .
And given the legitimate concerns of Irish fishermen relating to Spanish access to the Irish Box the EU must provide the necessary resources to patrol this and other areas .
I rise in support of the case of the fishermen of Southend , Leigh and Canvey in my constituency , who are further threatened by the Commission 's latest announcement .
These fishermen are native to the Kent and Essex waters , with smaller boats under 17 metres , and have already suffered a cutback of more than half of their catch in the last ten years .
Bigger boats from Belgium , Holland and other UK regions have grabbed their share .
And whilst fish stocks in our waters have held up compared to elsewhere in the North Sea , these latest quota cutbacks threaten more non-native boats coming in to destroy the livelihoods of locally based fishermen .
That is why our call today for more involvement by the fishermen themselves and the amendment which I have cosponsored to prohibit ' quota hopping ' of British stocks by other European vessels is absolutely right .
Our aim in Essex is to set up our own regional fishery with our own producers ' organization to give the traditional and important fishing industry off the Essex coast much more control over our own waters and therefore over our own future .
The fishermen of Northern Ireland have never felt more isolated .
The recent Commission announcement of an intended 40 % cut in the fishing fleets of Europe was the final blow .
Such a proposal would devastate the industry and the communities in which they are situated for they have no alternatives .
This dictatorial approach without consultation with the industry and the fishermen is unacceptable and will be resisted to the bitter end .
The Commission says there are fewer fish available to catch .
The fishermen in my area say this is nonsense and the scientists never contact them or ask their advice on the stocks available .
This is an impossible position for the Commission and the fishermen .
Brussels is too remote and a more reliable system must be found , with more control devolved to the administrations closer to the people .
The problem of quota-hopping and flagging out must be addressed for it causes deep resentment in the industry .
We at present have a common fisheries policy which does not work and is not understood by the fishermen or the industry .
We need and require positive proposals to revive the industry and instill confidence to ensure survival .
With regard to both policy formulation and the implementation of policy , the European Union 's approach on fisheries is seriously deficient and ineffective and is doing nothing to assist fisheries development .
On the contrary , it is driving a sector which has traditionally been dynamic and productive , especially in the coastal and island regions on the periphery of the Union , which in many cases are dependent on fishing for their survival , into inactivity and decline .
The imposition of Community directives which take no account of particular national circumstances , and which , rather than promoting modernization of the fishing fleet , demand ever more severe cuts in its size , and weaknesses in infrastructure and the miserly funding of fisheries research , which are depriving those involved in fishing of technical and scientific support , have led to problems in the sector which are beginning to look insuperable .
The signs are already very worrying , even for a country like Greece with its long experience and tradition of fishing and its natural advantages in terms of geography and fishing resources .
We think that the Member States must be given the option of managing their own resources , and we consider the implementation of discriminatory restrictions to ensure conservation of valuable stocks and of a range of technical measures ( criteria for the granting of fishing licences and the necessary controls , breeding ground studies and protection , measures to protect seas against pollution by toxic and hazardous wastes etc . ) to be essential .
We do not believe that over-fishing and the over-exploitation of sea resources can be fairly blamed on the large numbers of inshore fishermen who each catch just a few kilos of fish , who have always existed ( and are the ones whose numbers are falling with every passing year ) and who contribute to the economies and help to maintain the ecological balance of their localities .
The problem was started , and is being made worse all the time , by the big industrial fishing fleets ; by the factory ships which fish for the world market and set prices , and which are causing economic , social and ecological devastation by fishing coastal zones to exhaustion .
In the Mediterranean , in particular , this is tolerated , even connived at , by the common fisheries policy , which seems to work in favour of allowing sea resources to be managed , in terms of both orthodox fishing and aquaculture , by the multinationals whose only interest in the fisheries policy is making sure that it suits their ends .
We believe that fisheries activity can and must be strengthened . However , this can be achieved only through a new policy dedicated to promoting proper exploitation of sea resources , to safeguarding the balance of the marine ecosystem via effective measures to curb the pollution which is one of the main causes of lower catches and to ensuring that workers in the sector receive satisfactory incomes and have a decent standard of living .
Arias Cañete report
Mr President , the Arias Cañete report on fishing problems in the North-Western Atlantic area comes before us at a time when it could hardly be more topical , since the Euro-Canadian declaration which should have been adopted by the Council last week is still under examination today .
Among the obstacles that have occurred is the Commission 's determination to slip in free trade everywhere , even when the Council will have none of it , and the Commission 's strange omission of the entire heritage of relations between the Union Member States and the Canadian provinces .
Let us hope that these failings will be corrected .
And then there is the thorny problem of fisheries , which we have been considering today .
On this point , the European Community is calling on Canada to ratify the bilateral ' Fisheries ' agreement of 1992 , which provides in particular , and among other things , for the reopening of Canadian waters and Canadian ports to Community vessels .
The Arias Cañete report , as adopted , supports that demand very strongly , and so do we .
This matter of fisheries brings to light an institutional quirk which may help to explain the apparent weakness of the Union in the day-to-day handling of its problems .
Within the North Atlantic Fisheries Organization , as within many other international bodies in the fisheries sector , the European Union has only one vote in total , rather than one vote per Member State .
So , within the North-Western Atlantic Fisheries Organization , the European Union as a whole carries the same weight as Cuba .
The Commission really must be very anxious to be thought of as the single Government of Europe if it has come to the point of tolerating this kind of anomaly .
This is something that absolutely must be put right in the future .
This fisheries report contains observations to which special attention must be drawn . I refer in particular to the following recitals :
J ) which concerns Canadian law which the EU cannot accept .
The EU has nothing to do with these provisions as far as fisheries is concerned . The EU must learn to respect individual states ' sovereignty as regards industries which are important to them ;
V ) which concerns the fact that Canada wishes to have zero quotas for cod , which the EU does not regard as being justified pending new scientific data on the subject .
We consider that in the case of fish quotas the precautionary principle must apply so that stocks are not reduced / wiped out .
The EU should respect Canada 's opinion concerning zero quotas as an ecological measure based on the precautionary principle .
Mather report

The Danish social democrats are voting in favour of the report on minimum requirements for improving the protection of workers potentially at risk from explosive atmospheres .
Workers should be given the best possible protection .
However , a connection is lacking between this proposal for a directive and other similar proposals , for example on chemical agents .
It appears strange for special rules to be laid down when the general basis regarding chemical agents is not yet in place .
The scope of the directive is thus unclear .
We therefore hope to see a move soon from the Commission on chemical agents .
Stenius-Kaukonen report
In that benzene is an extremely hazardous substance which is also extremely common I intend to vote for the most far-reaching requirements which are put forward .
Naturally it is my hope that a majority in the EU parliament will also have the nerve to set proper requirements as regards the protection of employees .
Even with a limit value of 1 ppm , which is proposed in the report , there are considerable risks of humans contracting leukaemia .
It is therefore reasonable that the limit value should be lowered after 1 January 2001 , as proposed in amendment 20 by the Green Group .
This limit value is also being proposed in Denmark , for example , at the present time .
In this connection it is important that it is made absolutely clear that this provision is binding and that no exceptions will be made .
I naturally support the amendments relating to these requirements .
Barón Crespo report
The Titley report on aid for reconstruction in the former Yugoslavia is full of high-minded sentiments .
It is a pity , though , that this solicitude did not put in an appearance earlier , five years ago , when a number of States in the former Yugoslavia expressed the desire to gain independence and sovereignty .
At that time , for the European Union to have recognized the independence of those States would no doubt have made it possible to avoid the war , and the destruction for which we are now paying , in every sense .
We shall not be voting in favour of this report , for that reason and many others : because the only country that will benefit at present is Bosnia , since Croatia - one-third of whose territory has been ravaged by fighting - has been denied access to the PHARE programme , has seen negotiations for a cooperation agreement with the EU suspended , and has had the gates of the Council of Europe slammed in its face , though those gates were open to the great Russian ' democracy ' .
Because Europe , despite the promises of other donors , is responsible for 1 / 3 of the donations in theory and 2 / 3 in practice .
And because , above all , it does not seem to us that Europe will emerge politically strengthened by bearing the financial burden of the consequences of the international policing operations conducted by the United States under the leadership of the highly globalist United Nations Organization .
Unless , of course , this Europe of yours believes that its international political dimension can only be asserted under the shadow of the Clinton administration .
Pex report
The Pex report is about the way the Council treated the European Parliament at the last conciliation procedure .
And here the question arises : what interest has the Council in ignoring the European Parliament 's proposed amendments in this manner ?
After all Parliament is not primarily concerned with disputes about areas of competence , as keeps being suggested , but with the matter in hand .
The Council 's proposed regulation falls well behind the existing means of supporting the CIS states .
Furthermore it does not take account of the new facts , namely that the EU now has a long border with Russia .
And lastly , what is called the compromise package really only regulates means of improving the way TACIS funds can flow back into the European countries and in such a way that all EU countries get their share .
It fully ignores the fact that the sufferers will be the people in the CIS countries .
Nor does it take note of the fact that small projects in particular will hardly be allowed now .
The disappearance of the entire social dimension and most of the environmental and health aspects will considerably impair the process of transformation in these countries .
By its attitude the Council is showing that it does not want these improvements in terms of content either , which is why it is hiding behind the arguments of the compromise package .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0735 / 96 by Mr La Malfa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the elections in Albania ; -B4-0774 / 96 by Mrs Green and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the elections in Albania ; -B4-0783 / 96 by Mr Pasty and Mr Caligaris , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the elections in Albania ; -B4-0791 / 96 by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the elections in Albania ; -B4-0794 / 96 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the elections in Albania ; -B4-0813 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the electoral process in Albania ; -B4-0826 / 96 by Mrs Pack and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the electoral process in Albania .
Madam President , in this debate today the issue is not whether we agree that the elections in Albania were undemocratic .
Sadly , everyone acknowledges that there was an orgy of intimidation against the opposition , even those who are endeavouring to paint the situation in a more favourable light .
The self-delusion of some people who maintain that it is a case of good pro-Westerners on the one side and supporters of the former regime on the other - that , too , is reprehensible , given that the roles of everyone , now and before , are known fact .
They are all children of the former regime .
The fact , however , that nine opposition parties boycotted the second round of the elections , the fact that the Albanian electoral committee itself felt obliged to declare the elections invalid in 17 constituencies and the fact that no international observers were present when the new elections took place in those 17 constituencies do not say much for the progress being made towards democratization in Albania .
This country is a member of the Council of Europe .
It aspires to closer links with the European Union .
Nevertheless , it is true that Albania is still struggling to find its way in Europe and equally true that the road to democracy is not an easy one , particularly when a country has no tradition of democracy .
The recent happenings are far from encouraging .
If the European Parliament and the European Union genuinely wish to help the Albanian people along the road to democracy , they must issue a stern warning to Mr Berisha and condemn unequivocally conduct which may serve the interests in the region of certain parties in the medium term but will lead to greater tension in the long term .
The region is already full of tension and burdened down by suffering in myriad forms as a result of the open machinations of powerful states and the zones of influence that they are striving to regain .
Madam President , undemocratic elections have taken place in Albania , which is a member of the Council of Europe .
The lack of a free media , the exclusion of certain opposition parties from the elections together with serious irregularities have made the Albanian elections into a farce .
The OSCE report is very clear on that .
We must do everything we can to steer Albania as quickly as possible back on to the road to full democracy . Albania is entitled to this , but so are we .
So the elections must be held again from scratch .
Political prisoners must be released and the conditions for the holding of new elections must be drastically improved .
To that end the Union must pressurize the Albanian authorities and suspend cooperation with Albania .
The European Parliament must send a clear message .
Consequently the Liberal Group will support the amendments put down by the Socialist Group because any half-hearted pronouncement will only encourage President Berisha to continue his undemocratic behaviour .
He has to understand that there is at present no democracy , in other words he must listen not to us but to the democratic will of his own people who are at last free of the yoke of the past .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , although the elections took place scarcely a month ago , the public has almost forgotten what happened around these elections .
But the European Union institutions must not overlook these incidents .
According to information received from international observers , these elections involved very serious infringements of the principle of free and democratic elections .
Intimidation of voters and actual cheating were observed on several occasions and on such a massive scale that Helsinki Watch , the international human rights organization , pointed out in a report on these elections that their results must not be recognized because of the systematic infringements of local and international rules .
Even before the elections , President Berisha and his government took a number of measures which considerably restricted the chances of the opposition parties .
The opposition had little chance of presenting itself and its programmes to the media .
The infringements of the democratic electoral process even led all the opposition parties to withdraw from the second ballot .
Where there is no opposition , there is no democratic state .
But President Berisha has achieved one thing now : in contrast to 1994 - remember - when the draft constitution he proposed was rejected by a clear majority of the inhabitants , he can now fashion the Albanian state as he wants and dictate what happens in the country .
As a result of international pressure elections were held again in 17 constituencies without the participation of the opposition parties .
It is clear that this has not saved democracy in Albania .
Only new general elections that respect the international rules can put the democratic process in Albania back on track .
No democratic party in the European Union can even consider any further cooperation with a party that shows so little respect for democracy and is only interested in staying in power .
To pretend that nothing has happened is hypocrisy !
It is not enough to appeal as the Christian Democrats have done to the government party to make responsible and prudent use of the re-confirmation of their position as the majority party in order to achieve broad agreement wherever possible .
That would legitimize cheating and be a threat to democracy .
For the European Social Democrats it is not the colour of the government party that is important .
All that counts for us is respect for democracy .
Full or partial recognition of these elections is equal to the rejection of democratic principles for Albania .
So we call on the Council and the Commission to freeze relations with Albania until new elections have been held in this country under international democratic rules .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a Chamber as deserted as the one in which we now find ourselves in this form of normality that Parliament has appropriated for itself whereby policy has to be evacuated , it is appropriate that we should be discussing Albania and the difficult , the very difficult phase we are now seeing , with the holding of elections that were clearly completely , partly or largely irregular , as claimed by many , although not all , observers .
And in these circumstances we are now witnessing a rather strange turn of events in that the two main groups in the House - which alone account for 400 , if not more , Members - are not signing a text on Albania , are not therefore taking up a position , unless to absent themselves , and are not abiding by the compromise that was in fact negotiated with the Socialist Group and the PPE Group also .
That document , signed by Group of the European Liberal Democratic and Reformist Party , the Group of the European Radical Alliance , the Green Group in the European Parliament and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left endeavours to be balanced and robust , a strong but not an unbalanced appeal , as would appear to me to be the implication of what Mrs Hoff said .
I would in fact agree with what Mrs Hoff said , were the philosophy of the Socialist group applied to all of the situations in which this happens , but it seems to me odd that in the case of Albania the Socialist Group should want to adopt a position which is absolutely at odds with that of the other part of the House and which above all - I repeat - is being applied in a somewhat unilateral manner to that country and not others .
I therefore again ask the scant representatives of the groups I have mentioned to think again so that the text we have drawn up as a compromise and that I would describe as robust but acceptable can be adopted without going too far in one direction or the other .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
The electoral fraud that has just occurred in the recent sham elections in Albania has been internationally recognised .
Violations of the political and human rights of countless leaders , party members , trade unionists and members of the civil society in Albania are internationally recognised , too - violations that took place before , during and after the sham elections took place .
In this context , the European Parliament must either adopt a clear position on this issue or set serious precedents for the future in similar situations .
The European Parliament must adopt a clear position and not adopt any position that is in cahoots with democratic mockeries .
In order to adopt that clear position we are tabling amendments along with the Socialist Group calling clearly for the elections to be re-held in accordance with international standards - or else any economic and political cooperation could be suspended .
Madam President , as I had cause to say at the last part-session that we held in Brussels , practically all observers , of every nationality , found that the elections in Albania were irregular , and that the irregularities took place before the poll , that is to say in the course of the electoral campaign - as a result , for instance , of the fact that not everyone had sufficient opportunity to campaign ; during the poll itself , as a result of clear irregularities in access to the ballot-box , by preventing the monitoring of the poll itself , and also after the poll because it was possible , contrary to democratic principles , to examine the votes and because opposition protests were suppressed .
We are therefore dealing with a failure to respect the normal rules of democracy and have therefore to ask ourselves a question : what kind of process of democratization is under way in Albania at this point in time ?
We are dealing - perhaps for the first time - with regression of the normal democratic process .
That the previous elections went better than these therefore means that no attention was paid by international bodies , including the European Union , to ensuring that this was a progressive and not a regressive process .
In that context , it is a matter of regret that yesterday , during the debate on the Italian presidency , President Dini did not discuss the issue of Albania .
I believe that it is at any rate necessary at this point to hold new elections that respect democratic rules .
We have to work towards getting the Albanian Government to change policies and give guarantees to that effect , but we have also to work towards securing rapprochement between the government and the opposition so that dialogue can be reopened in Albania .
And we can also do this by bearing in mind that we need to replace the 1992 economic cooperation agreement : means of exerting pressure are therefore available to us .
Finally , I wish to remind the House of the need to apply , from now on at least , the same methods and the same criteria to all countries in which a process of democratization is under way .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to stick to the facts and not to things someone has read somewhere .
One : initially all the parties took part in the first elections in Albania .
At that point , according to its own statements , the opposition saw no unsurmountable problems in participating in the elections .
Two : the opposition parties , led by the socialist parties , withdrew their candidates and even their electoral assistants two hours before the end of the elections , but after the announcement by an American opinion poll that the election results were extremely unfavourable to them .
Three : the latter event obviously led to irregularities at some polling stations .
Four : the independent electoral committee found that irregularities and acts of violence had taken place in 17 constituencies and repeat elections were held there last Sunday .
Five : the opposition refused to take part in this second election round .
Nobody , my dear Mr Bertens , was excluded !
Six : following the opposition 's call for a boycott the recorded electoral turnout was only 18 % lower .
Seven : the high vote for the Democratic Party was therefore confirmed at the second ballot .
Eight : the various observers of the first ballot did not agree in their assessments .
Let me remind you , for instance , of the Helsinki Human Rights Group .
And since only one report was taken into consideration , the ODIHR report by the OSCE , there really are doubts about the election .
The composition of the group of electoral observers is extremely questionable .
I identified no less than 14 of these electoral observers as Young Socialists , as genuine Young Socialists and not parliamentarians .
In addition there were two Marxists , who were highly regarded guests in Albania at the time of Hoxha .
These 14 people were originally invited as observers of the communists and only subsequently recruited by the ODIHR group to observe the elections .
We should also remember that the EU ambassador and the American ambassador in Tirana drafted a document yesterday in which they picked the ODIHR report to pieces .
And they were strictly opposed to these conclusions also being put to use here .
We should take note of that and not only of what fits in with our political calculations .
Nine : the Albanians voted in accordance with their own views and not the wishes of the Left in this House , which greatly pleases me personally .
Ten : on the call for the release of political prisoners , let me say that I know of no political prisoners in Albania .
I only know of the case of a prominent left-winger who is , however , in prison for financial offences - that is to say , a legal matter that I will not become involved in .
Eleven : as Mrs Hoff said , I expect the Albanian Government to use its large majority with moderation and to involve the opposition in its activities , even though the latter rejected it .
I hope this opposition will take a constructive approach , for it too represents its fellow-citizens and its country .
Twelve : Albania had to find its way from the Middle Ages to modern times , i.e. , from the high-security wing of communism to democracy , in a space of five years .
That is hellishly difficult and there will still be a lot of mistakes for a long time to come .
So let us not be so arrogant and blinkered in our judgment !
We too found it difficult to achieve our democratic standards .
We can be proud of them , but now we should help Albania to refine these standards further .
That is what we should do , rather than rejecting it !
Madam President , in response to what other speakers before me have said .
I am happy to echo what Mr Bertens said about his Group 's position and the clear message which his Group too wishes to send to the Albanian Government , to the effect that the situation there is not acceptable to us .
Listening to Mrs Pack of the Christian Democratic Group I think our assessments of the situation there are quite a long way apart .
Our concern is not so much with a party-political assessment of the situation there but primarily with the conclusion that there were so many irregularities in these elections that one cannot speak of a credible result and if there is so much uncertainty , so much doubt , we think the elections have to be held afresh .
That is not a party-political choice .
Our aim is to reach an objective verdict on what is going on in Albania .
Observers , including observers other than those mentioned by Mrs Pack , identified so many irregularities , and where observers were not present all manner of things may have happened so that one can in all fairness talk of systematic fraud .
In a situation like this , where there is so much doubt , we think that fresh elections have to be held and that we as Parliament should make a clear pronouncement on them .
We can argue at length over who was or is to blame for the way things turned out but that is irrelevant to the question of whether the elections were fair .
For the Albanians ' understanding of democracy it is better , if errors are discovered , that the elections should be held all over again .
That is better than endless discussions about where exactly irregularities occurred and where the voting needs to be done again .
I also think , in conclusion , that we should treat Albania in the same way as we treat other countries , in accordance with the standards applied by the Council of Europe , and we cannot adjust those each time the political situation changes .
My Group has clearly endorsed this position , also through the amendments to the joint resolution .
In short , it makes it clear that we stand firmly behind the voter in Albania who has been treated with such contempt .
Madam President , when I listened to Mrs Pack I actually had the feeling I should hand her my two minutes ' speaking time , for what she said was so interesting , so clear and factual , and a good answer to the irresponsible demagogy we are faced with today .
The truth is , indeed , that we find ourselves in a time of democratic decline .
Anyone who knows a bit about Albania - unfortunately too few people know this country - will remember how things started out there .
I was there shortly after the collapse of the communist regime and saw the dreadful conditions that prevailed there .
Of course it is quite clear that you cannot have the kind of democracy we know in Switzerland or the UK there yet .
But there is no doubt that great progress has been made .
Something really is being done for the people in Albania .
The country has a government that really wants to do the right thing , and we have to recognize that .
That irregularities occurred during the elections cannot be denied .
The fact that the elections had to be repeated in 17 constituencies is evidence of that .
But in most constituencies the electoral process was orderly .
I very much regret that the opposition , which for the rest was made up almost entirely of communists , withdrew the electoral observers before the end of the elections .
They simply did not want to find out the truth because they knew full well from polls carried out in the course of the elections that they were facing a major defeat .
So I believe that we should do our utmost to ensure that Albania gets what it deserves , namely that it is accepted into the community of European democracies , even if that will still take a while .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is , I believe , no question that the elections in Albania were not completely democratic , in fact that there were serious violations of the most fundamental principles of democratic competition : that is the position , there is nothing to discuss .
But it seems to me that , as usual , we are moving from one extreme to another .
We did all we could to secure some kind of European protection for the elections in Albania to achieve , as far as possible , non-violent transition towards democracy , and now we are calling for everything to be dismantled , for the elections to be held afresh and chaos to be returned to that country .
That , I believe , is an approach that we have to reject : we need to exert strong pressure on the Albanian Government that has won the - in many instances , I repeat , nondemocratic - elections to hold them afresh in those districts in which irregularities have been established , but only in those districts .
I think it incumbent on Europe , at this stage , to monitor closely , without creating further upheaval , this process of transition in Albania : it is not democracy that is at stake here but above all civil coexistence within the whole Balkan region .
Madam President , the final report of the OSCE on the elections in Albania confirms previous reports detailing the irregularities which took place during voting and reports cases in which there were in fact infringements of the new electoral law approved last February .
The European Union has issued a forceful statement concerning those events and has asked for the elections to be held again in those constituencies in which there had been irregularities .
It also stated that the continuation of the electoral process according to international democratic rules constituted an essential factor for the successful future development of relations between Albania and the European Union .
We also condemn the violent police response to the demonstration on 28 May .
The Commission has received in Brussels the leaders of the Albanian opposition parties to hear their views and their criticisms of the way in which the elections were held and it was clear that the elections would have to be held again in various constituencies .
The decision taken by the Albanian Government to hold the elections again in 17 of those constituencies is a step in the right direction but it is regrettable that this has not given time to take into account and evaluate the final report of the OSCE and for observers to be present when they are held again .
Only yesterday an informal meeting of the permanent Council of the OSCE was held in Vienna with an Albanian delegation to discuss the OSCE 's own report .
Representatives of that organization were invited to Tirana to deal with the recommendations and technical aspects of the report .
It - the report - includes recommendations on improving electoral procedures and the holding of elections .
It passed no judgment on the general validity of the elections nor did it state the exact number of constituencies in which it would be appropriate to hold them again .
It is clear that respect for democratic principles and legality will be decisive for the future development of relations with Albania .
It is true , as some honourable Members have said , that Albania is an important factor for stability in an extremely unstable region and it is also true that in recent years important progress has been made in the economic field .
We must therefore continue to support this internal trend which , I repeat , is in the right direction .
In recent months the Commission has been engaged on preparing a negotiating mandate for a new trade and cooperation agreement with Albania .
For the moment the Commission has preferred to wait to see how the situation in Albania develops and whether , through the actions of the party in power and the dialogue between President Berisha and the opposition parties , it is possible to restore calm in Albanian political life and gradually to establish normal democratic working .
Thank you , Mr Marín !
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the motion for a resolution ( B4-0734 / 96 ) by Mr La Malfa and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democratic and Reformist Party , on the elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Madam President , it is very important that democratic elections should be held in Bosnia .
The date has been set and we must stick to it .
However justified a postponement might seem in the present circumstances , that would carry a lot of risks , for example Bosnia might disintegrate further and we would have to continue our negotiations with the warlords of recent years even longer .
Bosnia needs a stable and legitimate government , based on democratic elections .
We must thus do all we can to improve the conditions in which those elections are held .
First point : IFOR 's mandate must be broadened so that IFOR can arrest war criminals and oversee the return of refugees .
Free media must be encouraged .
Separatist forces must be firmly resisted .
Not only must Karadzic and Mladic be put behind bars , we must also reject the independence of the Bosnian Croats and strongly condemn the attack on Silajdzic .
The announcement that the Bosnian Serbs are to set up their own tribunal to try their war criminals is yet one more slap in the face for the peace process .
Our opposition to these developments must be very resolute and unequivocal .
We must use every available instrument to get the message across .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission fully endorses the European Parliament 's resolution on the holding of elections in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
They represent the crucial factor for the peace process and will form the basis for the Constitution of BosniaHerzegovina which will give its institutions legitimacy .
In the Council for implementing peace in the former Yugoslavia held in Florence last week , preparation for the elections was one of the main subjects .
Although conditions are far from ideal , the feeling was that it was vital to stick to the date of 14 September .
To postpone the elections would aggravate the division of Bosnia-Herzegovina and would leave the country without appropriate tools to work on its future .
The OSCE must ensure that the conditions for holding elections are satisfied and fix the date .
It may be assumed that the decision will be taken towards the end of June .
So it will be necessary to make an enormous effort between now and the elections to improve the present difficult situation .
The slowness of the return of refugees and displaced persons , owing to lack of freedom of movement , of course complicates preparations for the elections .
Freedom of movement does exist in theory but in practice there are numerous problems creating a climate of fear and mistrust aggravated by the presence in the Republica Srpska of people like Karadzic and Mladic who stand accused before the War Crimes Tribunal .
The relationship between the various entities is subject to separatist tendencies and insufficient progress has been made within the Croat-Muslim Federation .
Access to the communication media by all political parties is moreover still restricted .
Since January the OSCE which was entrusted by the Dayton agreements with the supervision and preparation of the elections has been working on the spot in the difficult political and practical conditions I am describing .
A provisional electoral commission has been set up to supervise the process and the rules on electoral registration , the right to vote - including that of refugees - and access to the communication media .
Similarly a series of programmes intended for civic education has been organized .
The Member States of the Union and the Commission fully support the OSCE 's actions .
The Member States - and the Commission -have strongly supported the OSCE 's voluntary fund used for financing electoral preparations .
The Community budget 's contribution for civic educational material and for the manufacture of voting booths and ballot boxes comes to ECU 2 million .
By means of a common Union programme we shall finance to the amount of ECU 3 million the deployment of observers to monitor appropriate preparations for the elections .
Considerable help is also being given to the independent communication media .
In this connection the Commission will contribute ECU 2 million to support Carl Bildt 's proposal to set up an independent television channel .
And naturally the European Union as such will also take part in supervising the elections according to rules to be studied with the OSCE election supervision coordinator .
Thank you , Mr Marín !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
East Timor and Indonesia
B4-0776 / 96 by Mr de Melo and Mr Cunha , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in East Timor ; -B4-0782 / 96 by Mr Marinho and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in East Timor ; -B4-0784 / 96 by Mr Vieira and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the events in Baucau ( East Timor ) ; -B4-0785 / 96 by Mr Pradier and Mr Vandemeulebroucke , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in East Timor and events at Baucau ; -B4-0806 / 96 by Mr Ribeiro and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on East Timor ; -B4-0819 / 96 by Mrs McKenna and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the human rights situation in East Timor and Indonesia ; -B4-0831 / 96 by Mr Lucas Pires , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Indonesian Government repression and imprisonment of Timorese demonstrators in Baucau ; -B4-0764 / 96 by Mrs D 'Ancona and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the sentence imposed on a former member of parliament in Indonesia ; -B4-0777 / 96 by Mr Pimenta , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the lack of fundamental freedoms in Indonesia ; -B4-0800 / 96 by Mr Ribeiro and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Indonesia ; -B4-0817 / 96 by Mr Telkämper and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the V Group , on the human rights situation in Indonesia ; -B4-0825 / 96 by Mr Moorhouse , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the human rights situation in Indonesia ; Nigeria
B4-0737 / 96 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the murder of Mrs Abiola in Nigeria ; -B4-0787 / 96 by Mr Macartney and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the murder of the wife of the Nigerian opposition politician Moshood Abiola ; -B4-0799 / 96 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the murder of Mrs Kudiratu Abiola in Nigeria ; -B4-0815 / 96 by Mrs Müller and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the assassination of Mrs Abiola in Nigeria ; -B4-0827 / 96 by Mr Moorhouse and Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the PPE Group , on human rights in Nigeria ; Burma
B4-0740 / 96 by Mrs André-Léonard and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Burma ; -B4-0801 / 96 by Mr Vinci and Mrs Sierra González , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the banning of the NLD in Burma ; -B4-0822 / 96 by Mr Telkämper and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the V Group , on human rights violations in Burma ; -B4-0832 / 96 by Mr Moorhouse and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on human rights in Burma ; Turkey
B4-0769 / 96 by Mr Newens and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on human rights and the situation in Turkey ; -B4-0797 / 96 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights situation and prison conditions in Turkey ; -B4-0820 / 96 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the V Group , on human rights violations in Turkey ; -B4-0828 / 96 by Mr Moorhouse and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the human rights situation in Turkey ; Chile
B4-0762 / 96 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on behalf of the V Group , Mr Pradier , on behalf of the ARE Group , Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the ELDR Group , Mr Fernández-Albor , on behalf of the PPE Group , Mrs Sornosa Martínez and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , Mr Pons Grau , on behalf of the PSE Group , on amnesty for the alleged kidnappers of Carmelo Soria ; -B4-0795 / 96 by Mrs Sornosa Martínez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the amnesty for the alleged kidnappers of Carmelo Soria ; -B4-0811 / 96 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mrs Telkämper , on behalf of the V Group , on an amnesty for the alleged kidnappers of Carmelo Soria ; Raghbir Singh Johal
B4-0780 / 96 by Mr Tomlinson and Mr Murphy , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the detention of Raghbir Singh Johal ; Victims of Chernobyl in Belarus
B4-0829 / 96 by Mrs Reding and Mr Moorhouse , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the Belarussian authorities ' suppression of the commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident and their ban on medical aid to child victims through independent NGOs ; China
B4-0772 / 96 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the serious situation of Wei Jingsheng and the human rights violations in China ; -B4-0778 / 96 by Mrs Larive and Mrs Gredler , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Wei Jingsheng and the lack of human rights in China ; -B4-0792 / 96 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the serious situation of Wei Jingsheng and the human rights violations in China ; -B4-0816 / 96 by Mr Ripa di Meana and others , on behalf of the V Group , on human rights violations in China and the situation of Wei Jingsheng .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again we have condemned here the attitude of the Indonesian authorities that are continuing to use military repression on the people of East Timor and its youth in particular .
Indeed once again this month the Indonesian authorities killed , wounded and arrested young Timorese citizens who were demonstrating peacefully in Baucau for freedom of religious practice following acts of provocation and religious intolerance culminating in the profanation of a Catholic religious image .
In Jakarta the Indonesian police , once again , shot a Timorese youth .
The gaols of East Timor and Indonesia continue to detain hundreds of political prisoners .
The Indonesian government continues to ignore all of the positions taken by the international community calling for the respect of human rights and the right of the people of East Timor to self-determination . This cannot be tolerated .
It is important that the European Parliament once again condemns the Indonesian authorities for the use of military repression against the people of East Timor and demands the immediate release of all political prisoners , in particular the lead of the resistance , Xanana Gusmão , and stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the fight of the people of Timor for self-determination and an end to the illegal occupation of their territory .
We cannot use words alone .
To demonstrate our solidarity with the victims of the struggles and their families we must also call on Member States once again to stop selling arms to Indonesia and lending it military assistance .
Madam President , the violent , bloody and deathly incidents described in the explanation of the joint resolution show that the sensitivity of the majority of Members of the European Parliament has not yet been taken in by the pro-Indonesia propaganda and the fight of the Timorese people for observance of UN resolutions and the respect of human rights is well known , backed and respected by the majority of political groups in this house and most Member States on the Council .
This resolution only confirms that the cause of the East Timorese people is gaining more and more notoriety and international political backing as the repression of the Indonesian dictatorship insists on violence .
Therefore , apart from common positions , occasionally adopted by the Council and suffering the ups and downs in terms of publication that are known to all by dint of the British position , positions that confront Indonesia vis-à-vis the respect of UN resolutions , I emphasise the common desire of the European Parliament that Indonesia should quickly and clearly respond to the dialogue initiative of the Portuguese prime minister as a first significant step towards finding a political solution for the East Timor problem .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
The illegitimate , illegal and bloody occupation of East Timor by Indonesia is one of the recent decades ' most serious and violent conflicts .
Twenty years of war and military repression have led to large numbers of deaths , wounded , invalids and prisoners , challenging the culture , history and sensitivity of the increasingly martyred Maubere people .
The events of last week in Baucau show once more how false have been the promises of peace and how sham is the respect of human rights and free exercise of religion in Timor .
The Indonesian authorities took part in a terrible provocation of the mostly Catholic population 's feelings .
They gratuitously insulted symbols of a religion that they must respect , and killed , maimed and arrested indiscriminately people who legitimately dared to protest .
All of these deeds must be strongly condemned but unfortunately some countries that speak of peace and the respect of human rights have been lending backing , weapons and logistics enabling the war and violence to go on .
As we saw in December international hypocrisy actually condoned the terrible crimes that have gone on , you might say , in litis consortio .
There is no point in continuing to churn out resolutions condemning the Indonesians in the European Parliament , the UN or any other forum , unless there is a strong will and genuine desire to free the Timorese people from the Indonesian yoke and restore peace and security to its people .
The truth is that if the many countries that claim to defend freedom and human rights really wanted it a solution for the East Timor problem could be found faster than one might think .
It is time to say enough is enough .
It is time to act instead of just talking .
It is time to say that this barbarity is unbearable and shameful for the whole of mankind .
To cap it all , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today in the press room of the European Parliament , is a press release strongly attacking Portugal , a European Union country that has only been defending the freedom of Timor , dated 3 July 1995 - yes , 3 July 1995 - revealing the attitude and permanent inflexibility of its authors .
A year without changing a single comma of this matter is an eternity .
Madam President , Timor again . Some of our colleagues seem to be a bit tired of this issue .
For our part even if the Timorese themselves were tired - and , to their credit , they are not - and even if the Indonesians terminated their genocide , with the tolerance of the international community against its own positions , we still would not be sick and tired - our indignation would be as great .
Is there anything new ?
Yes , still more aggression and provocations following on from military occupation , and still more demonstrations by a people demanding self-determination .
There is also the fact that we are discussing , umbilically , human rights in Indonesia and the occupation and repression that goes on in a still to be decolonised territory .
The same root for two different situations .
We must not be deluded into thinking that the international political issue can be solved by extension if there is more democracy in Indonesia since that would imply that East Timor is part and parcel of Indonesia .
Representatives of the Timorese people are meeting Indonesian democrats .
This is a positive signal that we applaud but they are meeting to coordinate different struggles and not to mix up the internal and external struggles .
Then people come along in the service of the current Indonesian regime - they should be paid no heed or honour - to accuse Portugal of being the colonizing power and diverting attention away from the fact that this is a case of unfinished decolonisation business - this ignores the fact that the Indonesian government has not - yet - responded to the Portuguese initiative in the framework of negotiations under the aegis of the United Nations .
They have used wily manoeuvres and we shall have nothing to do with them .
Let us repudiate them .
The question is the right of a people to self-determination , prevented by a military occupation that has led to religious , cultural and physical genocide .
Madam President , I am hoping that East Timor will be top of Ireland 's agenda on foreign policy during the Irish presidency .
I believe the best way we can help East Timor is to openly criticise our EU partners who are arming the Indonesian dictatorship that has subjected the Timorese to 20 years of murder , rape , torture and oppression .
We should not be afraid of offending our EU partners by condemning their cooperation with tyranny .
This is one of the problems with this compromise resolution , that it is too weak on this point .
This year at least three European Union countries have been involved in arms deals with the regime of General Suharto .
Britain exported two Hawk jets to Indonesia in April .
That is the first in a batch of 24 .
It is part of a £ 2 billion contract for British Aerospace .
The pilots for these jets are due to be trained in Wales .
Sweden has decided to resume arms sales to Indonesia .
Finland issued a licence in March for the export of 60 armoured troop carriers to Jakarta .
I think it is fitting today that we are talking about this issue because it is the 50th birthday of Xanana Gusmão , the Timorese resistance leader who is serving a 20-year sentence for opposing the Indonesian rule .
In the eyes of the Timorese he is the Nelson Mandela of East Timor .
Many governments and many human rights organizations have called for his release and for the release of all political prisoners .
The other thing the Indonesians have to realise is that we need people to have access to East Timor .
I was prevented myself from going there .
Parliament should be forcing Indonesia to allow people in there to see what is really going on .
Madam President , some people are tired of hearing the East Timor issue being raised here at the European Parliament .
But the problem could easily be solved : all Indonesia needs to do is to stop systematically violating fundamental rights , such as the right to self-determination , the right to life , and in the specific case of Baucau , the right to religious freedom .
Some people think that these things are less important than the roads that have been built in Timor by the Indonesians .
But they certainly built more gaols .
Thankfully there are people who do not swap the values of freedom and identity for concrete buildings and roads .
That alone merits our appreciation .
Finally how come the European Parliament has agreed on this for the last ten years , since the Portuguese arrived ?
Why do the United Nations not recognise the Indonesian occupation ?
All they all blind ?
Why are there bullets and not ballots in Timor ?
How cynical can you get when President Suharto launches a new car called the Timor on which you pay no sales tax , when he negates the most elementary liberty of circulation by Timorese citizens inside and outside the country ?
Although Portugal has been designated administrative power by the UN rejects unilateral solutions and is proposing a dialogue with Indonesia and a joint solution .
The Portuguese prime minister recently made concrete proposals .
But what is serious is that Indonesia has not responded to this proposal and carries on torturing .
Indonesia prefers torture to talks and so we ask for the country to be condemned by the European Parliament , aware that this body and Europe as a whole must be one of the great beacons of fundamental rights in the world .
We shall come here as often as is necessary .
That is the least we can do for the remotest and most ignored of all the suppressed peoples in the world .
Madam President , it distresses us that a country like Indonesia , which we admire in many respects , is unable to resolve a number of structural problems concerning human rights .
It is more serious still that the senseless and pointless repression , the curtailment of press freedom , the use of force against defenceless citizens as in the arrest of Dr Sri Bintang Pamungkas is not tackled seriously by Indonesia itself and that no efforts are being made to find a political solution .
We have people here who would be willing to work together with the Indonesians to find a solution .
That would be better , Madam President , than producing resolutions , since Indonesia takes no notice of these and obviously neither do the Member States since military aid and arms exports continue .
This impasse has to be broken , Madam President .
Madam President , there are three subjects with which we are constantly concerned here when it is a question of the right of a people to self-determination , subjects for which the colonial period is to blame .
They are the occupation of the Western Sahara , Mururoa and , again and again , East Timor .
We have a particular responsibility for that conflict .
We must tell the Indonesians that they must respect human rights .
It is a question here of the right to self-determination of the people of East Timor .
Yet we as Parliament and the EU as a whole also bear a responsibility here .
We have discussed the conflicts of Dili for years .
Now there have once again been demonstrations and incidents .
On 9 and 11 June two people were killed in Baucau .
Injuries , arrests and further oppression are always the consequence .
We are not dealing here with a religious conflict but with forms of systematic oppression .
In Jakarta itself the 25-year-old Imanuel Suares was executed .
We have the acts of oppression in Irian Jaya and one of the extreme cases was the arrest of the former member of parliament , Sri-Bintang Pamungkas , because he had spoken in Germany .
He was accused of intending to instigate demonstrations against Indonesia in Germany .
That is absurd , we can do that ourselves .
But we did guarantee him freedom of expression .
That has to be taken into account .
That is why we call for his release .
We have heard , however , that arms are continuing to be supplied from the UK , from Sweden and from the Federal Republic .
The EU cannot permit that .
Here it is up to the Commission to act .
And it is up to us as Parliament finally to set up the delegation we decided to create in 1991 and called for in countless speeches .
Here I expect an answer from you , Madam President , or from Mr Hänsch .
When will this parliamentary delegation be set up ?
How much longer do we have to go on talking about it ?
Are the discussions here just window-dressing or will this Parliament take action as a parliament ?
Only you can give me this answer from the Bureau .
I hope this matter will be dealt with at the next Bureau meeting .
Madam President , I want to say something about Nigeria , where the murder of Mrs Abiola has darkened what was already a murky political situation .
This murder rekindles the memory of the victory of her husband , Mr Abiola , in the presidential elections just three years ago , and the annulment of the election by the military .
Since then , imprisonment and exile have reduced the opposition to living on scraps .
Mr Abiola , accused of treason , is being held in virtual secrecy and is at risk of the death sentence .
We call for an international Commission of Inquiry to take up the investigations necessary to ensure that those responsible for Mrs Abiola 's murder are punished , and we call for sanctions to be invoked against the Lagos regime .
On that point , after the execution of the Ogoni , the junta - following international pressure - promised a programme of disengagement designed to hand power back to the civilian authorities in October 1998 .
In the meantime , in order to ensure that this return to normal takes place as soon as possible , it is necessary for the sanctions to be tightened and implemented by mutual agreement between the Commonwealth , the United Nations , the United States and the European Union .
Madam President , the increasing volume and tempo of the human rights violations perpetrated by the Nigerian Government have brought us to a crossroads .
These violations take many forms : restrictions on freedom of expression and association , improper detention without trial , harassment of opposition parties , persecution of intellectuals , capital punishment and collective executions as a matter of routine .
At this parting of the ways , there are two roads open to us . One is the road of indifference or resignation , by following which the European Union would bow to the realpolitik dictated by Nigeria 's oil wealth , lowering to halfmast the standard of human rights and democratic ideals .
The second way would be the way of courage and dignity , the way that would lead us to demand the release of the political prisoners , with Mr Abiola foremost among them , the way that would enable us to set up an international Commission of Inquiry to throw some light on the murder of Mrs Abiola and , finally , the way that would lead us to resolve upon firm political and economic measures to lend weight to the demands we shall be making .
That is the way , and the only way , that will enable us one day to be proud to salute the new Nigeria , as on another occasion we were rightly proud , in the light of the action we had taken , to salute the new South Africa .
Madam President , this House has to protest once again by way of a further resolution condemning murder by the Nigerian Government .
The murder of Mrs Abiola is simply the last and most serious incident in a long series of violations of democracy and human rights in Nigeria .
The time has come for us to ask ourselves - and I am addressing the Commission here - whether we should continue to wait or should try taking substantial measures .
I think that this latest incident may lead us finally to call for the perpetrators of this murder to be identified , and the only way of doing this is to set up an international commission of inquiry , because we certainly cannot expect the murderers to hold an investigation into themselves .
Do we want to do this ?
Do we want to take that kind of action ?
I also believe that it is no longer possible to put off isolating this Nigerian regime within the African continent .
And , as the European Union , we already have the means of doing just that , because Nigeria belongs to the ACP Assembly .
We must take action at European level , and Europe can do this because commercial relations exist and I think that the time has come to impose exemplary sanctions that can no longer be deferred .
Madam President , we are shocked at the death of Mrs Abiola , whose husband is in prison even though he was legitimately elected .
We are shocked at the way the Nigerian Government is behaving towards us .
The murder of Ken Saro-Wiwa gave rise to vehement international protests .
There were resolutions and discussions .
The Nigerian Government took an arrogant attitude to us in the Committee on Development and Cooperation and to the ACP Assembly but in the end there was some hope that we could enter into a dialogue and achieve a certain amount of democratization .
This hope sprang partly from the fact that we have economic relations with Nigeria and that new agreements were concluded .
Some of this has been destroyed again as a result of this murder .
This dictatorship is being supported by our trade relations , by us buying up oil instead of imposing an embargo and lastly also by the European Union selling arms .
We should not get our hands dirty here .
We should stop at this point and demand that the Nigerian Government initiate a process of democratization , immediately release Mr Abiola , move towards new elections and take legal measures to prosecute the murderers of Mrs Abiola .
Only by so doing can it signal a move towards democratization and real respect for human rights .
Madam President , the military junta in Nigeria rules the country gun in hand and it arrests and murders political opponents and representatives of the civilian population without pity .
The latest prominent victim is Mrs Abiola , wife of the democratically elected President Abiola .
Mrs Abiola was merely defending the cause of her husband who was arrested because he was victorious in the 1993 presidential elections and the military junta was not prepared to acknowledge his victory .
And in order to silence the democratic opposition , political opponents are terrorized and if necessary assassinated .
Nigeria is a great power in Africa .
Nigeria has the largest population in Africa and ties many African countries to it through its oil reserves .
The Nigerian military junta thinks that this knowledge and the possession of oil reserves means that it can do as it pleases .
And we have to admit that this arrogant attitude is paying off since world protest is loud but nothing is done .
We saw how the Nigerians operate at the last ACP meeting when fifteen diplomats flew in in a special plane to intimidate the other African countries to such an extent that they did not dare vote in favour of a resolution criticizing Nigeria .
And only urgent intervention by us to secure a secret vote made it possible ultimately for that critical resolution to be passed by a large majority .
We have been complaining about the Nigerian Government 's behaviour for months now and I think it is time to take action .
I would urge the Commissioner to take a firm stand , along the lines set out by Mr Mandela , for example , and that means that really there is no option but to go for a diplomatic boycott , an oil embargo or an arms embargo .
I think the Nigerian authorities will only respond to tough measures after everything they have done .
I urge the Commission to act along these lines .
Mr President , further repressive measures directed at Mrs Suu Kyi and her party have just been adopted by the military junta .
The clear purpose is to muzzle the opposition , by imposing upon it heavy sentences of as much as twenty years ' imprisonment .
Yet that is not preventing the Burmese opposition from gathering in thousands outside the barred gates of the building where Mrs Suu Kyi lives under house arrest .
Her supporters know that by gathering together they are defying the ruling junta .
The deteriorating situation in Burma is causing concern to the ASEAN , which had responded to the appeal by the junta by granting credit to it .
That is why its Member States are hesitating to introduce sanctions against Burma , which might result in the brutal suppression of the activities of Mrs Suu Kyi 's party , the LND .
It is deplorable that some Asian States have now demonstrated their sympathy with the military junta for reasons of commercial opportunism .
We therefore call upon them to ensure that the SLORC - the initials of the ruling junta - is politically and economically isolated .
Since the opposition in Burma has so little room for manoeuvre , it is up to Europe to respond to its appeal for openness and dialogue , in an effort to solve the Burmese question before further blood is spilt .
Mr President , this third human rights subject also concerns the European Union 's relationship with a dictatorial regime and the relations between politics and economic power .
This time we are concerned with Burma .
We are concerned with the National League for Democracy , with Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , with the opposition movement there .
The latest measures taken in Rangoon to suppress the opposition movement , which we support , have shocked us .
The question is , what can we do about it ?
I believe we can make political protests , but we in our Member States should also use our economic power to persuade the appropriate undertakings to implement our political demand , namely : the need to respect human rights .
Undertakings should give practical support to our demands in their dealings with the political leadership of such countries .
If BMW from Germany , Heineken from the Netherlands , Total from France go to Burma now , their economic cooperation should be accompanied by political dialogue .
They must not fail to refer to the need for democracy !
Of course that should also form part of the negotiations which the Commission is conducting on behalf of the European Union and which we are conducting with the ASEAN states to ensure that human rights really are respected there and that the opposition has freedom of movement and expression .
Mr President , last month we adopted a resolution on the human rights situation in Burma which seemed to take sufficient account of the situation there at that time .
Regrettably , however , the political situation appears to have taken a turn for the worse with the fresh threats by SLORC against not only Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi but her followers .
Anyone who turns up to hear the weekly address by Mrs Kyi is threatened with up to twenty years imprisonment .
There are now fears for the personal safety of Mrs Kyi and of her followers .
We therefore make two proposals in the resolution .
One , to invite the Commission to investigate the general human rights situation in Burma .
Two , to ask our own Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy to consider sending a European Parliament mission to Burma for talks with SLORC .
We would also ask the Commission to report on the use of forced child labour in Burma and whether it intends to withdraw the system of generalized preferences .
Mr President , since this Parliament approved the customs Union with Turkey in December of last year , human rights , Kurdish rights and the situation in South-East Turkey , far from improving , have in fact deteriorated , despite all the promises and hopes of the period leading up to our vote in December .
Leyla Zana and the three other former Kurdish MPs have not been released but are on hunger strike along with Kurdish prisoners in many other Turkish jails .
Torture has not been stopped and the prosecution , imprisonment and ill treatment of both Turks and Kurds who speak out for freedom has continued .
Army operations have been stepped up and Turkish troops have again penetrated into Iraqi Kurdistan , despite the declaration of a ceasefire by the PKK on 15 December .
We most earnestly appeal to the next Turkish Government to end this never-ending saga of oppression and civil war , to liberate political prisoners and to seek to settle the conflict in the south-east by peaceful means and not force of arms .
We urge the Council and the Commission at the same time to search out and pursue every possible opportunity to promote initiatives aiming to resolve this tragic situation without further suffering and loss of life .
It is announced today that the doctor appointed by the prison authorities to deal with the health of those on hunger strike has been arrested after a report he made to the effect that prisoners on hunger strike are at the stage of death .
I hope the prisoners can be persuaded to end their hunger strike and it is possible to avoid further loss of life that would add further to the appalling cost in terms of human suffering of people who are all Turkish citizens after all .
We all want closer association with Turkey and its peoples but I hope the Turkish authorities will see this resolution as a clear statement that unless steps are taken to achieve positive improvements in Kurdish and human rights and to end the suffering , our mutual relations will be seriously damaged .
The democratic veneer adopted by the Turkish authorities in order to organize the Habitat II World Conference in Istanbul has quickly peeled off .
Demonstrations have been suppressed , and intellectuals are once more being prosecuted before the courts .
Leyla Zana - who I would remind you was awarded the Sakharov Prize by this Parliament - and three other members of the DEP are still being held in prison under intolerable conditions .
The army has intensified its offensive in the Kurdish provinces : more than 3000 villages have already vanished from the map for refusing to respond to the cease-fire appeal made by the PKK on 15 December 1995 .
This situation , which has lasted all too long , is intolerable .
The approval of the customs union was a bad solution , because it was perceived by the Turkish authorities as an encouragement to persevere .
We should remember that those who asked us - almost begged us - to vote for that customs union were telling us that it would help to improve the situation , that it would strengthen our position .
Well , before customs union , I was able to visit Leyla Zana and the imprisoned members of parliament , and now we can no longer do so .
So we need to start taking action again , in every form and at every level , to secure respect for human rights and the opening of negotiations with the Kurdish organizations to find a peaceful political solution to the Kurdish question , which they have been demanding for a very long time .
Let us not be indifferent , then , to the hunger strikers in the support of political prisoners .
The adoption of our resolution is a logical continuation of this campaign , which has to be relaunched by the Commission and the Council , and also by national governments which are demonstrating culpable collusion , or even complicity . Take the case of France , the French Government , which is putting on the pressure to develop its trade relations and laughing both at human rights and at the rights of the Kurdish people .
No more collusion .
Freedom for Leyla Zana and all political prisoners .
Ladies and gentlemen , we saw a number of things in Istanbul with our own eyes : the Turkish police evicting the leadership of human rights organizations from the premises they had rented during Habitat II ; family members who had asked for news of missing relatives being intimidated by the police ; a colleague from our own Group being detained for the simple misdemeanour of giving out an invitation to the seminar organized by the Greens ; the chairman of the Green Group being grilled for a whole hour by the police because she had given a press conference on Habitat II .
So we have now experienced these kinds of conditions for ourselves . Even more serious is what Turks who question existing policy have to endure in these circumstances .
I was particularly struck by how utterly impossible it is to talk about the Kurdish question .
You are immediately categorized as a terrorist and separatist sympathizer .
We are thus very concerned at present for the hunger strikers , amongst them Leyla Zana , the winner of Parliament 's Sakharov prize .
We thus urge the Commission to give Parliament an interim report on the human rights situation .
Human rights in Turkey , of course .
Mr President , it is a matter of great regret to our group that we should feel obliged yet again to table a resolution about human rights in Turkey , but I feel we have a moral duty so to do .
When as a Parliament we agreed to the customs union with Turkey , before Christmas , we did so on the strict understanding that steps would be taken to allow real freedom of speech and full respect for the human person .
Sadly , it appears little or no progress has been made in this direction .
For that reason we are , as a Parliament , continuing to withhold our agreement to the adoption of the regulation for the associated financial protocol and I find it hard to see how we could change our attitude .
The reports of ill treatment , to which colleagues have referred , in Istanbul 's prisons , are particularly disturbing .
Then we have the former MP Leyla Zana and others who continue to be held in jail , while the famous writer Yasar Kemal continues to be harassed .
So fresh initiatives may well need to be called for , and hence our proposals in the resolution to put the Kurdish issue and Turkey on the agenda of the OSCE and we would like to hear from the Commissioner on this subject and also maybe to explore other avenues .
In any case we look to the Commission to provide us with the further reports promised to us on the human rights situation in Turkey .
Mr President , the life of Carmelo Soria , a Spanish national and an official of the United Nations removed from his post in Chile , came to an end on 14 July 1976 .
He was tortured and murdered by Major Salinas Torres and NCO San Martín , members of the Directorate for National Intelligence .
It is a paradox that on the anniversary of the beginning of the French Revolution , 14 July a democrat should have been murdered by the collaborators of the Chilean liberticide , General Pinochet .
The Soria family , like the families of all the victims of that sinister era , demand justice .
The dignity they deserve is the dignity they claim for their nearest and dearest ; neither Carmelo Soria nor those who met this same tragic fate will recover it until the guilty are judged .
Nobody is asking for a squaring of accounts , only that those who committed those barbarous deeds should be tried subject to guarantees - which their victims did not have - and should be sentenced .
The transition to democracy in Chile is not proving an easy one .
The military authorities are still playing too great a part in the social and political life of that nation .
The Constitution grants Pinochet the right to appoint senators , a right which he exercises ; that shows the extent to which Chilean democracy is controlled by Pinochet .
That allows him to continue protecting those who collaborated or committed murder and carried out torture .
This debate is not intended to be a criticism of the present government , it is only a call for the defence of human rights , a demand for dignity , and it must be a support for keeping up action before the courts .
It may even encourage justice in Chile to act in freedom and without fear .
It is a moral condemnation of the murderers and must be a living memorial to the victims , including Carmelo Soria .
Without justice there is no democracy .
Democracy , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , must be all-embracing , generous and indulgent with those who transgress and who , after being tried , demonstrate their wish to take part in democratic co-existence .
But that has nothing to do with guilty silences which frustrate justice and bring democracy into disrepute .
We here therefore ask the European Parliament today to raise its voice on behalf of the consolidation of democracy in Chile , denouncing the attempt at shameful side-stepping of justice in the case of the political murder of the European citizen Carmelo Soria .
Naturally , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mrs Miranda said , we are not motivated by malice or even by our repugnance when we remember the crime .
We are motivated by the basic principle with which I began this speech , that is , that without justice there is no democracy .
And the wish of this European Parliament , Mr President , is that Chile should live in full democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the terrible legacy of the Pinochet dictatorship has still not been overcome in Chile .
There are still more than one thousand unsolved cases of disappeared people , the torturers and murderers have not been found and sentenced , crimes have not been atoned for !
An unconstitutional amnesty law still covers the period from 1973 to 1978 !
Unfortunately I have to add that torture is still taking place in the prisons !
Five political prisoners still fear the death sentence and the Amnesty International annual report that has just appeared paints a shockingly gloomy picture .
Today we are concerned with the case of a Spaniard working with CEPAL who was murdered by the Chilean secret service in 1976 .
His file was wrongly closed .
But in fact we are concerned with far more than that , for the murder of Carmelo Soria is not an isolated case .
It is urgently necessary for the amnesty law pronounced by murderers to be suspended and for the government , military and police apparatus to be purged completely of all those who committed crimes during the military dictatorship .
The families have the right to know who murdered their relatives and that the perpetrators must atone for this .
There must never , never be torture in Chile again !
With the forthcoming signature of the EU-Chile framework agreement President Frei will testify to that .
Mr President , I turn to the case of Raghbir Singh Johal who is a journalist , editor of a Punjabi newspaper , who has lived peacefully in my constituency for many years and is known to me .
He has been detained since 29 March 1995 , for over 15 months , without charge or without trial .
Amnesty International have produced , in February this year , a report entitled ' The wrongful detention of asylum seeker Raghbir Singh ' .
He is currently awaiting deportation for , and I quote , ' reasons of national security and other reasons of a political nature , namely the fight against international terrorism ' .
This House has often asserted that the rule of law rests on the presumption of innocence in the absence of the proof of guilt .
In this particular case there is a prima-facie case of abuse of internationally recognized human rights .
We therefore call upon the British Government either to produce evidence of complicity in international terrorism or to release Raghbir Singh Johal from custody forthwith .
Mr President , our Europe is a place of boundless idealism .
There are men and women donating their free time , their energies and their financial resources to help the child victims of the Chernobyl disaster who were exposed to radiation .
To pursue this aim , there are hundreds of people , thousands of people , in the Member States who are giving what they can spare , certainly , but are also giving of themselves to help those children .
They are sending convoys to Byelorussia , technical aid , medical aid , medicines , even offering those child victims of radiation the opportunity to spend holidays here in Europe , with our well-to-do families , families where people eat well , live well , enjoy freedom and health .
And , so far , all this has gone very well .
But what is happening now , Mr President ?
What is happening , so we learn , is that the authorities in Minsk have refused to allow the non-governmental organizations that were providing regular supplies of medicines for Belarus 's child victims of radiation to enter the country unless they agree to allow the authorities to be responsible for delivering those medicines .
In other words , instead of those medicines going directly to those who need them , to their doctors and their hospitals , they are at present being diverted through other channels , and the bottom line is that we no longer know if they will ever reach the children .
This is a scandalous situation .
I believe it must stop , and we call upon the authorities in Minsk , the Byelorussian authorities , to cease their policy of obstruction and allow the non-governmental organizations to carry their aid - that vital aid - to the unfortunate child victims of Chernobyl .
Mr President , the human rights situation is and remains a matter for concern .
During the commemorations of Tiananmen Square 50 dissidents were arrested in order to prevent demonstrations .
Nine of them are still in custody .
Meanwhile new figures from Amnesty and other sources tell us that 2 000 executions were carried out in 1995 and that more than 3 000 new death sentences were imposed the year before that .
There are hundreds of reasons why China deserves to be condemned worldwide for its serious abuses of human rights .
The scandalous treatment of Mr Wei Jingsheng and the hundreds of thousands of citizens held in labour camps are just two of them .
At the beginning of March China managed , after a lot of machinations , and despite great efforts on the part of the Union , to prevent the adoption of a highly critical resolution by the UN Committee on Human Rights .
The difference was just one vote .
I will conclude , Mr President . The Union must continue making China aware of its bad reputation and we must lobby for worldwide condemnation of China .
Our standards and our respect for democracy make it imperative that we do so .
We must not be distracted from this by any economic considerations .
We must seek broad cooperation with other partners in order to exert as much pressure as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , the absence of any policy towards the People 's Republic of China on the part of the Union and the Member States is more apparent than real .
Such a policy does exist - it is the old policy of reasons of State and the primacy of commercial interests .
Only this Parliament seems willing to denounce it .
Some will say that this is yet another manifestation of the marginal nature of this Parliament .
For my part , I am convinced that the reverse is true .
I believe that our Parliament , even if it is still being too timid , is in the process of laying the groundwork for a genuine policy towards a country which will be one of the major issues of the next century .
A country the size of a continent , which both the governments of the Member States and the Commission persist in regarding as first and foremost a market to be conquered , where the law of every man for himself is becoming more and more important . And so they forget the reasons that lie at the origin of their union and they forget , too , and more importantly in my view , that this self-styled policy has a price - the liberty and democratic rights of 1 , 200 million people , whether they be Hans , Uygurs , Tibetans , Mongols or Manchus .
I believe that this difference between our Parliament and the other institutions does it great credit , and the recent positions adopted by the parliaments of Denmark and Luxembourg , by the Belgian Foreign Affairs Committee and by 200 members of the French Parliament , directly inspired by resolutions adopted by our Parliament relating to the invasion and occupation of Tibet by the People 's Republic of China , are all eloquent proof of that .
Today , we are preparing to vote on another important text .
Starting from the denunciation of the position of Wei Jingsheng , an exemplary and central figure in the democratic and non-violent opposition to the Communist Government in Peking , what we want to emphasize is the situation of hundreds of thousands of prisoners of the laogai , thousands of people under sentence of death , tens of thousands of people subjected to torture .
This reminder of the situation is , of course , addressed to the Chinese authorities , but even more so to the Union and to the Member States , urging Europe finally to break with this policy of de facto complicity with the current regime and not to reproduce in the case of China the Munich-style policy of appeasement that it adopted towards the Soviet Union .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , yet again attention of an unheeding public is being drawn to a very serious problem : I am referring to the increasing number of executions that are taking place in China , that are related to crimes of opinion and economic or tax offences and that are connected with the secret market in human organs for transplant : all of this is happening in clear contempt for important fundamental rights and proper process of the law .
In those circumstances , the call for the immediate closure of the labour and detention camps , better known as the laogai , has a symbolic value also , as does the call to reopen the case of Wei Jingsheng , on the basis of an independent judicial review open to international observers , to put an end to the emblematic persecution of the most famous Chinese dissident who is being held in sanitary conditions that are a cause of concern .
That is also the backdrop to our request to the Commission that it look at this and present to the House a report on the Union 's current policy towards China .
The Chinese are a great people and China is a great country but also an interesting economic and consumer market ; that does not make it acceptable - and I am appealing to you here , Commissioner - that Europe should be the silent accomplice in an unacceptable trade in human lives and fundamental rights .
Mr President , I should like to go back to another of the world 's benighted countries , Nigeria .
Despite international pressure things are going from bad to worse in Nigeria and there is no sign at all that those in power are prepared to allow the opposition any room for manoeuvre .
Quite the opposite .
The measures which the European Parliament has called for in earlier resolutions are manifestly not enough to make dictator Abacha see reason .
Unfortunately too , I see too little serious criticism and measures from Africa itself and notably from the Organization of African Unity .
I mention the OAU , Mr President , because Nigeria is also a responsibility of the African states .
The motion for a resolution now before us - the third within a short space of time - talks of tightening sanctions .
I think this is the only logical conclusion and we could take a new initiative here , which Mrs Maij-Weggen mentioned , namely a diplomatic boycott .
Nothing else is going to work .
Mr President , first let me say that I am not speaking on behalf of the EPP Group because this time I am representing a minority of the EPP .
Mr Moorhouse has already spoken for the majority .
I just want to say one thing on behalf of this minority : we are a liberal party which can represent different views .
We systematically regard some nations as the whipping boys of the world and assert all kinds of things about them ; it is quite clear that Turkey will figure among them .
Yet Turkey ought to be our friend , that would be in the European interest .
I at least take the view that we have been elected here in order to represent Europe , to represent European interests and not to go on some kind of worldwide excursions that may be wonderful but have no effect whatsoever .
As Europeans it is simply our duty to say some things more clearly , that is in our interest .
Mr President , I shall certainly not vote for these senseless resolutions .
Thank you , Mr von Habsburg .
I believe that we have in this Chamber 626 people who are free to express whatever view they wish .
I would merely remind you , as I understand it , that you are down to express the view of your group .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that , sadly , again today we are going to be discussing China , the violations of human rights , the labour camps , the laogai and the executions that take place daily , but absolutely nothing will change today , tomorrow or the day after because business with China will go on , because the big business opportunities along that vast frontier are too important to the international market , because Europe is absolutely powerless , because we , my friends , count for absolutely nothing here .
I therefore believe , Commissioner , that the time has come to do something concrete and stop going on about what we all , unfortunately , know : in China human rights are a utopian concept at this point in time .
A word or two on Nigeria now , Mr President .
Commissioner Marín is very familiar with the issue of cooperation with developing countries .
In the case of Nigeria we have a weapon : let us throw Nigeria out of the Lomé Convention , Commissioner !
Mr President , as regards Nigeria , Mr Caccavale has said it for me : it is clear that the terror campaign waged by this regime continues unabated .
Mrs Abiola 's murder is proof enough of that .
I would draw attention to the arrest of a new campaigner for democracy and the environment , Mr Nwimmo Bassey , who has been imprisoned for fear that he might become a new Ken Saro-Wiwa .
Clearly it is not easy to put pressure on the military , but we have a number of instruments and we have a number of resolutions calling for those instruments to be used , otherwise there is no doubt that Abacha 's men will go on wiping out the opposition .
The announcement of the opening of registration for political parties for the 1998 elections shows that Abacha is not prepared to hold democratic elections .
The conditions make it virtually impossible for the opposition parties to register .
Once again , the European Union must keep banging the drum and in conjunction with other countries must use all means available to put as much pressure as possible on the Nigerian military regime .
Mr President , on a point of procedure , not really about Nigeria .
But it seemed a good time to make this point .
If I were sitting in the visitors ' gallery or if I were a journalist I would be a bit confused here .
Why can we not take one subject at a time instead , notwithstanding the Commissioner 's global horizons , of shunting back and forth between Nigeria , China and Eastern Patagonia ?
We should not do that .
It is not a serious way of doing things .
Mr Bertens , that , as you know , is a problem that has been raised on several occasions , and you certainly did well to make use of a point of order , but that is not the way to resolve it .
I think that the best way - and some of you have already done this - is to speak to your group chairman to get the Conference of Presidents to decide to find a better solution , given that this is something we all feel the need for .
Mr President , I should like to speak to say something to Mr Bertens .
I had the honour to be in the Chair during one of these sittings and Mrs D 'Ancona and Mrs Lenz called attention to the fact that on the subject of human rights speeches flitted from one subject to another .
I took up these concerns and reported them to the President , and the Parliament staff organized for us an ordered debate in which the various subjects referring to human rights were kept separate .
Mr Bertens has perhaps not entirely noticed that now each of these subjects is separate on the agenda .
At the end some speeches were intermingled , but during the whole of the debate the speeches were kept separate .
Mr President , let us render unto Caesar the things which be Caesar 's and unto God the things which be God 's .
Mr Bertens has already been given a partial reply by Mr Gutiérrez .
It will probably not be completely satisfactory , but my invitation to refer the matter to your own group chairmen naturally stands .
I feel I must refer again , Mr President , as other fellow-Members in this House have already done , to the concern aroused by repeated breaches of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Turkey , in spite of the fact that that country has signed the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and has undertaken to observe them - an undertaking which has not stopped their taking political prisoners , the maltreatment of those arrested - a situation which is all the more wretched since they are in a position in which they completely unable to defend themselves - and the violence against the Kurdish people , which has got worse since the customs agreement was signed .
Such a situation represents on Turkey 's part - and that has been said before - a violation of the spirit of the customs union and is sufficient reason for asking the Council and the Commission - to our regret - to urge the Turkish authorities to take steps to guarantee an end to such ill treatment , to free political prisoners and to end violence towards the Kurdish people .
Mr President , it is unfortunate that we in the European Parliament are once again compelled to debate the issue of Indonesia .
The Indonesian military 's repression of the people is continuing and has recently been directed against the country 's young people too , young people who only want the minimum human rights and freedoms to which all people of the world should really be entitled .
The Indonesian authorities have also imprisoned enormous numbers of political prisoners and we naturally demand that they should be released as quickly as possible .
While the Indonesian regime continues with this oppression the Member States of the EU should of course stop exporting arms and providing military assistance to Indonesia .
To everyone 's surprise arms exports from countries including Sweden and Finland have been restarted and exports of guns and ammunition have been resumed .
This is taking place under the name of ' follow-up deliveries ' .
Guns , however , are not spare parts , nor do they constitute follow-up deliveries .
These activities are therefore totally unacceptable and must be stopped immediately .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , among the subjects under consideration in this House today is East Timor .
One can only welcome that fact .
The compromise text contains a few good things , in particular the denunciation of Indonesia 's occupation of East Timor .
But , alas , I fear that this hour 's debate and the vote that will follow will do little to improve the lot of that small Catholic nation .
In order for that to happen , our Governments would have to take specific action to obtain a commitment from Indonesia to respect international law , the more so since East Timor is under the sovereignty of a Member State - Portugal .
Admittedly , after the ' carnation revolution ' , the Portuguese administration collapsed and the territory fell into the hands of two rival factions - the Fretilin Communists and the Muslim factions in the pay of Indonesia .
However , the unilateral proclamation of the independence of Timor by the Communists on 28 November 1975 is no more legitimate than the annexation of these Catholic territories by Indonesia on 31 May 1976 .
No one consulted either the population of East Timor or Portugal as the sovereign power .
Since then , the 500 , 000 Catholic Timorese , who have become a minority in a State populated by 160 million Muslims , have been suffering the fate familiar to all Christian communities in Muslim countries - annihilation .
The alternative offered by the Communist movement is not much of an improvement .
It is up to us , confronted by these two forms of totalitarianism which are threatening our own countries too , to offer the Timorese another alternative - the reestablishment of Portuguese sovereignty .
Mr President , I met Mr Raghbir Singh Johal 's wife several months ago at one of the largest Sikh gurdwaras in Europe : there were some several thousand people in the Sedgely Street Temple in Wolverhampton .
She was absolutely distraught .
She could not talk to me properly because she was crying so much , she was so worried over the detention of her husband .
It cannot be right , in 1996 , that a democratic country imprisons without trial or without charge a man for over 15 months .
I must pay tribute to the British Sikh Federation and to the National Union of Journalists who have campaigned tirelessly on behalf of Mr Singh Johal .
But this Parliament which - let us be honest and open with each other - is the very physical embodiment of democracy in 15 separate European countries must send a clear message to the British Government : either produce the explicit evidence that shows that Raghbir Singh Johal is actually involved with international terrorism , or release him immediately .
That must be our simple , strong , clear message from this House .
Mr President , I find it deeply depressing to have to return for the umpteenth time to the subject of Turkey , particularly after the approval of the customs union .
There are at least two areas in which that country must sooner or later change it ways .
First , on respect for human rights , where practices and shortcomings in disregard of everything that the international community stands for are still continuing .
Then there is the behaviour towards a Member State of the European Union and towards other Mediterranean neighbours of Turkey which is seriously inconsistent with the philosophy and principles of the Barcelona procedure and international law .
Mr President , the policy being pursued by Turkey in the region is generating problems and posing a threat to the security and stability of the European Union 's south-eastern corner .
Turkey must therefore be sent a message from here to put its behaviour to rights .
Mr President , the arguments put to the European Parliament by the representatives of the Commission and the Council six months ago as the supposed case for eliciting our support for the customs union with Turkey are still ringing in my ears .
What did they tell us ?
That we should approve the customs union as a means to curbing the threat from the Islamists , namely from the party of Mr Erbakan .
That by approving it we would be helping the cause of human rights . That there would be big economic benefits for the Turkish people .
Now , Mr President , six months later , the party of Mr Erbakan has become the biggest party in the Turkish parliament , and as Mr Lake 's report , which you have to hand , shows , the situation on human rights and democracy has deteriorated .
The Commission 's representative in Turkey has sent a report to the Commission which makes it clear that the human rights situation has worsened .
And as to the economic benefits , just ask the Turkish people .
There is something else as well .
Something which has been worrying me a great deal .
All the main Turkish newspapers have carried a story stating that Mr Yilmaz told his parliamentary party that when Mrs Çiller was asked by President Demirel what had happened to the 6.5 million dollars of secret appropriations that were found to be missing after her fall from power , she replied that the money had been used for ' buying ' the customs union !
What did she mean by that , Mr President ?
What did ' buying the customs union ' involve ?
Whom did she buy ?
The Commission must give a response to this claim by Mrs Çiller , because we have a duty to give an answer to those who are watching and listening from the gallery , to the people of Europe , that is .


Mr President , the current list of human rights violations in Turkey is a long one : illtreatment of detainees , disappearance or death of prisoners .
The facts complained of are virtually always the same , quite a strange situation in a member of the Council of Europe which has subscribed to the values of liberty and respect for human dignity .
Strange or not , as long as Turkey refuses to declare out-and-out war on torture , the hope of putting an end to this shameful situation will be a vain one .
As long as Turkey can shelter behind the provisions of Article 11 of the Convention against torture - and thus oppose the publication of the reports in which the Control Commission , whose job it is , denounces these violations - human rights will be violated behind a cloak of anonymity , not to say general indifference .
The customs union between the European Union and Turkey , as it may be necessary to remind those honourable Members who prematurely ratified it , is producing very disappointing results when we recall the charm offensive carried on by Turkey before December 1995 - in other words , before the ratification of the customs union .
Mr President , let us at least have the courage to enforce transparency upon Turkey when it comes to respect for human rights .
Mr President , all those who know , love and value Belarus and the people who live there are noting with great concern that human rights violations in that country are becoming a constant theme here .
There are continuous reports about the decline in democracy in that country .
Belarus is isolating itself more and more .
Wide circles of Belarussians , and not just the Popular Front but also the non-governmental organizations and the liberal democratic and social democratic forces within the Belarussian Parliament are making efforts to direct this process of transformation towards reforms .
Yet the stubborn line taken by the government keeps destroying these efforts .
We must continue to support the democratic forces in that country by adhering consistently to our decisions .
We should constantly remind the Belarussian Government that in signing the interim agreement it has also signed the democracy clause , which we consider important .
It is incomprehensible why the Belarussian Government is playing down the decision by this Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs and dismissing it as personal animosity .
Mr President , let us go back to the case of Chile , and for our part we think this debate is not only appropriate but even essential since the European Parliament must not stand idly by whilst justice and international law are flouted by the disguised trap of an amnesty or pardon which is really only a cover for the concealment of unacceptable acts such as the case of the murder of the Spanish national , Mr Carmelo Soria in Chile in July 1976 , most of all today when a recent , though respectable , democracy is already established in Chile .
Chilean democracy is indeed recent but we must still acknowledge that the level of democracy in Chile is fortunately amongst the most consolidated on the Latin-American continent .
Since that is the real position it is not right to look away when there , years ago , human rights were trampled under foot and justice has not been done .
Mr President , just one comment on the resolution about the behaviour of the authorities in Minsk , Belarus .
We note in this resolution that medical aid is being provided in Minsk by independent NGOs , medical aid for children damaged by Chernobyl .
They are truly independent NGOs .
Their aim is to supply medicines to the children in Belarus affected by radiation , and these NGOs are simply not allowed by the Minsk authorities to supply them direct .
They are told they must deliver to the Government .
We find that very strange .
We would like to know if the Commissioner understands why the authorities are behaving in this way .
What lies behind it ?
We would also ask the Commissioner if he is prepared to use our existing ties with Belarus to find out what the situation is there in regard to this matter .
Mr President , I speak about China and in particular the case of Wei Jingsheng .
When the delegation of the European Parliament was in China last month we were repeatedly asked : why so many resolutions ?
So far 24 have been tabled in Parliament on the subject of China and human rights .
The explanation is quite simple .
The European Parliament follows the Treaty and in its declaration on relations with China the Council , on 4 December 1995 , stated that the basic goals of the EU in relations with China are : the promotion of democracy , structures based on the rule of law and respect for human rights .
In the case of Wei Jingsheng it is precisely the rule of law which is not being upheld ; not the rule of law of the European Union but the rule of law of China itself because he is being held in detention , he has not been charged , and he has been in this state now for 14 years .
It is because China ignores basic human rights and ignores its own so-called rule of law that we are able to criticize .
On this occasion I hope that Parliament will support this resolution and the amendment tabled which asks the Commission to state whether it will take human rights into account in its recommendation on China 's request to join the World Trade Organization .
With regard to Indonesia I must mention in the first place , Mr President , that the Commission has protested to the Indonesian Government on numerous occasions about the human rights situation in that country .
Those protests include not only requests to come to a fair agreement respecting the aspirations of the people of East Timor but also criticism of unjustifiable acts , the need for impartial judgments , appropriate legal representation and access to prisoners in general .
In December 1995 the presidency made representations to the Indonesian Government with regard to the sentences imposed on journalists .
As you know , the question of human rights was also raised at the last AsiaEurope meeting held in Bangkok in March 1995 .
The President 's final declaration made it clear that a dialogue should be initiated on the basis of mutual respect , equality and defence of human rights .
Similarly the firm commitment to the United Nations Charter , the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the action programme of the World Conference on Human Rights was reaffirmed at that meeting .
The Commission supports the project - to reply to a question by Mr Telkämper - of possibly sending a delegation of the European Parliament to Indonesia ; and the Commission will naturally continue to defend human rights and fundamental freedoms in its relations with the Indonesian Government .
I now turn to the speeches about Nigeria .
There can be no doubt that the Commission shares with all speakers their regret at the recent murder of Mrs Abiola .
The circumstances of her death are still , up to a point , mysterious .
The Commission recently launched an analysis of the present European Union measures against Nigeria , applied following the hanging of Ken Saro-Wiwa in November 1995 .
The Commission in fact considers that new measures should be adopted , particularly to lend greater support to the Nigerian groups committed to the fight for democracy and human rights and that additional sanctions should be studied along the lines of freezing assets and against the oil industry .
The purpose of these measures would be to hasten the peaceful withdrawal of the military from the positions of power in the Nigerian Government and the election of a coalition government , accompanied by the restoration of human rights and the independence of the judiciary .
The Commission assures the Members of the European Parliament that it is doing everything in its power within the limits of its authority to speed up the peaceful transition to a democratically elected government in Nigeria .
In this connection we are studying how to step up the dialogue with the Nigerian authorities on these matters .
The possibility of expelling Nigeria from the Lomé Convention has been mentioned .
But from the experience we have had on other previous occasions which I do not need to quote , when the Commission has tried to do that but has failed , we must be very cautious before putting that type of decision into practice .
In any case I have told you that the Commission is in favour of introducing additional sanctions .
With regard to Burma , the Commission shares with honourable Members their concern at the recent arrest of 262 elected members of the opposition and the continued threats from the government -the military Junta of Myanmar - to the democratic movements since that Junta cut short the beginnings of democracy in 1990 .
The Commission continues to monitor the internal situation in Myanmar carefully but , apart from the freeing of Aung San Suu Kyi in July last year , there has been no sign of significant improvement in respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms or of any steps taken towards the restoration of democracy .
Consequently it may be said that the problem of Burma continues to be a matter for concern and that it is impossible to trace any progress on the part of the authorities of that country .
That has led to the Commission 's proposing to cancel all benefits of the system of generalized preferences in favour of that country , and this will be the first case in which the new arrangements envisaged in the system of generalized preferences in the event of failure to observe human rights have been put into force .
As regards Turkey it must be recognized that since the general election in December 1995 it has been experiencing a serious crisis .
Last March the then Prime Minister , Mr Yilmaz , in his inaugural speech , clearly placed the strengthening of democracy in Turkey on his government 's programme ; the Prime Minister similarly made certain positive statements on the cultural rights of the Kurdish people in Turkey .
During the visit of my colleague Mr van den Broek to Turkey last April and during Prime Minister Yilmaz 's visit to President Santer at the beginning of this month the Commission had the opportunity to tell our Turkish partners again of the importance which it - like the European Parliament - attached to the continuation of the reforms initiated last year and the putting into practice of Mr Yilmaz 's statements in this connection .

It is no secret that the coalition government in Turkey has not lasted very long and it is clear that the accepted by the then Prime Minister , Mr Yilmaz , will be hard to fulfil .
And not only did that process cease from the second half of last year - at least as far as declarations are concerned - but we are sorry to note also that there have been fresh dubious happenings in Turkey , which increase our concern in the matter of human rights .
In any case , conscious of the concerns of the European Parliament , we intend to continue the dialogue on these questions as soon as there is a new government team in Turkey .
Mr Moorhouse has asked the Commission to send an annual report on the human rights situation and the progress of the democratic process in Turkey .
That annual report will be sent to Parliament in October .
With regard to Chile , the Commission agrees with honourable Members that Mr Carmelo Soria indeed murdered and on those grounds the Commission 's own delegation in Santiago de Chile has taken various steps to bring this to the notice of the competent national authorities .
I must also tell you , that following the line expressed in the resolution , specific representations were made on 5 June - only a fortnight ago - by the Troika in Santiago de Chile ; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was informed of the need to make this case the epitome of what ought to be seen in practice from justice and the review of a case which , as I said , is nothing but a political murder .
As regards Chernobyl and Belarus , the Commission has been informed of the restrictions imposed by the Government of Belarus on independent non-government organizations .
Both situations must give us concern but in different ways .
In fact no government action must interfere with the distribution of humanitarian aid in Belarus or in any other geographical region .
However , the Commission can tell you that the European Union 's aid programmes in Belarus are proceeding normally and at least the non-government organizations working with the Union have not raised any complaint or reported any interference from the Government of Belarus .
Human rights are another matter .
In this case the Commission gave our views to the Prime Minister , Mr Tshygir , in March 1996 and more recently to the Foreign Minister , Mr Syanko .
In addition the ambassadors of the Member States also made further diplomatic representations on 13 June to make our concern clear .
The Commission will continue to keep a careful watch on the human rights situation in Belarus , including freedom of the press , so that it can constantly keep bilateral cooperation between the European Union and Belarus under review .
Finally , China .
The question of human rights in China has been systematically taken up within the political dialogue with that country , the last meeting for which was held on 14 June in Beijing .
The fact is that apart from some significant reforms - such as the new legislation amending the Chinese law of criminal procedure - the human rights situation remains a source of disquiet to the European Union and the motions submitted by honourable Members contain precisely those matters which the European Union is to raise with China as a matter of priority .
The Commission will inform Parliament at a later date how those contacts have developed .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0736 / 96 by Mr Bertens and Mrs Larive , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on nuclear tests ; -B4-0768 / 96 by Ms Malone and Mr D 'Ancona , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and China ; -B4-0788 / 96 by Mr Mamère and Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the ARE group , on nuclear tests in China ; -B4-0805 / 96 by Mr Piquet and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL group , on the fresh Chinese nuclear test and the negotiations on the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty ; -B4-0812 / 96 by Ms McKenna and others , on behalf of the V Group , on Chinese nuclear testing and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty negotiations ; -B4-0830 / 96 by Mr Fabra Vallés and Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Chinese nuclear testing .
Mr President , time is now getting short for completion of the talks on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty .
These talks have to completed by the end of next week , or the signing ceremony cannot take place in September during the next session of the UN General Assembly .
Compromises on verification mechanisms and the conditions for the Treaty 's entry into force are currently being worked out .
China has finally agreed to things which may mean that it cannot conduct further peaceful nuclear tests .
That at least is something .
The bad news , meantime , is that India has announced today that it will not sign up to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty .
International pressure must be brought to bear to change India 's mind .
The difficult negotiations are also constantly being undermined by what is going on on the ground .
China 's recent nuclear test and the announcement that it is to carry out another one before September is a slap in the face to the negotiators .
Moreover , Mr President , the American announcement that subcritical nuclear tests are to be postponed till next year is not exactly encouraging either and detracts from the credibility of this forthcoming CTBT .
America , China and India must all realize that they are jeopardizing everything which has been achieved so far in respect of nuclear arms reduction .
Mr President , at exactly this time last year you will recall that there was worldwide condemnation of the French nuclear tests and this Parliament told President Chirac in no uncertain terms here in this hemicycle what we thought of his government 's actions .
I deeply regret that the People 's Republic of China has now carried out a nuclear test after the conclusion of the NPT Conference .
In the resolution before us today we call on the Chinese Government to abide by the moratorium adopted at international level .
The Chinese must understand that the continuation of nuclear testing is incompatible with implementation of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
The Chinese Government insists that it should be permitted to carry on with peaceful nuclear explosions or PNEs .
A PNE programme can form part of a nuclear research and development programme and the organization Greenpeace contends that a significant reason for China 's attraction to PNEs comes from encouragement by weapons scientists in both Russia and the United States .
These scientists are unable to pursue PNEs in their own countries due to environmental and cost reasons .
With regard to recital E in the compromise text I should like just to point out that I was not involved in the negotiations and I wonder if there would be any way of getting agreement on a change because there is an inaccuracy .
The factual situation is that China is proposing that peaceful nuclear explosions should be reconsidered at a review conference ten years after the Test Ban Treaty enters into force and that review should be automatic unless a majority of parties vote against it .
Would it be possible to take a split vote on recital E ?
We were concerned last year - as were millions throughout the world - at the health and environmental consequences resulting from the testing in the South Pacific at Mururoa and most Members here will recall the public hearing held here in Parliament which dealt extensively with this issue of health and public safety .
I do not know and I am not qualified to say what the consequences of the recent tests will be on the health of the people living in the Lop Nor region .
But there are obviously concerns there and it is right that Parliament should voice these concerns .
I ask all Members to support this resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , as this House prepares to vote on this motion for a resolution calling upon China to put a stop to its nuclear tests - which our entire group will of course be supporting - I look around in vain , I must say , for the Fausto Bertinottis and Carlo Ripa di Meanas and their like , our friends in the socialist group , our friends of the United Left , our friends in the Green group who were so active , so determined just a few months ago when , disdaining the most elementary courtesy , they were attacking President Chirac in a manner that we all remember .
I am looking for their banners , their streamers , and I see nothing at all .
Can I assume that the People 's Republic of China 's nuclear tests are safe , or somehow different ?
Mr President , let me take a few seconds to tell the honourable Member that there are some of us here from the European United Left , and I am one of them .
As for the Greens , I can see them too , they are here , and I see no banners or streamers .
I think that brings me to the start of my speech , but perhaps it was necessary to open our friend 's eyes and ears so that he can follow what I say .
Just after announcing that it would be applying a moratorium on testing from September , China went ahead on 8 June with its 44th underground nuclear test .
It must be admitted that this is not the best way of reaching a successful conclusion to the negotiations currently taking place in Geneva on the Treaty to prohibit nuclear testing .
On behalf of my group , I join in the international chorus of protest and I condemn the Chinese nuclear test just as I recently condemned the series of tests by the French Government .
A ban on nuclear tests , including laboratory testing , represents the essential first step down the road to disarmament , to non-proliferation and to the elimination of all nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction .
Our group calls upon all parties to the current Geneva negotiations - and especially the Member States - to do everything possible to ensure that those negotiations end , before the 28 June deadline , with an agreement readopting the zero option - in other words , the prohibition of all testing of nuclear weapons and any other kind of nuclear explosion , supplemented by an effective international verification and control system .
So I welcome the fact that the compromise motion for a resolution embodies the essence of these proposals .
By adopting it we shall be able to give a clear signal to the negotiators in Geneva and at the UN General Assembly , to open up the prospect of a test ban and the establishing of a binding timetable of nuclear disarmament with a view to the total elimination of all nuclear weapons .
Finally , let me tell Mr Dupuis that I did not have a visa to attend the Intergovernmental Conference on Women in Peking , perhaps because I have too frequently annoyed China in this House .
So I stand in need of no lessons from you , and nor does my group .
Mr President , allow me to reply in person to the somewhat provocative remarks of our young colleague .
My group did indeed demonstrate with banners and streamers , outside the Chinese Embassy because it is at China that such action should be aimed .
Moreover , if the President of China were to appear in this House we should do the same , and I should be glad if Mr Dupuis would join us .
Mr Aelvoet , of course that was not a personal statement : it was in fact a political comment on what the previous speaker had to say .
At any event , the Chinese President will not be able to come here .
That , I believe , is out of the question !
Mr President , thanks to your wise words , I shall give up my speaking time .
I wish only to say that I note what Mr Aelvoet said - evidently , it seemed to me also that it was certainly not a personal statement .
As far as I am concerned Mr Chirac got all he deserved here .
In fact , if I had my way , he would not even have been allowed in Parliament .
We have always been outspoken about condemning nuclear tests .
Now , just to get back to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty currently being negotiated in Geneva : there must not be any loopholes to allow countries to conduct nuclear tests .
If it is not watertight it means that certain countries will find ways of carrying out nuclear experiments and producing absurd arguments about how they are essential for world peace , just as Mr Chirac did during the debate on the French testing in Mururoa last year .
What Mrs Malone said is very true : recital E is actually misleading .
China has long favoured an exemption from that treaty for so-called peaceful nuclear explosions .
This concept originated in the US in 1957 as a method of investigating the non-military uses of nuclear explosives .
The whole concept is an actual farce because the results of these ' peaceful ' explosions can easily be used to develop weapons of war .
For example , India described its only nuclear test as a ' peaceful nuclear explosion ' , but it still used the results to develop its weapons programme .
The other sad fact is that this Parliament does not really have the moral high ground to condemn nuclear tests after our failure on the whole issue of France 's nuclear tests and nor does the Commission because the Commission sat on its hands when it had the power to do something and it did not do anything !
The Member States which let France go ahead with its nuclear tests all have dirt on their hands , so we cannot take the moral high ground here .
Mr President , there is no getting away from the fact that nuclear tests run counter to the letter and spirit of the nuclear weapons reduction treaties because they are intended to promote qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons , which is of greater significance than an increase in their quantity or their geographical proliferation .
Likewise , there is no getting away from the fact that China should cease carrying out nuclear tests immediately .
Mr President , if we want to steer clear of displaying double standards , it is important that we call on China to do what we called on France to do , namely to halt nuclear testing immediately .
Mr President , I am glad that , following the underground nuclear tests in the Lop Nor desert in China , honourable Members have stressed in their motion for a resolution the importance and urgency of the question of the Treaty on a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing .
Following approval of the extension for an indefinite period of the Treaty on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in May 1995 , for which the European Union made an unprecedented diplomatic effort , there is today a new opportunity in the context of multilateral nuclear disarmament which , in the Commission 's opinion , the international community must not miss .
The signing of a Comprehensive Nuclear Weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty including the zero option is a fundamental objective of the common foreign and security policy .
For that purpose the Commission associated itself with the European Union 's declaration on 22 April last year .
That declaration emphasizes the importance of negotiations to make it possible to sign the Treaty in the autumn , precisely at the opening of the Fifty-First General Assembly of the United Nations .
Similarly it would be appropriate to try to ensure that the Treaty is a universal one and that its application on an international scale may be genuinely monitored .
Consequently the next week is of fundamental importance and I am sure that all the Member States of the European Union and the associated States will make an effort so that it may be possible as I said to turn the need to sign this Comprehensive Nuclear Weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty at the next opening of the General Assembly of the United Nations into a reality .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0770 / 96 by Mr Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the assassination of humanitarian relief workers in Burundi ; -B4-0779 / 96 by Mr André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the ELDR group , on Burundi ; -B4-0786 / 96 by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the murder of three members of the ICRC in Burundi ; -B4-0789 / 96 by Mrs Baldi and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the murder of three ICRC delegates in Burundi ; -B4-0798 / 96 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the assassination of three ICRC delegates in Burundi ; -B4-0821 / 96 by Mr Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the V Group , on Burundi ; -B4-0824 / 96 by Mr Günther and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Burundi .
Mr President , first I should like to propose an oral amendment to the joint motion for a resolution . It is to add at the end of paragraph 5 a request to the Commission to retain its office in Burundi .
In the past week - since the tabling of this motion for a resolution on the death in Burundi of humanitarian aid staff - a further 70 civilians , this time Hutus , have been murdered .
All deaths have the same value , but the murder of three members of the International Committee of the Red Cross marks a qualitative change in the scale of the conflict .
For the first time there has been an attack on the international presence which plays a fundamental rôle in the attempt to contain of the conflict by means of humanitarian aid .
At every significant stage in this war the European Parliament has approved a resolution with specific proposals .
Now that we are about to vote on one more we have to wonder about the point of this type of action .
Politics take on a purpose only if they extend to practice and do not keep repeating the same thing , each time with less impact .
If the results obtained constantly fall short of our proposals , then apart from the human tragedy , in this case for the population of Burundi , we must reflect upon our own performance and the effectiveness of our institution , the European Parliament .
In Burundi peace will be possible only if it is possible to achieve an international agreement on an effective arms embargo with sanctions for those who fail to observe it ; supervision of the disarmament of all the parties involved , militias and armed forces ; and the holding of immediate official negotiations under the supervision of an international authority and in the presence of observers .
The negotiations would have to involve reform of the army and of the police , a solution to the problem of refugees and displaced persons under international supervision , the establishment of an effective judiciary and of a system for protecting humanitarian aid and staff .
However , neither the Commission nor the Council nor the Member States of the European Union individually have provided the resources for these measures to be applied or consequently for peace to be a reality in Burundi .
Once again we condemn the situation but we also wish to condemn the failure to put these measures into practice .
Mr President , in view of what has happened in Burundi during the last few months , we are indeed divided between the temptation to lapse into somewhat gloomy resignation and the determination to silence the guns and those who serve them .
In this very House dozens of texts , some more thunderous than others , declarations of all kinds , tons of paper and gallons of ink have been expended , and massacres in Burundi continue unaffected , claiming several hundred victims every week .
Far from regarding ourselves as blameless , Mr President , we need to accept that we bear our share of responsibility for the lorry loads of corpses being shovelled into the communal graves in that country .
And even today , when the International Committee of the Red Cross , the specialized United Nations Organizations like the WFP , the UNCD and the WHO are pulling out and even the non-governmental organizations are pulling out , we of the European Union can at least try two gestures .
The first is to stay put ; the second is to maintain a rapid reaction force on the borders , capable of being deployed in a few hours .
Mr President , I too am alarmed at the constant deterioration in the situation in Burundi . The mediation missions under Mr Nyerere and Mr Ajello have been stonewalled by the mistrust between the various factions , and especially the attitude of the extremists ; the Belgian and French schools in Bujumbura have been closed ; French military and civil cooperation has been suspended ; the activities of some NGOs have been suspended ; the national political dialogue has reached deadlock , with violence escalating in the hinterland ; and - let us not mince words , Mr President - the army has been using violence against the civilian population .
And yet there is no shortage of international diplomatic initiatives working to restore peace .
But the impression one gets is that there are arguments for and against each of them , to the point where none of them make any progress .
The intransigence shown by some of them is dangerous , because it threatens to plunge the country in despair , opening the door for the settling of scores .
That is what the extremists have long wanted , and with each day that passes they become more difficult to control .
So , Mr President , when are we going to see an arms embargo ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if there is one subject on which I think everything possible has been said and said so many times without any adequate action being taken , it is the situation in Burundi .
We have here a special kind of civil war in which it is wrong to speak of extremist groups because it is a generally acknowledged fact that the Burundian army itself is a party to the conflict .
Last Friday I entertained a delegation of parliamentarians from Burundi .
I was given a whole list of killings in a particular diocese , the diocese of Muinga , from which it is clear that the army itself is blamed for half of all the cases .
If you add the case of the three Red Cross workers , whose deaths prompted the urgent debate here today , and the fact that it is known that these Red Cross people were murdered by the Burundian army , then there is more to this than crimes committed by extremist groups .
We really do face a fundamental political problem here .
There are two things which need to be said .
Firstly , the political dialogue so vigorously advocated by Nyerere is currently blocked in Tanzania due to Uprona 's refusal to sign the agreement which was reached , thereby making the political situation even worse .
Secondly , it must be pointed out that all the international organizations are currently in the process of pulling out , including the representatives of the European Commission .
As regards the latter , I would earnestly recommend that the people there are given the protection which they themselves have requested .
I also think it has to be said that an international intervention force should be on standby in the region to take action if things should escalate further , and no one can ignore the fact that the danger of that happening is very real .
Mr President , honourable Members have rightly condemned the climate of violence again present in Burundi .
I shall therefore confine myself to putting a question to the Commission - a request for clarification in relation to the fact that in recent days and weeks the violence has become directed towards the humanitarian organizations present in Burundi .
It seems evident to me that by striking at those organizations , the more violent factions are seeking to tear asunder one of instruments still available to those who are currently striving in Burundi for peace and civil coexistence .
I am then asking how and whether the European Union is seeking to prevent those organizations from abandoning Burundi .
I also consider it very important that we reconfirm our full commitment to this continued humanitarian presence , to be demonstrated in two ways : first of all by guaranteeing that European aid will continue to arrive directly with the population and , secondly , by ensuring that the staff of the humanitarian organizations enjoy adequate protection .
Here too , I believe that the Commission can take further steps to secure improved protection .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this joint resolution we call for three things : creating an international force , abiding fully by the Carcassonne action plan and providing assistance for the restoration of an effective system of justice .
Let me follow this up with a few other questions .
What has become of our calls for the dissolution of the armed militia ?
What has become of our call for support for the OAU so that it can join in implementing this global action plan ?
What has become of our call for the legal prosecution of criminal offenders and for aid for the restoration of the certainty of justice ?
What has become of the proposal to send out human rights experts under the umbrella of the UNHCR ?
And what has become , for instance , of our call for some pressure to be put on the Security Council to keep the conflicting parties apart ?
We already called for that last month !
What has become of Parliament 's call for the Council and the Member States to draw up emergency plans in case the violence should escalate and to create safety zones to protect the civilian population ?
We called for that too in May this year !
What has become of our call for support to be given to the special envoy of the United Nations in organizing regional conferences on peace and security and making comprehensive , emergency financial aid available in order to stabilize the Burundian state before this escalation occurred ?
What became of the document on preventive diplomacy of December last year that was accepted by the Council ?
What became of the measures we called for in order to protect the humanitarian workers and what is to become of our appeals today ?
Mr President , when in recent years the massacres began in Rwanda there were those who said that Europe was unprepared , that we had not in fact grasped the serious threat that was affecting the region of the Great Lakes .
Today , in the case of Burundi , no-one can claim that ; no-one can claim that we were unaware of the danger threatening that region torn apart by ethnic rivalry , by age-old hatreds which surfaced in the form of unthinkable , unprecedented massacres , unparalleled in that region in recent years .
The most recent incident that has come to our attention is of particular concern to the Red Cross , some of whose delegates have been assassinated , but continues to affect Burundi 's civilian population that suffers acts of banditry and daily violence , and that should not leave us helpless .
I believe that clear action is now needed : I am calling upon the Commission to take an initiative to set up an international force ready to intervene - including militarily - in Burundi , with global action by the European Union directed towards an effective common policy in the region .
Mr President , once again today we see that the world is letting slip a chance of using active , preventive diplomacy to stop a conflict from escalating .
The bloodbath in Burundi which involved members of the Red Cross and other NGOs is bound to have repercussions .
How long does the international community think that the NGOs will go on providing humanitarian aid if they remain targets for uncontrolled young people and gangs ?
When are we at last going to decide to accept our responsibilities ?
We seem to get nowhere when we ask for the Carcassonne action plan to be carried out .
It does not seem as if an international military force for Burundi is going to get off the ground .
Srebrenica must not mean that we are never again willing to take part in peace-keeping operations under UN auspices .
We must accept our responsibility , even if it is just in training and helping to set up an African military presence .
And further work is needed on the political front too .
Nyerere 's initiative , as has already been said , is very welcome , and so is the European special envoy .
Mr President , the tribal warfare between Hutus and Tutsis is escalating again , this time in Burundi .
Extremists on both sides have gained control there .
The Tutsi army is losing its hold on the countryside and various Hutu guerilla movements are increasingly carrying out attacks in a number of regions .
And the civil war is increasingly becoming regional in character .
It is also worth pointing to the extremely dubious role being played by President Mobutu of Zaïre .
He says he wants the Rwandan and Burundian refugees to return to their homeland , but in reality he is supporting the Hutu rebels .
There are even indications that the Zaïrean army is helping the Hutus with ethnic cleansing .
The media too play an important part in the ethnic conflict .
One even hears talk of a Hutu press and a Tutsi press .
Last time the conflict in the Great Lakes region was discussed it was still possible to argue in favour of a regional conference .
That time is now past .
Ending the bloodshed must now be the first priority .
International intervention in Burundi is thus a matter of urgency .
The question is whether intervention in Burundi alone might not simply move the conflict to the neighbouring countries of Rwanda and Zaïre .
The main question is which country should take the lead in any intervention in the Great Lakes region .
Following its action in Somalia the USA has intimated that it is prepared to send equipment but not troops .
It is also doubtful whether France will take the lead in view of that country 's close involvement with the parties in the region .
The fear thus seems justified that following a disaster of the kind which occurred in Rwanda objections to intervention will disappear .
But for thousands of people it will then be too late .
Mr President , the Commission profoundly regrets the murder of three Red Cross delegates and the threats recently made against their colleagues in Burundi .
This is tragic evidence of a security situation which is rapidly deteriorating .
On the other hand it shows the risk run by staff at present working on the aid programmes in Burundi which in our opinion has reached such a pitch as to be barely acceptable .
The Commission has therefore decided , in close consultation with the Member States , to evacuate from Burundi families and staff not regarded as essential .
However the Commission will continue to be represented on the spot and to support the efforts to re-establish peace and stability in the region and in Burundi in particular .
Missions from the troika have visited Burundi , various diplomatic representations have been made and both the Union and the European Parliament have put forward various resolutions .
The European Union is trying to play an active part in these efforts as is very clearly shown by the appointment of Mr Aldo Ajello as a special envoy of the European Union in the region .
Mr Ajello is already recognized as a valuable partner in the quest for peace .
His mandate is to support the actions which are in progress - in particular those of ex-President Nyerere - and to press for a regional conference under the auspices of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations .
In all these diplomatic and political initiatives the message has been identical : violence must stop at once ; a dialogue of national reconciliation must be opened ; there is no possible military solution ; peace and stability in Burundi - and in all the region - can only be re-established at the negotiating table .
We place great hopes in the laudable efforts of ex-President to unite , or reunite , the parties to the conflict round the negotiating table in Tanzania .
The Commission , for its part , has done everything possible to support this initiative and those of the other prominent figures who are devoting their talents and experience to finding a peaceful settlement to the conflicts in the region .
Since the beginning of the crisis in the Great Lakes region the Community budget has made available more than US $ 700 million in humanitarian aid and rehabilitation work .
Considerable sums are still available and the Commission would be prepared to release them as soon as the political , security and human rights situation allows .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Votes
Mr President , in Amendment No 4 by Mr Pex there is a problem in the English translation .
Could you ask the author of the amendment if he could explain the phrase ' decisions taken on improper grounds ' .
It does not make sense in English .
Mr President , Mr Pex has asked me to say that the Dutch text is the original text .
Unfortunately the chairman of the Committee on Petitions is not able to read the Dutch text , but it is perfectly clear .
Mr President , I am against this amendment .
It is quite improper in the English language and it is quite contrary to the Treaty .
We cannot accept this amendment in its present form .
Mr Pex knows that and has admitted so to me .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate the Ombudsman on a successful first year of activity .
One of the European Ombudsman 's most important tasks is to play a role in developing a Union citizenship , which presently is only a small germ of an idea compared to what it could become .
It is very pleasing that the Ombudsman , Mr Söderman , has chosen to take a stand on a matter of such importance to all citizens as openness within the European Union .
Openness is one of democracy 's cornerstones , and Mr Söderman has sent an inquiry to Union bodies regarding the way in which documents are made available to citizens .
Let us hope that this inquiry speeds up the development of openness and transparency within the European Union .
The Ombudsman 's area of authority is very closely connected with the citizens ' actual constitutional position in the European Union , and I assume that as soon as he has established his position , discussions could be started regarding a possible extension of the civil rights of Union citizens . This way also the Ombudsman 's authority would increase and develop its full potential .
It is evident from the above that the European Ombudsman plays an essential role in developing the European Union into an authentic citizens ' Community .
The European Ombudsman has its good and bad points as an institution .
The same applies to Mr Söderman 's report .
On the positive side , any system of complaints can help to promote the hard-pressed concept of legal safety .
It is also clear from many of the opinions which Mr Söderman has delivered that he is a serious lawyer , who in a number of cases has taken both the Council and the Commission to task , especially in connection with questions of openness .
On the other hand , the creation of the European Ombudsman provided for by Article 138e of the Treaty on European Union is clearly a federal move which serves to give the Union and the European Parliament a false air of democratic legitimacy - an expression both symbolically and in reality of ' more Union ' .
Unfortunately , Mr Söderman has already accepted this function in his opening statement on taking up his post in September 1995 .
It grated on the ear to hear him say that the idea behind the European Ombudsman was to promote the concept of European citizenship .
There is no shortage of control mechanisms in the EU ; they have a tendency to develop into self-sustaining bureaucratic instruments .
If the Ombudsman were to be an effective guardian of legal safety in the same way as the national Ombudsmen , it would require a huge bureaucracy .
By way of comparison , the Danish Ombudsman has a staff of 25 lawyers .
I wish to record my support for the new Ombudsman as this new role is another step in the direction of making the European Union more accessible to ordinary people .
As an elected representative I feel it is vital that my constituents have someone to turn to with their complaints at the highest level .
I recognize that the Ombudsman has already become a champion of ordinary people 's interests .
However , as the role of the Ombudsman is so new , we in Parliament must make sure that both the Council and the Commission cooperate fully with his office .
Any information required to answer people 's enquiries must be forthcoming from the Council and the Commission .
Having established this important new role to give our citizens more knowledge of EU decisions we , as their representatives , must make sure they are not disappointed .
There must be no secrecy where my constituents ' grievances are concerned .
That concludes the vote .
Money laundering
The next item is the report ( A4-0187 / 96 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the first report from the Commission on the implementation of the money laundering directive ( 91 / 308 / EEC ) ( COM ( 95 ) 0054 - C4-0137 / 95 ) .
Mr President , this is a report the Commission submitted with a view to implementing the 1991 money-laundering directive .
We are giving our position as Parliament .
There can be no doubt at all that combating money laundering is one of the crucial crime-prevention tasks of our time .
There is a very close link between money laundering and organized crime which - as we all know - is constantly growing in Europe too and threatens to take on huge dimensions .
In this context the European Community issued a directive on combating money laundering in 1991 which was addressed to all the Member States so that they would introduce a certain minimum standard with regard to combating money laundering .
This 1991 directive does in fact set a relatively low standard compared to most of the legislation in the individual Member States .
Let me put that more simply : basically this directive mainly covered drug-related offences , which is one aspect of organized crime .
For those occupational groups that are in the end to be included in the scope of the national legislation there is so to speak only a minimum standard , which in principle covers the banking world , while many other areas , such as gambling casinos and other undertakings that are concerned with financial services are not adequately covered .
It has indeed now been left to the individual Member States to issue their own national laws over and above this minimum framework laid down by the directive but there have actually been wide variations - as a result of this discretionary approach - in the individual Member States .
The UK is one of the countries that has gone furthest here .
It has included virtually all serious criminal offences in its criminal records and it has included virtually every occupational group that is in any way concerned with money in the list of occupational groups that bear their own responsibility for combating money laundering in the sense of being liable under criminal law .
The other extreme , if I may cite an example , is Luxembourg which by comparison has a very liberal money-laundering legislation which basically only comes up to the minimum standard laid down in the directive .
Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights organized a hearing on this report in December last year , which the Commission has submitted to us .
It became clear from the views expressed by both committees that there certainly are weaknesses in the field of combating money laundering in Europe , and in particular they both found that the level of Europe-wide harmonization is inadequate .
The representative of the City of London Police , for instance , pointed out that constant difficulties arise in the cooperation between the various countries ' judicial authorities because cases which constitute a criminal offence of money-laundering in the United Kingdom , for instance involving reciprocal financial transactions with other Member States , cannot necessarily be considered a money-laundering offence in those states , which leads to constant problems in terms of cooperation .
It appeared from the hearings - for we also heard a representative of the Federal Criminal Police Office in Wiesbaden - that the same difficulties arise with regard to the coverage of different occupational groups .
Here the experts called for closer harmonization - in plain English for the money-laundering directive to be tightened up - in order to facilitate cross-frontier measures to combat crime in Europe .
A further aspect that became clear from the hearing was that a number of new forms of financial services now exist .
One example is direct banking , which in the experts view is evidently not properly covered in most Member States and is of course not covered by this directive either .
Both committees , Legal and Internal Affairs , considered that it would be most useful to adjust the directive to the new situation in this area too and of course then to adapt national legislation accordingly .
A final aspect that emerged is the problem that most of the money laundering no longer occurs in Western Europe now but mainly in Eastern Europe .
Today there are close interconnections between the banking world and organized crime in Russia in particular , but also in other Eastern European states .
The demand that was clearly expressed at the hearing and which we also took up in the committees was as follows : the agreements concluded with these states we must also require that they adopt equivalent money-laundering standards to those we impose on ourselves .
Those are the main requirements laid down in the report before you and which we ask the House to endorse .
There are a number of points of dispute , which is of course always the case , and which I shall list : one was the question whether the directive should cover only organized crime or also all ' serious criminal offences ' .
As rapporteur I was against going beyond organized crime because I believe otherwise it would be very difficult to differentiate .
The second problem concerns the following : with this money-laundering legislation we are intervening very deeply in the relationship of mutual trust between banks or financial institutions and clients .
For it to intervene in their relationship of mutual trust does indeed mean that the state must have a very strong interest in taking such action .
That is the subject of my report .
I ask the House to approve it .
Mr President , today money laundering is probably the most sophisticated and complex financial transaction .
Gone are the days when some petty criminal walked into a bank with a suitcase full of notes .
The advances in electronic banking have removed the personal contact , and criminal-controlled financial outlets provide a legitimate base for successful money laundering .
This is a global problem which has no regard for any international boundaries .
The European Union must play a prominent role in international efforts to deal with this global crime issue .
The United States of America is arguably at the forefront of the campaign tackling the problem of money laundering .
But its efforts can only be successful if it is aided and assisted by other countries .
It is , therefore , to our eternal shame that the European Union has not fully established Europol or provided the necessary resources for it .
The blocking actions by a certain Member State , it could be argued , are every bit as criminal as the people involved in money laundering .
There will also have to be a harmonization to a higher standard of the laws on money laundering throughout the Member States of the European Union so as not to allow a weak link within the Union .
We must also look beyond our borders where the European Union has influence , especially to those Eastern and Central European countries .
With the collapse of communism , overt criminal activity has increased .
Financial institutions within these countries are now being regularly used as a link in the chain to legitimize dirty money .
To combat this we must look at drawing up a list of clean banks , but we must also give urgent consideration to strengthening our articles of agreement with our partner countries to encourage them to adopt equivalent standards for supervision and transparency in financial transactions to those prevalent within Member States of the European Union .
Money laundering is not solely connected with drug trafficking but also takes in arms dealing , prostitution , art fraud and many other criminal activities .
By tackling the ill-gotten gains we will start to tackle the problem of crime .
We must not allow Europe to become the centre where crime pays .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has presented a first report on the implementation of the money-laundering directive which is very useful and informative .
It offers us an opportunity to concern ourselves in detail with the phenomenon of money laundering and to identify the weak points in the measures for combating this offence .
The weak points derive from the fact that the directive does not go far enough but also from the fact that organized crime is becoming increasingly cunning and using both new techniques and new means of investment .
We all know that the large criminal organizations which we lump together rather vaguely as organized crime are organized and built up in much the same way as economic undertakings and that the most sustainable way of reaching them is through their assets .
Any measures that prevent the proceeds of crime from being smuggled into the legal economic process are therefore very valuable and well targeted .
The motion for a resolution contains some sensible requests to the Commission to extend the scope of the directive .
In particular , national legal provisions on money laundering should expand the list of activities that constitute criminal offences .
It is incomprehensible why only drugs trafficking should be included and not other forms of organized or professional crime .
As has been pointed out , organized crime includes a whole range of crimes , from traffic in human beings to arms traffic , blackmail for protection money , gambling and many other areas .
So it would appear important to include all these areas of crime and all the proceeds from them .
I also think other occupational groups must be included in the scope of the directive .
Criminal organizations are inventive and their interest in the banking sector heightens the risk .
I just want to say a few words on the banking sector .
Mr Lehne mentions in the explanatory statement to his report that savings accounts in Austria could be used for money-laundering purposes .
To that I can only say that there are no savings accounts in Austria , only savings books .
Money can be paid into savings books and money can be withdrawn from them .
But money cannot be transferred .
I believe it is important to establish that .
Also , I do not think the figure of about 26 million savings books is really so high if you consider savings habits in Austria , where every pensioner opens at least one savings book for each grandchild and in any case everyone has different books for different savings purposes .
And I want to make it quite clear that accounts are not anonymous , neither current accounts nor any others , and that anonymity has also been abolished for securities accounts .
Austria lays great value on the fact that it is not a distributing centre for money laundering .
To return to the content of the resolution .
It can indeed be observed that mafia organizations and business people are appearing more and more often in the fields of real estate , gambling , jewellery and art with dubious funds .
So it is worth considering whether occupational groups such as jewellers , casino owners , lawyers and notaries should not be involved more closely in helping to combat organized crime .
Technical developments in financial transactions are also facing us with new problems .
It is very important to improve cooperation with the authorities responsible for combating organized crime and to keep a constant watch on developments .
Criminal organizations adjust very quickly to new measures and methods .
It is important to remain on the ball and react very promptly to changes .
The opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs takes the same line as the motion for a resolution submitted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
It too calls for the directive to be amended and to include in its scope a wider range of criminal activities .
Combating internationally operating criminal organizations is a great challenge for the European Union and its Member States .
The people of Europe expect us to combat crime successfully .
Combating money laundering is certainly an important means of combating international crime .
Mr President , you will understand that in my constituency , in Essex in the UK , the menace of drugs misuse is bitterly understood .
In the last year in our community we have suffered the tragic death of teenager Leah Betts , after taking ecstasy pills in a Basildon nightclub .
In a quiet country lane in Rettendon , three drugs-related execution-style murders today remain unsolved and a Billericay businessman was found shot dead in his car with £ 5 , 000 of drugs money left on the dashboard .
I am sad to say that we understand only too well that the scourge of drug addiction is big business too .
That businessman 's used car business is under investigation as a possible front for drug trafficking and therefore as an easy way to launder the profits of this destructive trade .
That is why tonight we call for a tightening of the rules , not against the people in the mafia-style gangs , but the men in the sharp suits and with the briefcases who are behind this $ 500 billion drugs trade worldwide .
After the scandals of Nick Leeson and Barings and in the last week of Mr Hamanaka and the Sumitomo Corporation we know that massive fraud and deception is happening today within these multinational financial institutions .
When a 59 year old grandmother , a 30 years ' activist in the British Conservative Party is jailed for five years for laundering £ 400 , 000 on behalf of the fugitive Azil Nadir , funder of that same ruling Conservative Party , we know that these criminals can be found in the most unlikely places .
Our local authorities , police and health agencies will do everything possible at the local level to combat illegal drugs supply and misuse , but they will not win the war against drugs until we at the European level bring about the necessary cooperation between governments , law enforcement agencies and banks to stop the bankrolling which is behind the scourge of the drugs trade .
End the dirty dollars and the hot money and we will really put a stop to the senseless and needless deaths .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , money does not stink , as the saying goes ; I would add , unless it is laundered .
That takes me right into Mr Lehne 's report , which I consider particularly thorough .
Money laundering is , as we know , only the final link in a long chain of criminal activities , many of which are coordinated by organized crime .
As we all know , these are cross-frontier phenomena which , like combating fraud in general , require intensive cooperation between the Member States of the European Union in the field of both domestic policy and judicial policy .
Consequently we need comprehensive legislative action to improve the coordination between the national judicial and police authorities .
In this context particular emphasis is laid on the need for appropriate procedural provisions in the Member States .
Only then will it be possible to detect and prosecute criminal money launderers successfully , for instance by making it easier to monitor telecommunications traffic or temporarily confiscating assets .
The rapporteur rightly points out that the criminals are entirely at home with computers and the most recent techniques .
In view of the enormous technical advances , it is therefore quite right to call for the existing European system for combating money laundering to be adjusted to technical innovations such as direct banking and prepaid cards and under no circumstances to delay this .
That this requires highly developed control systems and techniques but also of course specially trained personnel is self-evident .
The call to extend the measures to combat money laundering not just to money from drugs trafficking but to all the proceeds of organized crime is also important .
It is particularly necessary at this time for us in the European Parliament to give a signal to the people and to make them more confident that Europe is combating crime consistently and successfully .
In that sense the Lehne report is a major step forward .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Lehne for the excellent work he has done .
His is a good report , bearing in mind that the Commission is asked to take more resolute action in seeking data and information , communicating with the House and promoting greater cooperation with the national authorities by amending the directive on the recycling of capital .
Up to this point we are clearly in agreement , as we are in agreement on the fact that EUROPOL needs to be ratified as soon as possible , as it may provide an important means of combating this problem , just as , on the other hand , it could be very dangerous to open up to other countries , such as Russia , without the necessary guarantees on the issue of money-laundering .
It is clear that money-laundering is now the main weapon of organized crime - let us be clear about this - a lethal weapon which means that organized crime is taking possession of the economic and productive nerve centres of the large- , medium- and small-scale economic activities to be found in Europe .
I do not , however , believe that it will be possible to resolve the problem on the basis of controls or policing activities in regard to banks , for example .
The same is happening , for instance , in the case of the drugs problem , as Mr Howitt said a few moments ago : that problem is simply the product of a mistaken approach , a repressive approach the sole effect of which is to expand the drugs market .
I believe in and stress the importance of striking at the economic interests of organized crime and thus moneylaundering , by bringing into effect the concept of confiscating the proceeds of organized crime . This should be done not only in relation to organized crime but also in relation to individuals who commit such offences .
Mr President , in the first place I should like to say that the report on the implementation of the directive has made clear the need to take account , in the prevention of money laundering , of the new types of financial transactions and the elaboration of new legislative measures to deal with the complexity of such transactions .
In the second place it should be said that the present directive needs to be revised to include in its field of application occupations and categories of business likely to be involved in money laundering and similarly the directive should be revised to bring greater flexibility into the measures to be taken and the provisional confiscation of goods suspected of being of illegal origin .
Finally I should like to point out that the effectiveness of the campaign against money laundering depends both upon widening the field of application of the directive and on better information on the flow of capital to ascertain the origin and the monetary impact of the relevant transactions .
Otherwise how can we ascertain whether or not they are legitimate ?
Without such a move towards transparency , although the measures proposed are positive and deserve to be approved , I do not think it will be possible to put an end to the wealth born of crime , which is usually so tempting precisely because it pays so well .
Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteur had to do more than just square the circle or hit a nail on the head .
Because of the 1991 directive he was forced to take a legislative approach to a subject that is after all basically financial and economic .
He had to deal with a range of criminal activities for which there is no EU criminal law .
He had to set up a police force for which there is neither a legal basis nor democratic or judicial control .
With the list of clean banks he was forced in the end to show the money launderers where best to invest their money and in the end he , who after all wants to combat money laundering as we all do , had to call for evidence that the practice of money laundering is on the increase and that it is playing a growing part within the network of criminal associations .
The rapporteur is certainly not responsible for the mistaken philosophy on which the entire money-laundering legislation is based .
For the basic mistake is to take money laundering as an established fact instead of destroying the economic preconditions that make it so and , secondly , to intervene in the protected private sphere by legislative means instead of withdrawing the protection from those who misuse it to cover up their criminal activities .
That creating ' clean banks ' will be a strong weapon for combating money laundering is in my view the opposite of likely in more than one respect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , has made certain improvements by comparison with the Commission 's first report , they are still far from sufficient , given the scale of the problem .
Unlike the rapporteur , I believe that an enumerative , unnumbered and above all truncated report , a report in other words that annoys no one , cannot be a good report .
Nowhere is any mention made of numerical data on either the conventional or new laundering channels , although the total extent of the laundering of capital can be evaluated at ECU 500 thousand million .
More seriously , the report gives a clean sheet to the twelve Member States that signed the directive .
Yet the reality is very different .
After all , how can we explain the fact that the banks in Guernsey , which are under the authority of the British Crown and were formerly known for their cattle , are sitting on a hoard of 27 thousand million pounds sterling ?
How can we explain the fact that the Dutch Government has ratified a unique form of tax convention with the Dutch Antilles dependencies ?
I shall not go into any detail about the fiscal and banking legislation in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg .
And I can already picture Austria 's formal ratification of Directive 91 / 308 .
How are we to explain the fact that a State that is home to 8 million souls has managed to amass within its territory more than 20 million anonymous savings books ?
To pretend to display firmness by ratifying such directives , while at the same time continuing to wash our dirty linen in private ; to play the policeman without ever being seen as the villain in the eyes of public opinion - what hypocrisy !
Do we have to wait for one of our Heads of State to be caught in some dark dealings with money laundering , perhaps associated with arms dealing or drug trafficking ?
Do we need a European version of Mr Samper to force our leaders to see reason ?
Let us start by going to the root of the problem .
Let us start by regulating and legalizing all drugs , now .
Until that happens , my group will abstain .
Mr President , the Commission 's first report on the implementation of the 1993 money laundering directive has pointed to vast differences in the way the legislation is applied by the Member States .
As a result it is still possible for dirty money to move with ease throughout Europe .
The Irish Government has declared the fight against drugs a priority of its presidency .
I share Mr Howitt 's concern that the existing laws do not crack down on the proceeds of crime .
Indeed a major international crime conference in Dublin this week highlighted the very serious difficulties drug squad officers from European countries have in dealing with the Europol drugs unit in the Hague .
There were , for example , long delays in obtaining vital information from some countries .
The current directive on money laundering is clearly ineffective given the scale of this drug problem in the cities mentioned and in other areas and also the ease with which the proceeds appear to be laundered into legitimate businesses .
We clearly need a far more flexible legal framework to keep abreast of technological advances in banking systems .
Some of these have been outlined by Mr Miller .
I want to see a situation where criminals , whether they are drug dealers , IRA , bank robbers or white-collar fraudsters find it impossible to launder their ill-gotten gains anywhere in Europe .
I am also calling for much closer cooperation between the police , the courts , the revenue authorities and financial institutions .
I have spoken to some accountants who work in this area .
What they recommend is that civil proceedings should be taken in tandem with criminal proceedings so that the ill-gotten gains be confiscated on conviction .
We should not forget that Al Capone was eventually imprisoned for tax evasion .
Finally , the directive should also be extended to cover the proceeds of fraud against the EU budget .
In Ireland we have the scandal relating to the beef export refunds and the continuing massive transit fraud in , for example , cigarette smuggling .
There are huge sums of money going astray which we could use very effectively in the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lehne for an excellent report .
Money laundering is a growing problem in all Member States .
The authorities should prevent criminal money from penetrating the financial system .
This is essential , since criminal money puts at risk the reliability and stability of the entire financial system .
In Europe resources should be centralized to support preventive activity and to facilitate information exchange between the authorities receiving notifications , because information exchange at the European level is extremely difficult , especially between authorities and the police .
A system should be created which would prevent successful money laundering by supporting preventive measures in respect of targets exposed to money laundering risks and which would make it possible to discover , trace and investigate money laundering .
The system should work on two levels .
There should be a preventive function , including checks and training of targets under surveillance , analysis of money laundering methods and legislation initiatives , and an investigative function , including investigating suspected money laundering incidents .
If money has slipped through security measures , this money should be identified , traced , confiscated and the offenders brought to justice .
Money laundering can be done in various ways , which is why the reporting obligation should be extended .
Dealers in securities and money exchange bureaux will in all likelihood be obliged to report this year .
In the future also enterprises dealing in betting and gaming , real estate developers , companies or individuals in occupations handling valuable objects , accountants and enterprises or professionals offering financial services will in all likelihood be obliged to report .
A number of international organisations are involved in resolving the problems of money laundering .
There is clearly a need to co-ordinate measures at European level , in order to avoid a duplication of effort .
Mr President , the rapporteur Mr Lehne rightly said that the fight against money laundering must not be confined to drugs money but must of course also include the proceeds of all criminal offences committed by organized crime .
That is also why the European Parliament organized the first committee of inquiry on the transit system , for the Member States and the European Union are losing billions of ecus through the evasion of duties , especially in the case of sensitive products such as cigarettes , alcohol and certain foods .
Organized crime is active there too .
That is why we need comprehensive rules .
It is also necessary , however , to include and criminalize fraud involving EU budget funds in all the EU states .
To date that is only the case in some countries and it is quite incomprehensible why loopholes are being created here , which make it more difficult if not impossible to combat money laundering .
On the other hand it is a little naive to believe - and here I am addressing Mr Dupuis - that anonymous savings books with small deposits of less than ECU 15 000 , which is laid down as the limit in the directive , or similar banking transactions in other EU countries , such as Italy or Germany , that do not need to be disclosed , are used for money laundering purposes .
There are quite other reasons for that .
As Mrs Hlavac rightly pointed out , it is simply the case that many people open small savings books for their children , grandchildren and for the whole family .
That area is not suitable for money laundering .
Organized crime uses dummy firms , fictitious transfers and cover-ups on a large scale .
That is why the Community has to take a coordinated approach and needs a uniform information system , which also has to be extended to the Visegrad states if they are to be included in our system .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission I thank Parliament , and in particular its rapporteur Mr Lehne , for the comprehensive survey of the Union 's activities in the field of combating money laundering and the means by which we can jointly boost these efforts .
We are all aware of the damage being done to our society by the drugs traffic and other forms of organized crime .
If we can prevent criminals from laundering , using and investing their dirty money that will be an effective means of combating crime .
As we all know , dirty money corrupts everything , including the financial system .
And that was also the point of departure for the Community 's activities in this area , namely the prevention of misuse of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering .
Pursuant to the 1991 directive , the Commission must report to Parliament and the Council on its application .
We have done so , our report is the subject of the report before you this evening .
The Commission is convinced that the directive entirely fulfils its task and that in general it was transposed well in the Member States .
But that does not yet mean that we have effective means of also combating the causes of organized crime .
As our report says , money laundering is now a criminal offence in all Member States .
At first , in 1991 , that was not the case , as we know .
We broke through the protection offered by banking confidentiality .
All financial institutions now have to actively notify the authorities of any suspicion and may no longer just wait until they are asked .
Yet it will never be possible to regard the battle against money laundering as won .
As soon as we close up one loophole in the system , the money launderers look for new points of attack and , as has been made very clear here , use the most recent techniques for doing so .
But we can make this increasingly difficult and expensive for them and thereby thwart their tactics and strategy to some extent at least .
Both reports realise that this battle is a long-term one .
I only want to discuss a few of the most important matters raised in the motion for a resolution , since there is no time to go into all 20 paragraphs individually .
Many of these points are addressed not to the Commission but to the Member States , as the rapporteur just said in his oral statement .
We can endorse many of them , especially the call to include a very wide spectrum of serious crimes in their money-laundering legislation , to continue work on the Europol Convention and for all the Member States to ratify the Vienna and Strasbourg conventions .
Let me just point out that extending the scope and improved cooperation form part of both the Vienna and the Strasbourg conventions .
The Commission will examine every single point you raised in depth and will certainly discuss them with the Member States .
That is why the Commission has deferred the scheduled meeting of the Contact Committee until the autumn , so that this report by Parliament can be discussed adequately and thoroughly there .
What are the main themes ?
Firstly , the report requests more information from the Commission on reported cases and convictions , on new types of money-laundering and their economic effects .
As you know , some of this information is extremely difficult to obtain .
Where the Commission does have access to reliable information , it will of course pass it on to Parliament ; but you know that here we also have to rely on the information and the goodwill of the Member States .
The Council has already requested a second report on certain aspects of the directive and we will be drawing up another report both for Parliament and for the Council .
The present report also calls for a revision of the directive .
This relates mainly to the field of new financial techniques , but also to the other occupations and activities concerned and to their proper surveillance .
To be frank , the Commission is rather hesitant to draw up a new directive at this point .
The 1991 directive determines the objective and leaves the Member States a certain amount of room for play in implementing it .
It is not a technical measure and nor does it examine the individual financial products or techniques , but it can also be applied to areas that are not specifically mentioned in it .
Nor is the Commission entirely sure that it has a firm legal basis for further-reaching measures to deal with the fact that the main emphasis of measures to combat money laundering is shifting away from the formal financial sector .
As was also made clear in the report , it is generally agreed that what is needed most at present is closer cooperation between the Member States ' authorities responsible for combating money laundering .
Several speakers here have also pointed that out .
Cooperation between the police and the judiciary is an area in which the Commission does not at present have any right of initiative .
So we have to confine ourselves to calling for closer cooperation in this area and I hope we can jointly urge more movement on the third pillar at the intergovernmental conference .
The Commission is currently working on a number of areas together with the Contact Committee .
They include the misuse of bureaux de change and the problem of non-personal transactions such as telephone or computer banking .
This committee is doing very good work and the Commission is confident that further progress can be made in the framework of the existing directive .
Only if this fails will the Commission consider a further directive and even then only if it has found a solid legal base for it .
In any case the Commission will keep Parliament informed of both the progress made and the problems encountered .
Let me briefly discuss the requested extension of these measures to the Eastern European states .
I would very much like to point out that money-laundering clauses form part of the partnership agreements and association agreements with these countries and that we are also supporting practical means of advancing along this road , for instance through technical aid under PHARE , so that the arm of the law can reach beyond our borders .
Finally , let me again thank Parliament for its comprehensive and constructive report .
The Commission will continue the dialogue with you and I hope that together we will manage to achieve better results .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 9 a.m. tomorrow .
Linguistic diversity in the information society
The next item is the report ( A4-0148 / 96 ) by Mrs Mouskouri , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the adoption of a multiannual programme to promote the linguistic diversity of the Community in the information society ( COM ( 95 ) 0486 - C40152 / 96-95 / 0263 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal from the Commission comes in the framework of the growth of the information society .
The Commission is proposing the adoption , that is to say , of a multiannual programme to promote the linguistic diversity of the Community in the information society .
This proposal brings two benefits , the second of which flows from the first .
Firstly , it accepts the reality of linguistic diversity in the European Union , the reality of the linguistic pluralism which is currently under pressure because of the use on the information highways of only one language , English , which monopolies not only technology but also communications generally .
The use of this single language threatens to lead to a standardization of thought and to deprive large numbers of people in the Union of access to information , progress and knowledge .
For that reason the adoption of this programme should be warmly welcomed because it comes to the aid of our linguistic heritage and seeks to promote it , while at the same time offering total participation in the information society for all of Europe 's citizens without exception .
The second benefit is economic and springs from the fact that undertakings which have previously confined themselves to local markets will in future be helped by multi-lingual products to find international outlets .
In presenting to you the Commission proposal , with a number of amendments inserted by the Committee on Culture , I would like to draw your attention to a serious issue concerning the legal basis . The programme has the objectives of promoting the use of technologies and methods which can reduce the cost of transferring information from language to language , strengthening the languages industry and encouraging the development of multi-lingual services .
The question we have to ask ourselves is whether the promotion of linguistic diversity in the Union is an objective end it itself or simply a means to the promotion of the information society at the international level .
The Committee on Culture has come to a clear conclusion , namely that the programme as such is the main objective and that appropriate means are contained within it for the realization of that objective .
This means that the cultural dimension of this programme has priority over the industrial effects and that therefore a change is necessary in the legal basis .
We are pleading with the Council and the Commission to accept that this proposal be at least given a double legal basis , with recourse to Article 128 as well , rather than having it rest solely on Article 130 which would be much too restrictive a basis for the subject .
The European Parliament would be willing to request a judgment from the European Court , not only for the purpose of seeking support for its position in this particular case but also in order to seek , above all , confirmation and endorsement of the importance of the role of cultural values in the European infrastructure .
The Commission has proposed three action lines : support for the construction of an infrastructure for European language resources , mobilization and expansion of the language industries and promotion of the use of advanced language tools in the European public sector .
The programme ends in 1998 and has a budget of ECU 15m .
Allow me to turn now to some of the Committee on Culture 's most important amendments .
Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 7 make the case for placing the Commission proposal in the cultural sphere , with Article 128 as the legal basis .
In a related way , Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 emphasize the social aspect of the information society , the need to ensure democratic access in order to protect certain population categories against exclusion .
Amendment No 11 underscores the threat of ' dialectification ' to languages left on the margins of the information society .
Amendments Nos 23 and 39 deal with the economic aspect .
Most of the enterprises with an interest in this programme are small and medium-sized , and it is important that we protect and assist them .
Amendment No 25 proposes the use of the Structural Funds by the Member States to help protect our linguistic heritage .
Many of the amendments call for special attention to be paid to the lesser-used languages and for examination of the possibility of seeking synergies with other social programmes such as the ARIANE programme .
Lastly , taking account of the great importance of this programme , it is proposed that the financing be raised from ECU 15m to ECU 20m .
In concluding , I should like to re-emphasize to the House the immense importance of preserving the European Union 's linguistic heritage and of ensuring , above all , that it is not devastated in the future by information highways whose content is incomprehensible .
Lastly , I would like to thank the Commission very greatly for its excellent initiative and to say that I hope that this proposal will be accorded the cultural dimension that it merits and that it can be implemented swiftly .
Apart from the parliamentary courtesy which requires me to thank you , Mrs Mouskouri , I should like to offer my warmest thanks today because in this institution , faced with all the budgetary and technical difficulties we work with 100 % multilingualism .
There is a concern to promote the many languages which exist throughout the European Union .
Your words , which have stressed the importance of languages as a factor of culture , are without doubt a very important aspect and I can assure you that your speech was music to the ears of everyone here - one of your best songs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by warmly congratulating Mrs Mouskouri on her polished and excellent report on the Commission proposal on promoting the linguistic diversity of the information society .
I emphatically support her in her attempt to free this three-year programme from the confines of the purely economic vision of the Commission .
For linguistic diversity is not just an economic resource that may even represent a barrier .
The terms used by the Commission , such as language industries , language as a product and so on , totally disregard the fact that linguistic diversity is a cultural asset and an important mark of identity .
This cultural heritage must be preserved .
That is why preference should be given to Article 128 as the legal base .
It concerns culture and gives precedence to non-commercial , cultural exchanges .
It ensures co-decision by Parliament , instead of mere consultation under Article 130 , as the Commission proposed .
Since I am delivering the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , let me point to a few financial aspects .
The meagre funds of a total of ECU 15 m allocated to this programme could be increased by amending the financial perspective , otherwise the burden would fall on other Category 3 areas .
The appropriations must be safeguarded in each annual budget , taking account of the preceding year 's execution of the budget .
That also includes administrative costs .
For the rest , the financial statement does not take account of potential revenue from the participation of non-member third parties .
Nor is the number of officials already working in this field clarified ; two additional posts are being requested and two national experts .
We should take every care to avoid duplication of work and costs .
That is why we propose a link-up with other programmes , e.g. INFO 2000 or TELEMATICS .
It is doubtful whether the advisory committee will have the kind of overall view that will enable it to promote not just mega-projects but also micro-projects .
These two questions of the advisory committee and the establishment plan posts both need to be examined during the annual budget procedure .
I warmly thank the rapporteur again for accepting the amendments from the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy considers it essential for the European Union to draw up a policy aimed , on the one hand , at guaranteeing and promoting the cultural and linguistic diversity of the Union in the information society and , on the other , transforming the obvious advantages of the Union at the level of knowledge and experience of multilingualism into new economic and job-creating opportunities .
Any effective action must start out with a sound knowledge of the facts of the problem .
In that connection , the Commission document is disappointing .
Indeed , apart from a very approximate estimate of the financial dimension - unsupported and lacking in detail and some reference to jobs - it contains not the slightest analysis of the market in question .
This seems to us to represent a highly detrimental omission .
It would be desirable for the Commission to complete its proposal by adding a searching analysis of the world and European markets and of the strengths and weaknesses of European undertakings .
This would create the opportunity to make soundly-based choices and to target efforts .
It is clear that this programme is far from equal to the situation it describes .
Given the advantages of Union industries , the activities of European undertakings in this market deserve to be supported .
This programme in its present form is incapable of providing the necessary assistance and it can , at best , prepare the ground .
The development of the global and multimedia means of communication can jeopardize the cultural and linguistic diversity of the Union .
It is , therefore , appropriate in that connection to draw up a policy for the defence of cultural and linguistic identities already existing , the number of which is , of course , much higher than the number of official languages in the European institutions .
In this connection , the arrival of new translation and interpretation techniques can help the so-called minority languages to flourish .
On the other hand , technological development that will lead to production of new translation and interpretation tools could enable the European Union to exploit economically its natural knowhow in multilingualism at world level .
A market for these new applications of language technology is a highly promising one , in particular in terms of job creation and exports .
In that connection the Union must conduct an interventionist policy of accompaniment and support for the efforts of European undertakings that have committed themselves to this market .
I now wish to congratulate the rapporteur on behalf of the Green Group and to say that my new computer at home sings to me , but not with the richness or diversity of the rapporteur herself or the human voice in general , and the computer will never take the place of human beings .
I share her view that we must dismiss the quick fix of English only : we must take concrete action to promote cultural and linguistic diversity in the information age .
The right of mother tongue access to information technology must go hand in hand with the promotion of language learning .
In this regard , the non-official languages of the Union which have a status recognized at regional level are used as instruments of communication , both for the transmission of technical information and in teaching and cultural activities .
The diversity of the languages used in the European Union constitute a wealth that must be preserved and dynamically developed , both from a cultural point of view and to secure economic spin-offs for the language industries .
Action taken in this programme should help to create a favourable environment for strengthening the language industries .
I thank the rapporteur very sincerely for her efforts .
Finally , we must create an environment favourable to the expansion of the language industries and promote the development of multilingual services .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Mouskouri on this report on the promotion of the linguistic diversity of the Community in the information society .
The development of globally interlinked information and communication services could have a major impact on the languages we use .
People who are not in a position to communicate properly in the usual languages could be prevented from taking full part in our increasingly information-oriented society .
Since information affects all levels of society , equality of opportunity for all is of major importance in order to ensure full participation by all .
If we allow the information revolution to advance unchecked this could lead to a two-tier society .
Many of the minority languages find themselves in difficulties under the influence of changing communication patterns .
If the new technologies are put to full use that could even speed up the process and risk destroying the linguistic and cultural diversity of the European Community .
I recently leafed through a report by ' Euromosaic ' which is about minority-language communities and which points out that earlier proposals concerned emotive , traditional activities such as folklore whereas today we are also concerned with preventing the social and economic marginalization of minority-language communities and that it is also of decisive importance whether the use of the language in question is extended to the working environment .
That is to say , we are concerned today not with cultural but with economic measures .
By the way , there is also some criticism of the fact that not only are not enough funds available but that they are not always spent efficiently .
We need specific directives to ensure a balance between the major language groups and those languages that are used in smaller national or regional groups in Europe , with a view to achieving equality of opportunity .
Resources such as electronic dictionaries , terminology data banks and language and grammar data banks are needed in order to transform communication technologies into marketable products .
Here the necessary efforts will have to be made to attract investment from the private sector and small and medium-sized undertakings .
Small undertakings , as Mrs Mouskouri also noted , that are confronted with large and diversifying markets also need to be offered adequate assistance .
The Member States , the European Commission and private undertakings have already invested substantially in the production of language resources .
However , most of these are single-language systems and , moreover , the current systems are not sufficiently compatible .
The linguistic diversity in Europe is notable compared , for example , with that in the USA or Japan .
Europe has the scientific and technological know-how and the economic strength , but it must also have the political will to maintain its linguistic diversity in the information age , which is what the people of Europe want .
Let me underline that the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media calls for the modest financing basis to be increased from ECU 15 m to ECU 20 m .
The people must be guaranteed their basic right of access to information in their European mother tongue .
European society must not be split into the informed and the uninformed .
Europe 's richness lies in its diversity .
We must promote it and invest in it in a well-considered way .
Mr President , first of all my compliments to Mrs Mouskouri for her excellent work and for the power of her conviction . And I very much approve of the Commission proposal .
Linguistic diversity in the Union is a matter close to my heart .
It is not just an economic burden which we seek to ease by technology .
It is above all a cultural asset , something precious which should be treasured .
Our citizens attach importance to this , for a variety of reasons .
We must support them in this , at Union level too .
In this respect the programme is a step in the right direction .
Thirdly and lastly , a small complaint .
I absolutely do not agree with the legal basis and am totally with the rapporteur on this .
Of course it makes sense to make room for a programme like this in industrial policy .
It fosters economic integration , opportunities for small businesses and the competitive position of the language industry sector .
But legally and politically it is a mistake to use only Article 130 as a legal basis .
Firstly , because this cuts out the Committee of the Regions and Parliament totally and partially .
Secondly , and most importantly , because it does not appreciate the cultural dimension of this subject .
Language is both the basis of culture and its expression .
I would be glad of an answer from the Commission , preferably a straight yes or no , to each of the following two questions .
Does the Commission view linguistic diversity as an aspect of cultural diversity within the meaning of Article 128 of the Treaty ?
And secondly , and I will end on this : in the Commission 's view is linguistic diversity a part of our European cultural heritage , within the meaning of Article 128 of the Treaty ?
Mr President , I welcome the proposal of the Commission for the adoption of the programme to promote linguistic diversity in the information society and offer warm congratulations to Mrs Mouskouri .
The linking and interoperability of file and information centre services will certainly be an advance .
However , we need to ensure that the periphery , which is striving hard to adjust and needs greater support , is not further marginalized because of infrastructure shortcomings and deficiencies in technical know-how .
There is a connection between that and the threat to the lesser-used languages of Europe and to the future of multilingual European culture .
We must reject one-dimensional linguistic cultural expression , and Mrs Mouskouri 's excellent report emphasizes that very clearly .
That means giving our support to the efforts to promote cultural products released in the various languages of the countries of the European Union .
It was to that end that we gave our support for the preferential treatment of multilingual audio-visual works via the MEDIA II programme , and for the conversion of printed publications into electronic publications via INFO 2000 .
And the ARIANE translation programme was formulated in the same general spirit .
We must now support the increased appropriations for the financing of linguistic diversity in the information society .
In addition , as has already been said , Article 128 must be given primacy , so as to create , together with the use of Article 130 , a double legal basis which can accommodate the essentially cultural character of this programme .
Lastly , we must keep on insisting that each country must have access to the information centres and to the services of the information society in its own language .
As has been already been emphasized , and I am glad that it has come also from Members whose mother tongue is English , the quick fix of English , of that language which is used in such a debased and codified way , can neither reflect , by itself , nor defend our multi-cultural Europe .
Mr President , the future of the languages of Europe is a central problem to the policy of the European Union even if the Union does not seem to acknowledge that , given the paltry size this programme .
It must be debated and discussed , something which has not yet been done in full detail and complexity , to find solutions , with a contribution by all the Union 's institutions and those of the Member States , specialised bodies and relevant companies .
The Mouskouri report is an excellent list of questions . It reflects the great openness of its author .
But I would like to see a clearer definition of the priorities .
Language policies need to be dealt with at very many levels .
First of all , the language itself .
Each country and each linguistic region needs to requalify the instruction of the language at school - that is a basis which does not exist at present .
Secondly , functional bilingualism : every citizen must , as of the most basic educational level , be trained in the notion of the European linguistic plurality and become bi- or even trilingual .
That could cement European citizenship together .
Thirdly , translation ; the circulation of knowledge throughout Europe , be it artistic , literary or scientific , must be done in all languages , with reliance on a coherent common policy , with linguistic resource infrastructures created by the different Member States and , in cases where subsidiarity allows , by the European Union .
The problems concerning scientific and technological translation , literary translation , translation of the multimedia need to be dealt with , taking into account their individual specific needs .
Fourth point : the Union and Member States ' official policies .
European language policies must give equal treatment - and that does not mean egalitarian - to all national , regional and minority languages in Europe , and also to non-European languages spoken by communities residing in Europe .
I should like to end by referring to one last point and making one proposal .
My final point is about translation and interpretation at international fora .
The future of the use of different languages by international organisations deserves to be given thought in the cool light of day .
I think it would be a serious mistake to pull out a pistol every time someone mentions reducing the number of languages .
It is not here that our identity is at stake .
I think that the launch of this three-year Community programme is the right time to hold a major international conference on the future of language sin Europe so that we can decide clearly which direction to take when the programme comes to an end in 1998 .
This is my proposal to the Commission .
I shall be voting in favour of this report , and I must thank Mrs Mouskouri for a very significant improvement to the Commission 's text , which I am bound to say badly needed it .
The Commission , in fact , adopted a very economistic approach , reflected in the choice of legal basis in Article 130 , paragraph 3 .
We find the spirit and letter of the Bangemann report in this talk of achieving economies of scale , the view of multilingualism as an economic asset and the talk about the language industry , the view of linguistic diversity as an obstacle which creates a cost burden , and the proposal that these linguistic barriers should be overcome in order to enable us to benefit from the advantages of the internal market . All of this I quote from the report .
As the report recommends , it is essential to retain Article 128 as the legal basis and to ensure that , in the age of the binary language of computers , the networks are not monolingual in English and , at the same time , the information society does not create a new social dichotomy through the agency of discrimination .
In order to avoid this , all languages must be fully integrated into the information society , and we must therefore be particularly attentive to supporting minority languages , including regional ones .
From this point of view , the structural funds could be used to preserve and develop the linguistic heritage of the Member States .
We must be careful not just to favour the megaprojects ; more modest projects need to be supported and , with them , the SMEs which are developing multilingual tools , methods and services .
We must not forget that the inequalities in our societies have a profoundly cultural aspect which finds expression in terms of exclusion and disaffiliation .
In the field of languages , as in other cultural fields , it is still necessary - as Brecht said about the theatre - to ' increase the number in the know ' .
The conditions for that increase have yet to be established , and will require a budget worthy of that ambition .
Mr President , the diversity of our languages is an integral component of our cultural heritage and must be preserved and maintained .
The planned action programme will support this important objective .
But let me just point to one aspect to which perhaps not quite enough attention is paid , that of the minority languages .
They too are an expression of cultural diversity and I am glad therefore that the rapporteur has made constructive proposals on this important question in several amendments .
The programmes must take account of minority languages , even if they are languages that are only the official language outside the Union .
Precisely these languages must not be excluded from the information society either .
For instance , a significant Slovenian minority lives in the southernmost province of Austria , Kärnten , and their language is protected and taken into consideration in the Austrian educational system in exemplary fashion .
Unfortunately one cannot say the same for the German-speaking minority in Slovenia .
But quite apart from that it would be important if pilot actions could be envisaged and carried out precisely for this kind of linguistic minority , as proposed in Amendment 29 .
Actions of this kind could also give rise to interesting synergies in relation to enlargement eastward , which will naturally have a major impact on the Austrian frontier regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I too should like to congratulate Mrs Mouskouri on her splendid work and stress the importance of the subject we are discussing and the part which the European Parliament must play in everything related to defending and encouraging linguistic diversity in the information society .
The information society offers us the opportunity of enriching the main European bastion , which consists of a rich cultural , historical and linguistic heritage , in offering us the possibility to provide new services intended for a wider European audience .
By means of the so-called information highways culture and languages will spread more rapidly and widely within and outside Europe .
The building of Europe must develop by means of respect for the cultural and linguistic heritage of its citizens and initiatives like this help to encourage that diversity .
We must take advantage of the challenges and opportunities which the information society offers us on behalf of European citizens , safeguarding one of the basic principles of Community law such as equality of opportunity .
The use of all Community languages in Community networks is fundamental for developing information and communication accessible to all since citizens who are not able to communicate in the widely-spoken languages such as , for example English , might be cut off from any form of communication or at least placed at a disadvantage .
Parliament must take an active part in the functioning , establishment and results of the programme as a body representing the interests of European citizens , ensuring in its turn that there is synergy between this programme and other programmes relating to the information society , since it is clear that coordination saves duplication of effort which unfortunately frequently arises in the Union .
For all these reasons , Mr President , I should like to express again all my support for the report and of course to repeat my sincere congratulations on the rapporteur 's work .
We must also support Community initiatives like this programme for the encouragement of linguistic diversity , which guarantees full multilingual protection in the use of computerized information .
Mr President , I support the Commission 's three-year programme to promote linguistic diversity in the information society through the encouragement of new technologies and the development of multilingual services .
I also support the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media amendment to increase the budget allocation from ECU 12m to ECU 16m .
We must all ensure that the spread of modern technology will strengthen rather than weaken the continent 's rich multilingual diversity .
The growing emphasis of an English-dominated global network information and communications service must not undermine the range of European cultures and languages .
This programme aims to encourage producers to supply support material and manuals in various languages , devise ways of making online dictionaries and terminology banks multilingual and encourage the expansion of software products .
With English firmly established as the major international high technology language , there are fears that non-English speakers may not be able to benefit from the various services available , reducing the information society 's impact on schools , businesses and homes .
There is justified concern that the linguistic diversity resulting from the 45 national and regional languages spoken by the EU 's 270 million inhabitants could be suffocated by the predominance of one or two major languages .
We should never overlook the fact that 20 % of our citizens speak minority languages .
These languages should not be allowed to suffer because of the dominant role of a few major languages .
These of course include the first language of my country , the Irish language .
People must have access to information in their own language .
I hope the Telecommunications Council meeting on 27 June next will have the wisdom and foresight to support these innovative proposals from the European Parliament .
Mr President , it is a case of David and Goliath , minor languages against major languages .
I choose this image advisedly , because I am convinced that the minor languages must not come off second best , even despite the revolution in the information society .
Our many languages are one aspect of our wealth and information in one 's own language is a fundamental right of the European citizen .
But the minor languages are indeed coming under pressure .
At the beginning of 1995 I was in sharp disagreement with Alain Lamassoure who wanted to limit the number of working languages in the European Union after further enlargement .
Three weeks ago I had occasion to ask a question of Commissioner Cresson who had given instructions in a letter to her DGs that all correspondence with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe should be written in French , even replies to letters in English or German .
I do not find that very friendly , and who in Central and Eastern Europe understands French ?
But it is encouraging that the Commission wishes by this proposal to promote linguistic diversity in a European Union in which the information society is irrevocably gaining dominance and in which English is usually the language of choice .
Countless problems still remain over the importation of multilingual products and this is why this proposal is so important .
We must seek ways of breaking down the language barriers .
If such ways are found , we shall see a whole lot of new forms of economic activity which will be advantageous to small businesses in particular .
Bravo , Mrs Mouskouri .
My Group too backs Mrs Mouskouri 's amendments which want to see Article 28 and not Article 130 chosen as the legal basis .
The objective here is linguistic diversity .
Industry plays an important part , developing technologies , expanding the language industry , but the preservation of one 's own language is primarily a cultural matter .
Many thanks , Mrs Larive .
You know that the President 's gavel is not to stop you speaking but on the contrary to tell you that you have used up your speaking time .
Mr President , although my Group regards the Council proposal for the establishment of this programme as highly positive it nevertheless regrets that the budgetary allocation envisaged in principle is insufficient to achieve the objectives set by the promotion of linguistic diversity with a view to the new information society .
The European Charter on minority languages forbids any kind of discrimination with regard to their use and the safeguarding of that principle may be endangered by an upsurge in new forms of communication in privileged languages .
On the other hand perhaps the Council is underestimating the aims to be achieved .
If we have proposed in these programmes to guarantee the citizen 's democratic access to information it is essential that it should be available in his own language .
On the other hand I think that if appropriate finance were assigned to this programme it would be in our power to ensure that our cultural diversity in the new information society should indeed be a source of richness and that , furthermore , this rich European diversity should become the key feature distinguishing us from the world of informatics - only in English - which comes from the United States .
Our Group in convinced that the Union 's minority languages as well as of the minority languages brought to us by others whom we welcome to our territory need to be promoted .
That will no doubt help to increase the cultural diversity of this pluralistic and democratic information society which we desire for Europe .
In the Spanish State , where languages like Catalan , Galician and Basque form an important part of our cultural heritage and as such , and in their capacity as official languages , they deserve every possible assistance to flourish and thrive .
Finally , perhaps I may make a reference to languages such as Berber which , apart from being spoken in Spanish territory , is the languages of thousands of emigrants who also help to enrich the Spanish and European cultural heritage .
Thank you , Mr Mohamed Alí , and thank you also Mrs Larive .
When I use the gavel it is only so that you may know that you have used up your time , but you can decide for yourselves in such a quiet and interesting evening as this and in such good company .
Mr President , this report corrects what at times is an unforgivable oversight in the European institutions .
There is much talk of official languages of the Union and it is forgotten that many millions of us citizens speak languages which are not official , though they are official in our own different spheres .
It would be cynical to talk about linguistic diversity without putting these languages on the same footing and would constitute discrimination against the linguistic rights of European citizens .
I would even go so far as to say that these languages need additional support because they are weaker in the face of the challenges posed by the information society .
The Commission says that market forces by themselves are not enough to achieve the multilingual information society in Europe which is essentially a positive measure .
So that is all the more true , if possible for the less wide-spread languages .
Parliament 's action in supporting this aspect in its Committee on Culture is an important advance , as will also be its final approval , I feel sure .
Support for the weaker languages deserves special emphasis , particularly in bilingual regions .
Bilingualism is cultural richness , but it is also an interesting aspect of tolerance and mutual respect .
Having two languages is for some people something which helps us to understand a little better the concept of respect for others , as long as we are able to accept both as appropriate .
We have to make appropriate machinery to ensure that in the information society in which communication will radically change , these languages may develop .
Our world is experiencing two different phenomena , two faces of the same coin : globalization with the new technologies and innovation as a driving force , and at the same time , a return to what is small , to our own , to something with which we can identify ourselves .
Both tendencies are positive and compatible .
I think support for multilingualism in the information society will represent a fine balance between them .
So , Mrs Mouskouri , many thanks for your report , which I am sure will work in that direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my enthusiastic support for Mrs Mouskouri 's report on the adoption of a multiannual programme to promote the linguistic diversity of the Community in the information society .
The report - and the amendments proposed by the Committee on Culture - show a laudable sensitivity and a very positive proposal for the application of the principles contained in the Treaty with regard to cultural policy , the conservation and protection of the Union 's cultural heritage and the application of the principle of unity in diversity .
The report and the amendments it proposes guarantee these principles , pay special attention to the non-official languages of the Union which have a recognized status at regional level and place the emphasis on the application of a policy guaranteeing and promoting the linguistic diversity of the European Union , ensuring multilingual information , including the protection of and help for the so-called minority languages and approving the funds necessary for it by an amount of ECU 20 million , according to the distribution proposed in Amendment 2 .
Vostè , senyor President , comprèn , com a català , l 'especial importància del contingut d 'aquest informe , atès el treball que realitzem per defensar llengües europees que , com la nostra , representen la identitat i la cultura de milions de ciutadans europeus , una riquesa espiritual a la qual Europa no pot renunciar , ans al contrari , ha de promoure i recolçar .
For those who have not been able to follow the dialogue between the President and me , I was telling him in a common language spoken by millions of European citizens that we understand the importance of this report precisely because there are millions of European citizens able to express themselves in their own language , which expresses their identity and which is a spiritual richness which we cannot give up .
Thank you , Mr Gasòliba .
Ladies and gentlemen , although you may have been lost for some of the time , Mr Carles Gasòliba 's speech was very interesting and I think it is also interesting for us to get used to hearing what languages sound like and so , on a day like today and in a debate like this , it seems very appropriate to hear one of the languages which represent the multilingual cultural wealth of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the following quote from a recently published book on tele-translation goes to the heart of the proposal before us .
It reads more or less as follows : now that we are beginning to master the technical problems the real problem of communications is coming to light , and it is enormous .
Various languages wait like stumbling stones on the other side of the electronic highway and fully reveal the problematic nature of cross-cultural communications .
To find solutions , that is the far more difficult task that the Commission has undertaken with this proposal for a pan-European project , together with the Member States and the appropriate private and public institutions .
The report by Mrs Mouskouri , the rapporteur , on which I too want to congratulate her warmly , endorses our analysis of the impact of the information society on the European languages and vice versa .
Nor is there any major difference of view on the actions required , although the European Parliament is rather more ambitious than the Commission thought justifiable at this point .
Let me make it clear from the outset that the multilingual information society programme forms part of the comprehensive action plan entitled ' Europe 's way to the information society ' and is and must be coordinated with other actions provided for in that plan .
After careful analysis of the 59 amendments the Commission decided to accept 21 amendments in full and 16 in part with small textual changes .
For reasons of time I will not read them all out now .
But the Commission does not find itself able to accept the remaining 22 amendments and I will now discuss the most important of these and explain why not .
The European Parliament proposes taking Article 128 as a further legal basis in addition to Article 130 and links this with several other amendments as a logical consequence .
The Commission is adhering to Article 130 ( 2 ) as the legal basis because the main aim is to motivate industry to develop and offer multilingual products and services using advanced technological and linguistic tools .
But its adherence to this legal basis has not prevented it from nevertheless asking the Committee of the Regions to give its opinion , which I am sure you are familiar with .
The people of Europe use many languages in order to communicate and the information society must ensure that they can continue to do so .
The main players who should ensure that the people can use their mother tongue are the many undertakings , the public sector and the private organizations that supply information to the people or receive it from the people and the specialized undertakings and occupations which facilitate the provision of these kinds of services in the various languages .
The actions proposed by the Commission are directed primarily at them , in order primarily to create an awareness , to stimulate cooperation and to make the provision of linguistic services more transparent .
These practical objectives led the Commission to propose Article 130 ( 2 ) as the sole legal basis , even though the Commission fully and entirely appreciates the impact of this programme on other aspects of life and society and in particular on the protection of the linguistic heritage .
The European Parliament regards the Commission 's proposed funding as too modest .
The Commission is assuming that for reasons of subsidiarity the Member States will primarily have to provide the funding , but that the private sector is also likely to invest in it .
The proposed programme is due to run for only three years and it is breaking new ground .
That is one reason to start modestly .
The Commission 's proposed budget of ECU 15 m is indeed limited but , in our view , it is appropriate for financing surveys , promoting awareness , mobilizing those concerned , creating the bases for institutional and linguistic infrastructures and promoting the use of multilingual tools .
May I remind the European Parliament that the general financial plan seriously restricts new budget initiatives and the current Chapter 3 restrictions of the financial perspective are particularly stringent , as Mrs Theato has also just pointed out .
Let me also point out that in line with the joint declaration on financial regulations of 6 March 1995 the Commission does not lay down any indicative frameworks in legal acts that are not the subject of co-decision .
With regard to the allocation of funds , i.e. , Amendment 58 , the Commission can appreciate the emphasis on action lines 1 and 2 , although one must not underestimate the important role of the public sector as the demonstrator of multilingual practice .
In relation to synergy with other programmes I would like to point out that both the Commission and Parliament take the view that successful cooperation is and must be a keynote of this programme .
However , the potential of cooperation and synergy is not restricted to Community initiatives .
It would be counterproductive for this initiative to be isolated from similar national or regional initiatives .
The multilingual information society can basically be regarded as an exercise in European cooperation , but that means that the programme must also be an attractive partner for other initiatives .
Good and transparent management of the programme , broad political support and adequate financing are therefore necessary .
Let me only emphasize , on the basis of my own dossier , that to some extent we also specifically promote minority languages in our INTERREG programme in order to make it clear that they represent a fundamental aspect of European diversity .
So we are fully aware of the regional-policy importance of this subject .
Let me end by thanking Parliament 's committees , and especially you , Mrs Mouskouri , and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media for your constructive and creative proposals .
I am sorry that we differ as regards the legal basis .
Nevertheless we can accept in part the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media 's interpretation of the programme .
We recognize that measures to deal with linguistic communication problems have cultural , social and also political consequences .
But in the Commission 's view the programme is directed above all at industry and the language industry , even if that word does not necessarily fill everyone with enthusiasm .
For legal reasons the Commission cannot support the European Parliament 's proposal .
Nevertheless , the European Parliament and the Commission are following the same direction , although Parliament , as is only its right , is looking ahead a little further and more quickly .
I am convinced that there is a general agreement between Parliament and the Commission on the need to take practical action to promote the development of a multilingual information society that will do justice to European diversity .
Mr President , I put two very specific questions to the Commission .
I can live with the fact that I am not getting an answer for the moment , but I did wonder if I might get an answer later in writing or whether I first need to put my question in writing in order to be sure of an answer .
I would like to know , please .
I am grateful to you , Commissioner , for the replies that you have given us .
I would just like to say that the placing of Europe 's diversity on an industrial footing is very difficult to accept .
It is something that we cannot accept .
Europe needs to create an infrastructure of its own based on its linguistic pluralism , on its multilingual wealth .
Because its culture , to which , in the creation of this Europe , all of the countries will be linked , resides therein .
I think that Europe 's identity is encapsulated in its multilingualism , and restricting that multilingualism to an industrial presentation will restrict the projection of its quality .
Spreading Europe 's identity through the information highways with a quality lower than it would have in the dimension that is necessary for it , namely the cultural dimension , will place limitations on it .
We shall keep on pressing as much as we can for that in the hope that you will be very understanding .
Just a quick word to you , Mrs Mouskouri .
We do not want to industrialize the diversity of Europe but on the contrary use industry , but also the public service and political measures , as instruments for making this cultural dimension of practical use to the people .
That must after all be our objective .
We cannot do that alone as an institution , nor can the European Union do it alone ; to do so we need those who have to provide the resources to enable the people actually to be able to communicate in their own language on the data highway .
I believe we entirely agree on that objective , even if we have different views on the legal basis .
I would like to answer your questions , although I thought I had already done so in the context of the Committee of the Regions .
Perhaps we can clarify the matters that are of special interest to you in a moment .
My answer may have been too general .
We are happy to go into more detail on certain questions if you wish .
Thank you , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.55 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , yesterday morning I raised , under the Minutes , the suggestion that we should record in the Minutes the average cost of roll call votes , because I noticed that there were quite a large number from the previous day .
That cost does not appear , nor does the suggestion about the number of trees that might be involved in a year in roll call votes .
I mention this in particular because the Green Group managed to call for more roll call votes than anybody else .
They should think of the trees !
Mr Kellett-Bowman , that was not the subject of the discussion but of course we will raise it and consider it .
Madam President , I am very sorry but I have to speak up here .
I am not usually inclined to comment on the Minutes , but Mr Kellett-Bowman should remember that the Green Group is not the only one to request roll call votes .
Moreover , the Green Group is very much the group which constantly sees to it that trees are planted everywhere in Europe , forests are protected and roads are not built because they interfere with nature and destroy nature .
So do not accuse the Green Group of destroying the environment by asking for roll call votes .
You , Mr Kellett-Bowman , belong to a group which is constantly advocating trans-European networks which will ruin the natural environment everywhere .
Mrs Van Dijk , we are discussing the approval of the Minutes !
Madam President , I had asked to speak before Mrs Van Dijk began talking about the networks , which cannot be discussed if there are no motorcyclists .
I refer you to the proceedings for 18-19 June , page 18 : in connection with what Mrs Larive said just before Mrs van Dijk spoke .
Mrs Larive has just left for Cuba - I do not know if she has gone for good , I presume she is coming back - but the proceedings say & # x02BC ; lastly , Madam President , an appeal to the motor cyclist himself , 82 years , average value ' .
Motor cyclists are usually on the elderly side when they hang up their helmets for good , but Mrs Larive was not referring to 82-year-old motorcyclists , but to 82 decibels .
Will you have that corrected ?
Mr Wijsenbeek , we are discussing the Minutes .
What you are referring to is the Rainbow edition .
But you can make requests for changes there too if you believe something needs changing .
Madam President , the Schulz report was postponed yesterday and it says in the Minutes that it was deferred to the next part-session .
I would like to know whether the so-called mini-session in Brussels is or is not now a part of this plenary part-session , for that would mean that it is postponed to July , or whether the Brussels part-session should be regarded as a separate part-session .
I would also like to know whether this report is to be taken on Wednesday at the beginning of the part-session or on Thursday during voting time .
Would you please clarify this because it is in no way clear from the Minutes .
Firstly , the part-session in Strasbourg and the mini-session that follows it are regarded as a package and their agendas are drawn up together .
The Schulz report will be put to the vote on the Thursday of the mini-session at 11 a.m.
Madam President , people who are in the chair should express themselves carefully .
There is no such thing as a mini-session .
There are sessions or no sessions .
Unfortunately this expression has become current , but in future I will express myself correctly .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Votes
Madam President , do I understand from Mrs Mouskouri that this extremely long text is being presented as an oral amendment ?
May I ask for clarification , because I was not altogether sure .
Does Mrs Mouskouri 's proposal entail amendment of the financial envelope ?
Because if so , I really wonder whether that can be done in an oral amendment , otherwise could you just read out the one sentence containing the oral amendment .
Because that is not clear at the moment .
Mrs Mouskouri , could you please read out the sentence that is to be added again ?
Madam President , Mr De Vries , yes , indeed , this will replace the first part of Amendment No 33 .
I will read it to you in French in order to be more precise .
The reference amount for the total duration of the programme shall be ecu 20 million , of which ecu 5 million will be subject to the revision of the financial perspective .
The added phrase states that ECU 5 million will be subject to the revision of the financial perspective .
That is the oral amendment .
Is that clear now , Mr de Vries ?
On Amendment No 58 :
Yes , precisely , Madam President , this follows on from Amendment No 33 and means that we should reject the second paragraph of Amendment No 58 .
The first part is exactly the same , following on as it does from Amendment No 33 .
So it should be put to a split vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
The Commission initiative to create a programme to promote linguistic diversity in the Community in the framework of the information society is fundamental for maintaining the Union 's cultural diversity .
An initiative that the excellent Mouskouri report , which I shall vote for today , has undoubtedly improved thanks to the tabled amendments .
I should like to pick out those that change the legal base which makes it possible to bring the proposal through the co-decision procedure and those that help to highlight and strengthen the linguistic plurality of the Union by including regional and minority languages .
Special importance for me as a representative of the people of Catalunya are those amendments that I myself introduced in committee and which mean that Catalan will benefit from the programmes contemplated in the proposal .
In any case , the Mouskouri report is another step along the road towards a European Union that respects its cultural diversity and the signs of peoples ' identities which comprise it and therefore I hope that the Commission will adopt it .
As chairman of the Intergroup Working Party on Minority Languages I congratulate Mrs Mouskouri on her outstanding report and on the fact that the amendments of hers that were adopted today concentrate very strongly on promoting minority languages .
Anyone who , like the rapporteur , is at home in nearly all the cultures of Europe , is aware of the inestimable value of cultural diversity and therefore able to sweep away the widely prevalent trend towards centralism .
I now appeal also to the Council , the Commission and colleagues to maintain the budget line for the promotion of minority languages and , since it was used 100 % and a growing number of tasks need to be carried out , to agree to increasing it by 15 % during the forthcoming budgetary deliberations .
Aid to ACP banana suppliers
The next item is the report ( A4-0182 / 96 ) by Mr Castagnede , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0033 - C4-0187 / 96-96 / 0028 ( SYN ) ) amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2686 / 94 establishing a special system of assistance to traditional ACP suppliers of bananas .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you know that the Lomé Convention guarantees the presence in the Union market of traditional banana suppliers from the ACP countries .
You also know that the creation of a common market organization for this product in 1993 affected the position of the traditional ACP banana suppliers in the Union market .
It was for this reason that , in 1993 , the Union created a special system of technical and financial aid to its traditional ACP banana producers , calculated to enable them to adapt to the new market conditions and , also , to ensure the maintenance of their income .
This special system was defined within the framework of a regulation adopted in 1994 , which formally expired on 28 February 1996 .
The Commission is proposing that we should extend the period of validity of that regulation until 31 December 1996 , for two reasons .
First , the delay in the availability of the statistics necessary to calculate the level of income support ; secondly , the time required to present the projects eligible to benefit in those countries from the Union 's technical and financial assistance .
In principle , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal presents no problem of any kind . That is why the Committee on Cooperation and Development proposed that it should be approved .
However , it turns out , first , that during the past year the banana market in the Union underwent substantial and abrupt changes .
As you know , the Union has expanded to include new Members and , for that reason , the Commission felt it should significantly increase the free import quotas for certain third countries , which are in essence the banana producing countries of Central America whose crops are marketed by the American multinationals .
Apparently , the gate was open too wide .
There was an oversupply in the market , and prices slumped .
Secondly , it so happens that the common organization of the market in bananas is undergoing reorganization and redefinition , and this will be referred to very shortly .
The ACP countries , as traditional suppliers of bananas , are legitimately concerned by these developments and , in particular , by a development which , because it would result in the market being opened up too widely to supplies from third countries , especially those producing at very low cost , threatens naturally to compromise their position in the market .
The ACP - European Union Joint Assembly , meeting in Namibia during March , echoed these concerns and , by a resolution of 22 March , indicated its support for a mechanism which guarantees and perpetuates the special tie of solidarity that links the European Union to these ACP countries .
Your Committee on Cooperation and Development felt that reference should be made to this resolution by the Joint Assembly in the interests of consistency between the positions defended here and those expressed before the representatives of the ACP countries .
The committee wanted to make this reference simply in the form of an amendment , which does not modify the basis of the Commission 's proposal but merely changes its recitals .
So it seemed that there was no legal obstacle whatsoever to a decision by the European Union making reference to the opinion of a consultative body .
I would simply like to make it clear that , if the effect would be to delay the application of the special assistance system , your Committee on Cooperation and Development would in all probability not maintain a position which would produce such a negative effect , the more so since Parliament will very soon be asked to consider the merits of the conditions of the changes in the market organization .
That , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , concludes the remarks I wanted to make in connection with this Commission proposal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Castagnède has accurately explained the meaning of today 's debate on the partial and concrete modification to Regulation 2686 / 94 setting up a special assistance system for traditional ACP banana suppliers .
The Commission is simply proposing to extend the expiry date of the Regulation - 28 March 1996 - until 31 December for reasons which are fully explained by the rapporteur , Mr Castagnède and which I shall not reiterate for time reasons .

The amendment tabled by the Committee on Development is an amendment that takes up , as the rapporteur also said , a motion for a resolution that I myself , together with Mr Robles Piquer , tabled at the ACP Joint Assembly meeting in Windhoek , Namibia and that , with contributions by other members and other groups of ACP representatives , was unanimously adopted .
It is simply a political declaration intended to strengthen the position of both ACP countries and European banana producers , defending what is done by the banana COM .
Defence of Regulation 404 / 93 which is quite relevant as , ever since its approval , the banana COM in Europe has come under constant attack by means of legitimate measures , undoubtedly , in many cases , in most cases , but sometimes using measures that do not seem to be entirely justifiable .
For example , we have known for some months now that up to 100 , 000 tonnes of bananas per annum have been smuggled in through European ports by quite fraudulent means : each bundle of bananas must weigh 18.14 kg but when inspections are carried out it seems that they all weigh more , mostly 19-20 kg .
This is part of a plan to undermine quotas , in other words it is yet another way of undermining or violating current Community rules .
We think that the resolutions proposed by the Committee on Development should be approved as it is defended by Mr Castagnède with the amendments tabled by the Committee on Development .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think I need describe the proposal again because the rapporteur has presented it to you .
So I will only point out that it is urgent to adopt this proposal because the regulation lays down that the income support must be calculated annually in July .
ECU 30 m is entered for this purpose out of the 1996 resources , but until the proposal has been accepted , we will not have the necessary legal basis for allocating them .
Unfortunately the Commission does not find it possible to accept the two amendments , because they are not legally compatible with the text of the regulation , because the Commission does not accept the Windhoek resolution and in particular because the second amendment goes beyond the framework and scale of the resources allocated .
That is why I would ask you to withdraw that amendment .
Thank you , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , I think that Mr Castagnède has gone out but I think that he clearly said that now that the Commission opinion is known - we found out about it a few days ago and it has now been reiterated by Mrs Wulf-Mathies - both amendments should be withdrawn and not put to the vote .
In nay case we would recommend a vote against them .
Madam President , I rise to confirm the point of view put forward by Mr Fernandez Martin .
As soon as the Commission informs us that the adoption of the amendments might result in delaying the implementation of the assistance system , we shall take the responsibility of asking you not to vote on those amendments .
Madam President , this explanation of vote will be very brief .
The consensus which has very clearly formed on this proposal and the pragmatic approach which led us to take all necessary steps to ensure that assistance is expedited require no explanation , but argue in favour of the need for the European Union to accept its historical role and , consequently , to demonstrate its solidarity with these ACP countries , whose economies are highly dependent on one-product systems .
Those systems were established during the colonial period and have been reinforced since these former colonies became independent of their European rulers .
Next , it is important that the European Union should remain faithful to its principles , and in particular to the social clause .
Mr Castagnède , the rapporteur , has moreover reminded us forcefully that , gradually , the Union has been attentive to the social clause and , therefore , to the need to be extremely rigorous with regard to imports of bananas from the dollar areas , where social dumping is widespread and the democratic rules that govern market economies are not properly respected .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Wine
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the wine and sparkling wine sector is regulated by a large number of European regulations .
Over a year ago Parliament delivered its opinion on the common organization of the market in wine .
To our great regret this subject was not taken up under either the Spanish or the French presidency of the Council and nor will Italy reform the wine market in such away as to meet the justified demands of the various wine regions in the European Union and of the wine market .
The European wine description legislation should be checked and reworked thoroughly .
The current description legislation has developed from a compilation of the various provisions in the Member States and at the initial stage it was possible to harmonize only a few regulations with a view to a single market .
Given this background , which was most apparent in the approval or prohibition principle , a very complex , obscure and in part unsystematic set of provisions inevitably developed .
Simplification is urgently needed here in general .
The Commission proposal deals with the amendment of four regulations on wine and sparkling wine .
New developments and knowledge make it necessary to adjust the existing regulations .
The European Parliament was consulted on only two of these four regulations .
But since the main points are to be found in the other two regulations , the Committee on Agriculture decided to give its position on them too .
One important point in the Commission document concerns the indication of the producer .
The Committee on Agriculture considered that in the case of quality sparkling wines the name of the producer must be indicated on the label .
Over and above that , however , the name of the vendor may also be indicated , on a voluntary basis .
Many hotels , restaurants and firms , and the European Parliament too for that matter , offer sparkling wines which indicate not the producer but the hotel or restaurant as the vendor .
That signifies that this cuvée has been specially selected by that hotel or restaurant for its customers .
So the name is a guarantee of the quality and contents of the bottle .
This house-label business offers many sparkling wine firms a considerable sales market .
In Germany alone there are some 20 000 house labels .
This market must not be destroyed .
That is why the EPP Group has submitted a compromise proposal making it optional whether to indicate the vendor .
In some Member States , an imitation sparkling wine is being produced and marketed in Russia as genuine sparkling wine .
This imitation sparkling wine has never seen a grape .
It consists of water , alcohol , liquid sugar and flavourings and colourings and is carbonated .
But the Russian consumer cannot learn this from the bottle because the label is not written in Russian script .
One German firm wants to produce 100 million bottles a year .
That has to be banned !
We cannot have this kind of artificial product being marketed in a sparkling wine bottle .
For of course the consumer believes that is what he is buying .
We want to prohibit the use of sparkling wine bottles for this product .
The report clearly defines which beverages may be bottled in sparkling wine bottles .
In addition to champagne and sparkling wine , beverages which have traditionally been marketed in these bottles may continue to be marketed in them .
But these bottles may not be used for imitation sparkling wine .
Following a judgment by the European Court of Justice , the term ' crémant ' is now authorized on a wider basis .
The Commission has laid down the minimum requirements for the production of crémant .
There must be no deviation from the quality criteria .
After a controversial discussion of this point in the Committee on Agriculture , a compromise proposal has now been submitted .
In future crémant may be produced in all wine-growing regions of the European Community in which quality sparkling wine has traditionally been produced , but subject to strict quality criteria .
The Commission also proposes including the terms ' Qualitätswein garantierten Ursprungs ' and ' Qualitätsschaumwein garantierten Ursprungs ' in the list of terms authorized for Germany .
As rapporteur I welcome that proposal .
That enshrines these two terms in EU law and means that in future they may be used in Germany .
The Commission provides for two new designations for table wines .
The Italian term ' vino tipico ' is to be replaced by ' indicazione geografica tipica ' and the term ' regional wine ' is introduced for table wines originating in the United Kingdom .
There are also to be new terms for indicating the taste of sparkling wine , namely ' brut nature ' or ' no dosage ' .
The term ' brut nature ' is traditionally used in Spain for sparkling wines .
We have to accept this regional fact and enshrine the term in EU law .
Those are the main points of my report .
I thank Members and the secretariat of the committee for the good work done together and would ask you to support my proposals .
Madam President , I would like to pay tribute to Mrs Klaß for her work on this excellent report .
We have all enjoyed the discussions - sometimes very wide-ranging - we have had on it .
Mrs Klaß has borne them with good humour and we have all learned a great deal and I thank her for her work .
From the Socialist Group 's point of view we will be supporting most of the amendments tabled .
On our voting list we made a slight mistake : we will now be supporting Amendment No 11 which Mrs Klaß referred to earlier - so I would remind my Socialist colleagues to vote for Amendment No 11
I particularly welcome Amendment No 10 because it will place a limit on the way in which champagne-style bottles can be used .
In England where we do not produce these beautiful wines there is a development which is to be regretted , namely that manufacturers of alcoholized cola and alcoholized lemonade are putting their products into champagne-style bottles , trying to give the impression that they are of good quality when , in fact , they are absolute rubbish to drink and to taste .
So I hope that Amendment No 10 will play some part in ensuring that this regrettable development stops .
We welcome this report and look forward to it going through hardly amended .
Madam President , this is a proposal for a Council regulation amending four previous regulations concerning provisions on quality wines produced in given regions and on sparkling wines produced in the Community .
It is a proposal with which we are fundamentally in agreement because it meets basic objectives : first of all to unify legislation and adapt it to the needs and realities of European Union wine producers . Secondly because it takes account of some small problems in Member States concerning specific aspects .
I shall speak only about the latter .
We fully agree with the Commission proposal to maintain the use of one , two or three varieties .
We also agree that the name of the producer should be shown , and possibly the name of the seller .
We also back the idea on brut nature - which we shall not develop because everyone here knows what it is about - and the solution found for the problem of crémant which created discriminations between different producing regions in the European Union .
A compromise solution has been found that I think is reasonable for everyone .
As Mr Hallam said we insist on an immediate ban on the bottling of other products in champagne-style bottles , a current trend .
This situation is harming the Union 's producers of the real products to the tune of millions of ecus .
This must be banned and care must be taken to observe this ban throughout the Union , including exports .
Madam President , here then we have four regulations to bring a little order into the confused bundle of legislation in the most delicate of the agricultural sectors : wine and , in particular , sparkling wines .
What a good idea of the Council to have a thorough report by Mrs Klaß who has had to work her way through the many and varied styles in which Community producers perform here .
Yes indeed , because wine is not made solely of grapes , it is also made of culture , and it is specifically those differing practices that frequently conceal serious threats to the moral integrity of wine that has at least and always to be mainly derived from grapes .
Wine production in areas in which grapes do not grow is therefore an industrial and not an oenological practice .
Transporting too many grapes from one region to another distorts one of the basic characteristics of wine which derives its character and identity from its place of registration .
That is stated by Regulation No 2392 / 89 which rightly places a strong emphasis on origin and , in the case of table wines , replaces the weak description ' vino tipico ' with the more robust ' indicazione geografica tipica ' , now finally in force - and , what is more , with retroactive effect .
That same regulation limits to three the grape varieties to be shown on the label .
Frankly , that is still too many for anyone wishing to defend their own personality .
But the proposal with the most bite comes from Regulation 2332 / 92 on sparkling wines .
These are the stars of the market , following in the footsteps of their noble cousin , French champagne .
Quite rightly , the precautions taken here are greater still , but it may perhaps be a little exaggerated to propose a minimum of 90 days on the lees in all cases .
For some sparkling wines that are obtained in autoclaves using agitation , a shorter period will suffice .
Of importance in this regulation is the extension granted to 31 August 1998 for the process of adjusting superior wines using products that did not originate in the area of production , albeit subject to drastic limits .
Moving on to sparkling wines , we are also right to be concerned about the constitution of a product that is held in such high regard .
That is why I am opposed to any concession concerning the use of typical sparkling wine bottles for wines or other food products .
The risk of fraud is always just around the corner and even the smallest concession may encourage it , that is why I have asked that we vote separately on the different parts of Amendment No 10 - the first paragraph is acceptable but thereafter it contains too many dangerous exemptions in regard to other products .
Unfortunately , fraud is already rife on the market , as we were reminded by the rapporteur : there are , for example , the producers who send from France and Germany to Eastern Europe tankers full of grape or other fruit juice to which alcohol is then obligingly added , and this is subsequently sold as sparkling wine in elegant bottles that are easily mistaken for the real thing and , what is more , to complete the deception - beware - the names given on the label are in Italian .
Mr President , the Liberal Group very much supports the work of the rapporteur and most of the amendments , although not those of the ARE .
I was interested to hear Mr Hallam 's comments in the long tradition in the UK of Socialists supporting champagne .
We agree with his comments .
I personally - and the Liberal group - welcome the fact that certain English wines can now have regional designations .
I am still very concerned that no vineyards are able to have quality labels within the United Kingdom .
In my constituency in Fowey in the Camel Valley we have excellent wines which are still not able to have those designations .
With your indulgence I would like to move on to a more important topic .
Last night in my constituency a gentleman called Albert Tong was arrested by the British authorities to be deported to Hong Kong , causing the break-up of a British family .
He is now in hospital with heart condition .
I wish to express my dismay and disgust at those actions .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
It is always a pleasure to deal with people who know what they are talking about and that is quite definitely the case here .
Even if the report looks rather technical at first glance , it does cover major problems as regards content .
Let me particularly emphasize the fact that it is thanks to the rapporteur 's and the committee 's work that regionalization in the wine sector has now been established and trend away from the producer towards the vendor , towards artificial production , has been stopped .
In our group 's view that has something to do with ecology , even if no specific reference is made to it here , because the description of origin allows the consumer to know where a product comes from and to check how it was grown .
In the age of BSE , when we have seen what anonymity and uncontrolled sales can lead to , it is particularly important to be stringent in this field .
Now one could say , in relation to sparkling wine in Russia , that it does not matter what you get drunk on , but of course here we are concerned not with alcohol but with a semi-luxury .
That is why I am very glad that this report was drawn up ; our group supports it and the amendments it proposes .
Mr President , so , while we wait for the end of the saga of the COM for wines and while we wait for the European Commission , scratching its head over its meat problems , to adopt the legislation on registered designations of origin , we are being asked to amend , for the sake of simplicity , this legislation on quality sparkling wines produced in specific regions .
As all speakers have pointed out , this concerns many regions of Europe and especially of France : the Jura , the Loire , Burgundy and of course not forgetting my own region of Languedoc-Roussillon .
I would remind all honourable Members that it was in 1531 - in the XVIth century - that people in the Limoux region began to produce what was to become the world 's oldest dry sparkling wine , even before Champagne , represented by our colleague Bernard Stasi , got to work .
The cooperative cellar at Arques , for example , produces 6 million bottles and serves more than 500 producers .
As to the minimum definition , everyone agrees on it .
100 litres of settled must for every 150 kilos of grapes , the pressing of whole grapes , a maximum sulphur dioxide content of 150 mg , a sugar content of less than 50 g per litre , everyone agrees on these , although it should be specified that secondary fermentation in bottle is necessary and also - something which I regret to see has not been made clear - that the wine must be left on its lees for at least 9 months .
And we all agree with the concept , the idea that crémant must be associated with a specific region to prevent the global insanity of the European Commission endlessly extending the production areas .
Even so , I have certain reservations .
The period of fermentation with the traditional methods is based on that for closed vats , and I can tell Mr Santini that the longer the period of fermentation the higher the quality of the finished product .
So it should be clearly understood that a fermentation period of 90 days is a minimum .
A much greater anxiety , Mrs Klaß , relates to the naming of the winemaker on the label .
I am well aware that this is included in the basic Regulation , but the concept of winemaker is not clear .
A producer is associated with a particular region , whereas the concept of a winemaker may allow the emergence of multicultural , multiethnic , multiregional wines : we are going to find ourselves stirring up wine from Australia , Chile , Argentina , Spain , more of it , if it really is from Spain - and France , all of it bearing hotel labels !
I have heard about hotel labels , restaurant labels , McDonald 's crémant .
So I have misgivings , Mrs Lulling , because the European Commission can always be expected to do its worst - never forget the meat business , remember it for ever .
So it is absolutely essential to prevent the creation of vineyard Coca-Cola and a situation where the multinational Cigrav , which is a winemaker , mixes everything up together and make us a crémant which - if I can say this about a crémant - makes us foam at the mouth .
That is my most important reservation .
Yes to specific regions and no to vineyard Coca-Cola .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank Mrs Klaß for the excellent report she has produced in consultation with the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I also extend my congratulations to my colleague Mrs Barthet-Mayer for the effort that has gone into her numerous amendments .
And , if I may , I should like to make a few comments on the amendments that have been tabled .
First , Amendment No 1 . On the official pretext of easing the administrative burden on winegrowers , this amendment may have the unwanted effect of making it difficult to monitor the quality of wines and grape musts .
Similarly , I shall be opposing Amendment No 4 , because it makes it possible to retain the term ' wine ' for sparkling wines which have not achieved the legally prescribed excess pressure or no longer exhibit that excess pressure .
My reasons are simple : if the product is not of sufficient quality at the end of the production process , or if the storage conditions have not allowed it to retain that quality , it is logical that the product should be destroyed or reprocessed - according to the statutory and recognized oenological practices , naturally - before it is marketed .
As regards the amendments relating to the definition of crémant , about which we have just heard so much , I shall of course be in favour of Amendment No 9 , the result of a compromise reached by the Committee on Agriculture , because crémant must remain a quality product and so correspond to specific standards in terms of traditional vine varieties , pressing rates , maximum sulphur dioxide content and maximum sugar content .
Moreover , the name ' crémant ' represents a particular oenological method and must compulsorily be associated with a specific region within a Member State .
So we can talk about Crémant d 'Alsace , Crémant de Bourgogne , Crémant de Loire , Crémant du Jura , etc . , and not just ' crémant ' on its own .
I shall be voting in favour of Amendment No 10 , and I will ask the rapporteur to accept an oral amendment from me .
This is because the amendment contains the words ' may be put up in ' Champagne ' -type or similar bottles ' .
I would prefer the term ' Champagne ' , which relates to a French registered designation of origin , to be replaced by the term ' sparkling wine ' , which conforms to the original text of the amendment and , moreover , has the advantage of being a generic expression which makes no reference to any particular geographical indication .
With regard to Amendment No 11 tabled by the rapporteur , this states that it is necessary to add ' the name of the local administrative area , or part of the local administrative area , and Member State in which the abovementioned person has his head office ' .
For many undertakings , and especially winegrowing ones , the registered office of the undertaking is located at the same place as the premises where the product is produced .
On the other hand , in the case of large undertakings , a single head office may cover a number of different production establishments .
I shall of course accept all the amendments tabled by my colleague Mrs Barthet-Mayer , with who I have worked very closely .
However , I cannot accept Amendment No 6 , tabled by her and accepted by the Committee , unless the word ' complete ' is deleted .
My reason here is the statement that the term ' producer ' defines the operator who undertakes the complete production of the product .
Moreover , in some regions , it is possible to subcontract certain procedures , bottling for example , a practice more commonly known as bottling to order .
However , in other regions , some wine is sold in barrel .
The definition of a producer must not be too strict , or it would result in unnecessary detail on the label and would disrupt the economic balance existing in our production regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to express my support for the proposals in the reports by Mrs Klaß , which have the advantage of paying special attention to quality wines and sparkling wines - one of the sectors in the European Union that has developed fastest and shown positive developments , in my country , Catalonia , for example , in respect of cava .
This process of improvement and accuracy had to be reflected in the regulations , especially vigilance over quality , because it is by improving quality that this sector can be competitive and face up to other wine derived products .
Mr President , Mrs Klaß ' report proposes a number of important simplifications to the current EU rules and regulations .
So in principle our group very much welcomes it .
But in our view the Commission 's proposal to indicate three instead of two vine varieties on the labels of quality and table wine is not useful because it would lead to even more confusion on the labels .
We should take a decided stand against allowing artificial and imitation sparkling wines , which the consumer has always recognized as such , to be bottled and marketed in traditional sparkling wine bottles .
In the opinion of Austrians , who had to deal with an appalling wine scandal some ten years ago , any measure that describes the quality of a product in clear , honest and comprehensible terms is a good one , because it will do much to restore consumer confidence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present regulation applicable to wine may be regarded , both as regards definition and as regards presentation or labelling , as extremely complex .
Though we may regret this - in that major efforts have to be made to comply with provisions which sometimes seem pernickety - we also have to accept that it is necessary , because of the extreme complexity and diversity of wine itself , the different grape varieties , different regions , different designations relating to ancestral production traditions and customs reflecting the growth of what I will unhesitatingly call ' the civilization of wine ' .
It was logical , then , for the Commission to propose adjustments , and I must thank and congratulate Mrs Klaß , who is absolutely right when she refers to the need to simplify the rules .
So I will dwell briefly on a few specific points , with a view to the joint interests of the producer and the consumer .
As regards quality sparkling wines , the concept of the producer seems to us to be essential : after all , apart from the grower of the grape , it is he who gives the sparkling wine its character , and who guarantees its quality associated with its designation .
It does seem to us essential , therefore , that the name of the producer should appear on the label of this type of wine .
In fact , for us , as consumers , this information is a yardstick for the quality of the product .
Although it should of course be permitted for the vendor to be named , we believe that this should be an optional addition to the naming of the producer .
The best solution would be to make it obligatory throughout the Member States for the producer 's name to be stated in black and white .
If this is perhaps impossible or unacceptable as yet - though we shall come to it one day - it is at least essential to give every Member State the option of doing so .
That is the purpose of the amendment tabled by Mrs Barthet-Mayer . I fully approve of that amendment , and recommend you to vote in favour of it .
As far as crémant is concerned , I will not dwell on matters that have already been covered .
What matters to us , I feel , is to ensure that quality and tradition in wine-growing are respected .
We need to apply strict production criteria and to retain an association between the word ' Crémant ' and the region from which it comes - crémant de Bordeaux , de Moselle , d 'Alsace , etc . : that is the condition for the idea to be accepted by the only traditional regions where quality sparkling wine is produced .
This is the purpose of the amendment tabled by our rapporteur .
It is the result of a carefully negotiated compromise within the intergroup of which I am chairman , which has thus once again shown how useful and dynamic it is .
Mr President , I shall conclude by expressing the hope that matters of this type , brought up on a Friday when the House is sparsely attended , will be better treated in future .
Wine , a fruit of our Mediterranean and European civilization , would , I think , have been deserving of a wider audience .
I urge you then , ladies and gentlemen , to ensure a very large majority for the survival of the values that our Western civilization associates with wine .
Mr President , as this is my maiden speech I should like to begin by thanking the presidency for their kind words of welcome on 20 May and thank all of my colleagues that I have met here in this excellent Assembly .
Since I come from an excellent wine-producing region , the ancient kingdom of Navarre , it is with much interest that I have followed the excellent work done by my colleague , Mrs Klaß .
Unfortunately , I was unable to take part in the debates but I have been particularly concerned about Amendment No 3 changing the date for allowing the use of 15 % of grapes from regions not mentioned on the label .
I am worried that no new date has been set and that this exemption has been extended indefinitely .
This might be the thin end of the wedge and mean that even more than 15 % of other-region grapes could find its way to our cellars , raising problems with DOC .
The quality wine we want to protect must respect the consumer and the region it is supposed to come from .
In any case it is laudable that both the Commission and the Committee on Agriculture are taking an interest in overseeing our wine production and the two million producers in the Union .
There may be concern in some other committees , like that on Economic Affairs , where discussion has begun about the surplus production and how special taxes might foster such a surplus .
I think that production is not too high but demand is too low .
It is the non-producing countries with their high taxes on wine that are preventing lower income families from drinking wine .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that I have been able to discuss two European cultural products while I was here today , namely linguistic diversity and now the diversity and quality of wines and sparkling wines in Europe .
That is why I want to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and especially Mrs Klaß for their very good work on this report .
The report contains a thorough analysis of all four proposals to amend the regulation on quality wines produced in specified regions , sparkling wines and their description , even if the European Parliament was only formally consulted on two of the amendments , namely the amendment of Regulation No 823 / 87 on quality wines produced in specified regions and of No 2332 / 92 on sparkling wines .

The Commission takes note of the call to simplify the legislation on the description and presentation of wine .
It also welcomes the fact that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has approved many of the Commission 's proposals without change .
That applies in particular to Regulation No 823 on quality wines and Regulation No 2332 on sparkling wines ; only one amendment was tabled on the latter .
Unfortunately that amendment calls for the possibility of using ' return ' wine in the production of sparkling wine .
The Commission cannot agree to that without first having an opportunity to discuss it in depth with the Member States .
All the other amendments relate to Regulations Nos 2392 / 89 and 2333 / 92 on the description of wines and sparkling wines .
On Amendment No 1 concerning no compulsory indication of the alcohol content and the nominal volume in the accompanying documents let me make the following comment : the Commission can take account of your views and make it clear that both must be indicated under the implementing provisions .
The Commission cannot , however , accept Amendment No 2 on indicating only two vine varieties on wine labels because the indication of more than two vine varieties is now common practice and improves consumer information .
Nor can the Commission accept the amendment proposing an unlimited extension of the exceptional provision under which quality wines may use the name of a geographical unit smaller than a specified region provided 15 % of the grapes used are harvested outside this geographical unit named on the label .
It could , however , consider extending the deadline so that some Member States can make the necessary adjustments .
Amendments Nos 5 , 7 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 and 18 concern the obligation to indicate the name of the producer or vendor on the label .
The Commission can under no circumstances accept making it compulsory Community-wide to name the producer or vendor on the label , even if in some cases it only applies to quality wines produced in specified regions .
Given the various types of sparkling wine produced in the Community , and in view of the different conditions in the individual Member States , the Commission believes it would be best to leave it up to the Member States to decide whether or not to make it compulsory to indicate the producer .
That is why the Commission finds Amendment No 12 , which provides for the possibility of producer Member States making it compulsory to clearly indicate the producer 's name or firm , entirely acceptable , although the proposal on the optional designation of the vendor can be dropped since that is already regulated by the existing rules and I have understood that the compromise by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also tends in that direction .
The Commission cannot , however , accept Amendment No 5 on a new definition of sparkling wine producers because this definition is confined to sparkling wine produced in specified regions and according to traditional methods of fermentation in the bottle , which precludes from the outset sparkling wine produced in specified regions according to the pressure-vessel method .
The Commission can accept Amendment No 8 concerning the indication of the sugar content of sparkling wines because it clarifies the conditions for the use of the proposed new designation .
Regarding Amendment No 9 introducing additional criteria for the use of the term ' crémant ' , the Commission agrees with some of the additional criteria proposed by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for instance that the Member States must decide whether this term should be used in a specified region .
But the Commission found it unacceptable for the term ' crémant ' only to be used in regions which have traditionally produced this product .
It therefore proposes - and from what some speakers have said I think there would be a consensus on this - that this rule should apply for all quality wines produced in specified regions in which the prescribed technical rules and therefore also the quality criteria are observed .
With regard to the use of traditional vine varieties , the Commission does not consider it necessary to apply this new criteria to ' crémant ' since it already applies to all quality wines produced in specified regions .
Finally , the Commission can accept Amendment No 10 banning the use of sparkling wine bottles or bottles of a similar type for what are called imitation sparkling wines because it is designed to make the products that have traditionally used these types of bottle more recognizable and to prevent the public from being misled .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
I support this defence of quality products associated with particular regions , particular varieties in the case of wine , and very strict traditional methods .
Today , we are concerned with the crémants .
Their name cannot be given to just any sparkling wine , some of which have never seen a single grape !
Some time ago , we were defending the Champagne designation - and rightly so - prohibiting even the use of the term ' Champagne-type ' .
Today , the problem is crémant , whether it comes from the Loire , the Jura , Alsace , Languedoc or Luxembourg .
There can be no question of allowing any old sparkling wine to add to the confusion already caused by the shape of the bottle by deceiving the consumer with an ambiguous label .
Our group , being concerned to ensure respect for traditional and regional products , has expressed the desire both within the Committee on Agriculture and in the plenary that crémant should remain a quality product complying with strict oenological and production standards .
That is why we helped to draft , and supported , the amendments setting a maximum content of sulphur dioxide ( 150 mg / l ) , a sugar content of below 50 g / l , a pressing rate limited to 100 litres of settled must for every 150 kg of grapes , and wines produced from traditional grape varieties .
These standards , of course , define a minimum quality level in order to be permitted to use the term ' crémant ' .
But the Member States , the institutions responsible for registered designations of origin and the winegrowing syndicates must always be able to adopt stricter standards if they so desire .
The use of the term ' crémant ' must always be associated with a name identifying a production region .
I stress the word always , because I know that some Member States and some third countries would like to use the word ' crémant ' on its own , without associating it with a production region .
Their aim would be to make ' crémant ' a manufactured product of constant quality , irrespective of any typical features associated with region , vintage or harvesting and winemaking conditions .
In order for crémant to remain a traditional product , therefore , an association with a region is essential .
Crémant d 'Alsace differs in composition , grape variety and characteristics , from the crémants from the Loire , Burgundy , the Jura , etc. and it must remain different .
Our Alsace growers , our winegrowing syndicates and the INAO ( National Institute of Registered Designations of Origin ) have worked for more than twenty years to ensure that Crémant d 'Alsace is what it is , and we must not allow community legislation , which will be replaced in the medium term by that of the IWO ( International Wine and Vine Office ) to destroy the heritage of our products .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Ornamental horticulture
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0446 / 96-0-0118 / 96 ) by Mr Jacob and Mr Filippi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Commission , on the Community initiative to assist ornamental horticulture .

Mr President , first I want to thank Mr Jacob and Mr Filippi for their oral question because I consider it important for Parliament to concern itself with this particular economic sector .
As you know , the Commission has submitted a proposal on measures to promote the marketing of live horticultural plants and goods .
The purpose of this proposal is to support national programmes to promote the use of live horticultural plants and goods produced in the Community , not just in the Union but in third countries too .
The Community budget will bear 60 % of the total costs of the programme , which should amount to a maximum of ECU 10 million a year .
The Commission is aware that the trade associations would like more funds to be allocated .
The ECU 10 million proposed by the Commission is , however , comparable to the amounts available for advertising measures in other important agricultural production sectors , such as the dairy sector .
The Commission is assuming that these programmes will have a positive effect on the incomes of the farmers concerned since general advertising measures of this kind have proved successful in the past and have markedly improved turnover and consumer interest in ornamental plants .
Mr President , obviously ornamental horticulture is a sector of high ambitions in many countries which have concluded or would like to conclude a free trade agreement with the European Union .
It has gone unnoticed that the European Union has already granted considerable trade concessions in this ornamental horticulture sector to countries which are actual or potential exporters of these products .
I do not wish in any way to argue in favour of a more protectionist policy on imports of ornamental products .
And the European Union has an interest in having free access to third country markets .
Nevertheless , because of the great pressure from imports from third countries and because its own production has increased , the ornamental horticulture sector frequently suffers the problem of unduly low prices and incomes .
Every effort must thus be made to improve the market position of ornamental horticulturalists in the European Union .
The European Commission clearly has a job to do here in launching a Community initiative .
With this in mind it is useful to make a comparison with the fruit and vegetables sector which is not unrelated to ornamental horticulture .
In the fruit and vegetables sector the Commission proposed strengthening this sector by means of support for certain activities of producer organizations .
This was to be done primarily by means of a Community contribution to action funds held by these producer organizations .
Might the Commission consider a similar policy for ornamental horticulture , perhaps in an amended form ?
The area concerned is the marketing activities of the producer organizations .
With fruit and vegetables payments made be made for not selling , and there may be compensatory payments for market intervention .
This does not arise in ornamental horticulture and would not have to be encouraged .
But for most other marketing activities , primarily promotion , the system proposed for fruit and vegetables could also apply to ornamental horticulture .
Is the Commission prepared to look at this and make funds available ?
This would provide a fairer deal for this sector which all too often ends up as the poor relation in EU talks on free trade .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the appropriate exploitation of the natural resources of European regions must be stimulated and preserved in order to protect the lives of their populations and usually modest resources .
When those regions suffer from natural disadvantages and their development has to be faster or more significant , that obviously calls for greater protection of those resources and the potential that they offer , especially when it is a question of agricultural production .
The defence of ornamental plant and flower production is extremely important in the European Union and in the country I represent , especially the autonomous region of Madeira .
Given the current imbalances in the marketing of exported flowers , because of trade agreements with non-Community countries in which due attention was not paid to their impact on the economies of Member States , the Commission must take urgent action , introduce financial aid and take other measures so that production can be preserved and , better still , so that it can properly expand .
It must not be forgotten that , as well as all the European Union support to Member States and their producers , it is vital to apply to our production - and not only farming production , but especially quality production at good prices and of manifest interest for the whole European economy - the principle of Community preference which should always figure and been observed in cooperation agreements with third countries .
The problem of unemployment is now at stake and we do not want it directly or indirectly worsened .
To go off on a slight tangent , I recall that in one way or another Community preference has been mentioned or applied but only in a few cases and when the interests or strength of stronger countries is at stake .

I sincerely congratulate Mr Jacob and Mr Filippi on the relevance of their oral question on this issue .
As for the amendments to the text of the resolution tabled by Mr Mulder , I cannot support his first amendment on the application of VAT but I fully back his suggestion about creating a quality label that properly applies to present and future farm production .
Mr President , the Commissioner can count herself fortunate this morning .
Not only is she dealing with two European cultural products , she is getting a third one this morning , European flowers and ornamental horticultural products .
This sector is currently in some danger , as a result of the conclusion of all manner of free trade agreements which are largely disadvantageous to this sector .
They are disadvantageous because in those countries with which agreements are being concluded horticulture is extremely important and much of the produce is exported to Europe .
What is important to us is that the conditions of competition should be the same .
It seems to me not very fair that we in Europe should impose all manner of strict environmental requirements on horticulture and that we should import flowers from producers who do not have to meet such requirements .
Hence my argument in favour of a quality mark .
Another point : more promotional funds , not 0.05 % of total sales in the sector but I would say about 0.5 % of the value of the sector .
Mr President , ornamental horticulture is having a difficult time at present .
Growth is stagnant and competition is particularly fierce as a result of free trade agreements with countries such as Morocco .
A strong boost is thus needed to sales of this economically important sector by means of marketing and promotional activities .
In this respect the Commission 's creation of a promotional fund is a welcome initiative .
But the 10 million ECU budgeted for it are totally inadequate .
Thanks to the lowering of tariffs on imports from third countries the Commission will lose some 60 million ECU .
In fact this is a form of subsidy to ornamental horticulture in those countries .
The 10 million ECU which the Commission is earmarking for the European promotional fund is in stark contrast to this .
It is altogether reasonable to support the promotional fund too to the tune of 60 million ECU .
Together with the 40 million ECU which the private organizations themselves spend on marketing and promotion , that makes an available total of 100 million ECU which is still well below the 2 % of the value of the trade which the Commission recommended for this objective in an earlier study .
Let us not forget either that this fund is the only form of European aid to ornamental horticulture .
Other sectors receive enormous sums of money .
Lastly , I would ask the Commission to press for cut flowers to remain in the low VAT band .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I just wanted to say that in my country , in Catalunya and the País Valencià , the production of ornamental plants is an important crop that has replaced other crops for many years now .
We are quite aware that the European Union has to reach agreements with third countries , especially North African countries .
The Barcelona Conference was quite explicit on this score .
But reaching trade agreements with these countries does not mean neglecting or undermining the needs of the ornamental plant sector in the European Union .
I therefore think that what Mr Mulder said is important - there must be fair competition and proper environmental conditions must be demanded of countries exporting flowers to the Community so that we can safeguard our own sector , a very important one in the Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in my country too ornamental horticulture is going through a difficult period for the reasons already stated but primarily too as a result of the great difference in the VAT rate between ourselves and our neighbours .
The Commission proposal which sought a solution was blocked for a long time by the Belgian Government .
Its view was that from 1995 the normal rate had to apply in all Member States .
Last year it even went to the Court and brought an action against seven Member States .
This attitude is hardly helpful to the ornamental horticulturalists .
The Belgian Government is inconsistent too , because it is not in favour of raising the reduced rate on firewood and wool , principally products from French-speaking Belgium , but is in favour of reducing the normal rate on cut flowers which are principally grown in Flanders .
Fortunately a preliminary agreement seems to have been reached within COREPER on the application of a reduced rate .
I hope the ECOFIN Council will ratify that agreement on 8 July next .
I also hope the Commission will quickly come up with measures to keep the sector competitive .
Mr Mulder 's suggestion of a quality mark is certainly worth investigating too .
I would just like to add two comments to what I said earlier , firstly on Mr Sonneveld 's suggestion about the question of comparable treatment with the fruit and vegetable sector and secondly in relation to VAT .
I also thank Mr Mulder for presenting me here with another bouquet of cultural products of Europe .
On the question of comparability with the fruit and vegetable sector let me point out again on behalf of the Commission that of course the horticultural sector has its own characteristics that are not comparable with those of other sectors , including fruit and vegetables .
It is , however , true that increased imports from third countries are putting pressure on our own producers ' incomes .
In order to remedy this situation , a rule was introduced in the EU organization of the market on adherence to minimum prices for products imported from Mediterranean countries together with a protective clause that will be applicable from 1 January 1997 under the new generalized system of preferences .
In the Commission 's view these measures , together with the above support programme , suffice to maintain the dynamism of the sector .
As regards VAT , i.e. , the reduced VAT rate , I hope that the compromise reached in the Council by the presidency will be adopted at the next Council meeting and that VAT can therefore soon be reduced for this sector .
In accordance with Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received two motions for resolutions .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Motion for a resolution B4-0732 / 96
We cannot support a proposal which seeks to provide support of ECU 60 million per year for horticulture .
It is unreasonable that every single sector of agriculture should receive additional support every time it gets into difficulties .
After all , this does not happen with other sectors of the economy , such as industry and services .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Aid to the Slovak Republic
The next item is the report by Mr Konecny ( A4-0157 / 96 ) , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision repealing Decision 94 / 939 / EEC providing further macro-financial assistance for the Slovak Republic ( COM ( 96 ) 0009 - C4-0154 / 96-96 / 0018 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , when the Commission and Parliament decided at the turn of 1994 / 1995 to grant the Slovak Republic a loan of ECU 130 million it did so with the intention of supporting a positive course of economic reform , in particular by ensuring that it would not be threatened with balance of payments problems .
The reason this decision is now to be repealed is that both these objectives have become obsolete .
Firstly , the economic situation in Slovakia had already begun to change in 1994 , which led to impressive growth rates , a marked fall in the inflation rate and above all a change in the balance of payments and current account .
These showed surpluses again as early as 1994 .
Under these circumstances it is obviously no longer necessary to grant a balance of payments loan , for which the EU would have stood guarantee .
This indisputable economic success , on which Slovakia must certainly be congratulated , is , however , only one reason why we should now repeal our decision .
The second , equally significant one is the fact that the negotiations with the new Slovak Government of the time on the economic conditions that were to be tied to this loan had reached a dead end by the spring and summer of 1995 .
Slovakia neither proved willing to repeal the protectionist measure of a 10 % import levy nor - which I at least consider even more serious - did it indicate that it was prepared to repeal the change of course in its privatization policy at the time .
And this without doubt takes us to the crux of our disagreement with the Slovak Republic and its current government , which neither can nor should be concealed in this context , although I am quite deliberately confining myself to the economic aspects and not taking into consideration the many political questions which have also been discussed and criticized in this House .
After all the European Parliament sees it as its particular task to support movements towards reform in the Central and Eastern European states on a basis of solidarity , since they create the conditions for further steps towards integration and eventually in many cases for membership of the Union .
That includes , for instance , the creation of sound economic structures .
I must express my doubts about their ' soundness ' and therefore about the success of the current economic course being pursued in Slovakia .
This year there is a deficit again in its foreign trade balance .
One might ask whether it is really sound for two undertakings each to account for almost 20 % of all exports , namely on the one hand a refinery which has no raw materials basis in the country itself , and on the other hand a steel works , whose most prominent products are certainly not suited to peaceful uses .
Then we have the form of privatization , which we imagine as fair , transparent and forward-looking .
The repeal of the former programme of voucher privatization is extremely problematic from that point of view .
In the view of many observers , the form of what is called management buy-outs that is generally chosen now does not just squander the national wealth but in particular forms a basis for non-transparent power structures in the Slovak economy , which are no less than an invitation to suspicion .
Privatization should include an orderly economic life , and that cannot be reconciled with events such as occurred two weeks ago when the management of a large undertaken was dismissed and led away by armed works guards , only to come back the following day under a police escort which in turn disarmed the works guards .
Nor can it be reconciled with government crises that are sparked off by arguments about which party 's sphere of influence a supposedly privatized undertaking is to come under .
I quite understand that a nation that only became independent so recently feels particularly sensitive .
And it is certainly not an easy task to turn a part of what was once a unitary economy into a national economy .
Slovakia is extremely sensitive about anything that looks like interference or a patronage , and it deserves our understanding for that too .
But it is without doubt our duty and our right to call , without any arrogance but emphatically , for the establishment of the common economic values characteristic of our Community .
We hope and wish that Slovakia will correct its course and move politically and economically towards the common values on which the Union is based .
Mr President , After this excellent report by Mr Konecny , I can be very brief .
This Parliament 's Group of the Party of European Socialists will fully support this report .
I believe the rapporteur 's statement complemented the report extremely well and threw great light on the complexity of the European Union 's relations with the Slovak Republic .
Given the positive trend of the Slovakian economy which has been referred to , and which of course led to today 's decision , it really is incomprehensible why Slovakia is still imposing a 10 % import levy .
At its second meeting in Brussels early this month the EU-Slovakia Joint Committee unanimously called for its abolition .
We are assuming that this demand will be met in the foreseeable future .
We also believe that the already mentioned , encouraging economic figures of the Slovak economy may also give cause for a certain optimism so that the political inadequacies rightly referred to by the rapporteur can be remedied in the foreseeable future .
We are of course very pleased , given the budgetary situation in the European Union , that today 's decision will relieve some of the pressure on a somewhat tight area , namely the European Guarantee Fund .
Mr President , the reason I like the report by Mr Konecny so much is because it paints a differentiated picture of the differentiated situation in Slovakia , which is usually depicted in a simplistic manner .
I am pleased with his reference to the fact that through their hard work in the recent years of change , the Slovakian people helped ensure that the money we have already granted is in a sense flowing back to us .
OK , we no longer have it , but in a sense it is flowing back to us .
I think we may conclude from this that Slovakia is on the right path in many areas .
But I can also understand the concern he expressed in paragraphs 9 and 10 of his explanatory statement , both as regards privatization and the accompanying concentration of power in what are possibly the wrong hands , and as regards the political framework conditions .
I think it is important not to separate the economy and the political framework conditions , for you simply cannot have a working market economy the rule of law also prevails .
That is why I would point out - as the rapporteur did in his report - that it is not just the language law he mentions but also the criminal law that was recently introduced for allegedly anti-state opinions expressed abroad that are likely to destroy international confidence in Slovakia .
On Wednesday the vice-president of the ' coexistence ' movement of the Hungarian ethnic group in Slovakia was a guest of the inter-group working party on minority languages which I chair , and he told us about this problem and about the problem of the administrative reform , which is an attempt to rob the minority of the basis of their livelihood .
We must continue to keep a careful eye on this situation .
We should not try to tell them what to do but should distinguish on the basis of dialogue between the Slovakian people and various wrong turns .
We have always supported self-determination for the Slovakian people .
But this self-determination is only possible for the smaller nations of Central Europe if fragmented artificial states are replaced by a new , large entity that links the nations together , namely if the European Union is enlarged to the east .
The peoples of this region must not confront one another but form a community that binds them together .
That is why Slovakia must remain in the front row of countries we hope will become Member States .
To support this is an important task , which is why I am glad that Mr Konecny has taken this matter up as he has .
I believe we should certainly not slam the door on Slovakia and use the fact that economic successes have been achieved but that there are also points of criticism in order to enter into a differentiated dialogue with the Slovakian people , who clearly belong with us .
Mr President , it is of course good news that a country previously promised macrofinancial assistance does not need it and , as Mr Posselt says , the money thus comes back .
We are happy with that .
Slovakia , Mr President , has seen unexpectedly positive economic development : economic growth of 5 to 6 % , a sizeable improvement in the balance of payments - from a one billion dollar deficit in 1993 to a small surplus in 1995 - and a rapid fall in inflation .
This is an impressive achievement , and many a country of the Union would do well to emulate it .
Slovakia is now able to operate in the capital market on its own account .
This is all the more remarkable in that institutionally and economically quite a few problems remain .
Slovakia is reluctant to agree to the terms attached to the macro-financial assistance it had requested earlier , and the privatization process in particular was a point of concern to would-be lenders .
The European Union must continue to pay appropriate attention to this country by means of structured dialogue .
In the first place - and the two previous speakers have already said that - an eye must be kept on the political situation and rights of minorities .
For the time being it would appear impossible for Slovakia to join the Union on the basis of the current situation , but the same goes for privatization .
The exemption of major areas of the economy creates great problems .
Broad dialogue with the Slovak authorities would appear appropriate .
And may I once more compliment Mr Konecny on this report .
Mr President , I too shall be supporting Mr Konecny 's report , but like all those who have spoken before me I must also express my concern at developments in Slovakia .
It may well be that Slovakia does not need this loan , but it may primarily be a signal from the Meciar Government that it does not need the Union .
It is precisely this which bothers me , because I know that the great majority of Slovaks think otherwise .
The problem is of course that the Meciar Government has so far always ignored the pressure put on it by the Union .
Examples have been given here , of action by the Meciar Government against minorities in the use of language , also for example the redrawing of provincial borders to ensure that the Hungarians will not be in the majority in one of the provinces , the laws on seditious talk , and so on .
I think the Meciar Government has to remember that it has to respect human rights , that it has to respect democratic principles .
I think it is very important in the near future , if the door is not to be shut in Slovakia 's face , to encourage NGOs from the West and from Slovakia to contact each other and try jointly to get a dialogue going from the bottom up .
I think quite honestly that this may achieve more than what we have been doing so far with our pressurizing of Slovakia , though this must of course continue otherwise Meciar will simply carry on as before .
Mr President , Slovakia 's economy is doing so well that foreign help with its balance of payments is no longer needed .
The economy is growing considerably and unemployment is falling .
Reasons enough to vote for the Commission 's proposal to end macro-financial aid .
But there are also economic minus points .
The privatization programme is stagnant and the level of investment is very low .
The question is thus whether the economic recovery is sufficiently sustainable , especially as Slovak exports are largely generated by just two companies and are heavily dependent on imports of cheap raw materials from Russia .
So for the longer term not all the economic signals are green .
The greatest problem , however , is the political problem .
It is well known that there is tension between the president and the prime minister .
There is no media freedom and life continues to be made difficult for the Hungarian minority .
There is also notoriously the law on protection of the republic under which criticism of government policy may be a criminal offence .
Commissioner van den Broek has repeatedly raised these matters with the Slovak Government .
That critical dialogue should be continued .
The tempo of change may be somewhat hesitant , but the changes do have to be in the right direction .
Mr President , the Council proposal to repeal the financial assistance and the Slovak Government 's rejection of further financial assistance is presumably based on the fact that Slovakia no longer wants to follow the path proposed by the European Union , in particular in its privatization policy .
Moreover , the Slovak Government is not prepared to suspend the 10 % import levy on foreign goods .
A further reason is probably the Slovakian nuclear policy .
Slovakia is obviously not prepared to continue the construction of Mochovce according to Western safety standards and at the same time to close down the obsolete Bohunice nuclear power station .
What does that mean in terms of cooperation between the European Union and the Slovak Republic ?
For with the association agreement on the one hand and the disappearance of the financial aid and the conditions tied to it on the other , however much understanding we have for its difficult position , it will become easier for the Slovak Government to revert to a planned economy .
For all these reasons the European Union must make greater efforts to seek dialogue with the Slovak Government in order to prevent Slovakia from pursuing a policy that tends to move away from Europe again instead of towards Europe .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes Mr Konecny 's report on behalf of Parliament 's Committee on External Economic Relations , which supports our proposal to repeal the financial assistance to Slovakia .
In 1995 the Commission held talks with the Slovak Government on the economic-policy conditions to which the loan was to be tied .
No agreement could in fact be reached during these talks because the Slovak Government could not decide to take various measures that the Commission considered essential and in particular , as all the speakers have pointed out , rapidly to abolish the 10 % supplementary import levy which Slovakia has imposed since 1994 .
Moreover , the Slovak Government decided to cancel the voucher-privatization plan , which the Commission regarded as a highly important precondition for payment of the loan .
Because of this about-turn in its privatization policy , the interim review provided for under the standby credit agreement with the IMF could not be carried out .
This led the World Bank to break off the talks on a structural adjustment loan for the Slovak financial and business sector .
Meanwhile , as has also been pointed out , the balance of payments situation in Slovakia has improved markedly , so that the Slovak Government has declared it is no longer interested in continuing the programme agreed with the IMF .
In view of these facts and in particular of the inadequate structural reform carried out by the Slovak Government , the retention of the supplementary import levy and the marked improvement in the Slovakian balance of payments , the Commission proposes repealing the Council decision on financial assistance to Slovakia .
In a letter the deputy prime minister and minister of finance of Slovakia addressed to the Commission at the beginning of the year , he took note of the Commission 's proposal to repeal the financial assistance and conceded that this assistance is no longer justified .
Once this assistance has been repealed , the necessary budgetary rectifications will of course have to be made .
Let me point out that regardless of these events the Commission will continue its critical dialogue with the Slovak Government .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Fishery products from Ceuta
The next item is the report ( A4-0154 / 96 ) by Mr Valdivielso De Cué , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Regulation opening and providing for the administration of Community tariff quotas for certain fishery products originating in Ceuta ( COM ( 95 ) 0687 - C40134 / 96-95 / 0351 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , in March the Council consulted the European Parliament on the proposal for a regulation opening and providing for the administration of Community tariff quotas for certain fishery products originating in Ceuta .
The legal basis chosen by the Commission is the Spanish Act of Accession , in particular Article 25.4 , calling for the opening of the quota to be regulated by a Council regulation and also calling for the European Parliament 's opinion .
I would like to remind you that Spain has three customs systems : one covering the mainland and the Balearics , the customs union with the European Union ; one for the Canaries , and another for the territories of Ceuta and Melilla situated on the Mediterranean coast of North Africa .
Once the report was assigned to the REX Committee we contacted the people of Ceuta in order to discover the social and economic reality there so that this report would be as objective as possible .
Analysis of our report shows clearly that Ceuta is a city in decline , lacking land , water and energy and that the free port is also in decline , as we shall see .
84.5 % of the population lives off the tertiary sector and is highly dependent on the current customs set up .
This situation changed after the signing of the Mediterranean Agreement between the European Union and the kingdom of Morocco , setting up a free trade area over 12 years , breaking the previous trade specialisation model and raising problems of the future viability and economic survival of the city .
Analysis shows the need for a new development strategy for Ceuta .
On this score , we must consider using customs policy measures - in the REX Committee - as an instrument of economic and social cohesion for ultra-peripheral regions .
Although the European Union has co-funded in Ceuta aquaculture activities and has started up a fish farm with genuine success , we think that it should also use - as a tool for boosting the economy and creating jobs- since there is a market - the possibility of adopting customs measures since Ceuta , although a part of a European Union Member State has a separate customs system ; especially bearing in mind that extending the quota proposed in this report , together with the REX Committee 's own amendments , would not distort the Community sea bream and sea bass market , as these are the products concerned and which enjoy full and growing demand .
Therefore logic calls for an increase in the tiny quota of 200 tonnes proposed by the n to 1000 or 1200 tonnes in accordance with the projection included in the draft resolution .
The knock-on effect on the g market would be very limited - not to say practically nil - other than in southern Spain . On the other hand the development of this activity would be beneficial for the GDP of the city of Ceuta , possibly as much as a 2 % increase .
We think that employment would go up by 0.5 to 1 % . The economy would also be diversified whereas at the moment it is in dire straits as we have already said , for reasons already explained .
Therefore the REX Committee is proposing to the Commission and the Council to extend the Community quota for sea bass and sea bream .
This extension would result in a 69 , 000 ECU loss for the Community budget but would harmoniously consolidate and develop industry and help the economic diversification of the region as the quotas could be gradually increase over the next two years .
That is why we are asking the Commission to draft a technical report in order to assess the effects of the planned trade liberalisation and relations between the European Union and Morocco , that so much affect the city of Ceuta . This petition would also be extendible to the situation in Melilla .
To sum up , we should like to see management of quotas as an instrument of social cohesion in a declining region .
Mr President , the Liberal Group fully endorses Mr Valdivielso 's report , and I compliment him on it .
The Commission 's proposal for a new tariff quota for certain fish species merits support , but more desirable still , in all honesty , is a doubling of the quota for sea bass and sea bream , as the rapporteur proposes .
Ceuta is greatly affected by the European Union 's new Euro-Mediterranean policy .
The gradual creation of a free trade area with neighbouring Morocco will , as we all know and as Mr Valdivielso has already said , totally remove Ceuta 's trade advantages .
In order to strengthen local aquaculture and for reasons connected with diversification of the economy it is thus desirable that we should create this quota .
Aquaculture in Ceuta has great potential .
This tariff quota may boost Ceuta 's economy but will have very little effect on aquaculture in the Union .
So anyone who urges caution on environmental grounds should be very careful and bear in mind that this quota means only 0.18 % of the Community market 's absorption capacity , in other words it is well short of the 2-10 % of capacity .
Furthermore , demand for sea bass and sea bream is rising in the Union and a doubling of the quota , as I have indicated , would thus be a good thing from that point of view as well .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mr Valdivielso de Cué for his excellent report on quotas for certain fishery products originating in Ceuta .
As you know , Ceuta is in an extremely complex situation .
It is situated on the periphery of the European Union but it suffers from many additional problems .
There is also the other geographical problem , the fact that it is situated on the African continent .
Other questions have created a difficult situation .
Ceuta 's economy depends heavily on the tertiary sector and this has used up much of its potential while it continues to need to expand its economy in order to deal with its social needs .
If Ceuta 's economy is to be maintained it needs a boost in terms of increased activity in the primary and secondary sectors , especially the primary one .
Yet its geographical position presents the main obstacle to its development . An additional problem lies in the restricted territory of Ceuta and its soil and climatic features which make the development of farming impossible .
The fishery sector of Ceuta suffers from the same problems as the rest of the sector in the Community , due to a lack of resources .
The geographical situation again hinders marketing and this is all made worse by the nature and obsolescence of its fishing fleet .
Despite all these problems , the conditions in Ceuta are such that the development of economic sectors outside the tertiary sector is prevented .
This is due to the fact that products face the same cost of access to Community markets as Moroccan products . However wage costs and social security are far higher than those in Morocco .
Moreover , Ceuta does not enjoy the preferential quota treatment granted to Morocco . Since Ceuta is not part of the customs union , products from the city face a much harsher quota regime than Moroccan products .
Although this is adapted to the tertiarisation of the Ceutan economy , it prevents the development of activities based on other sectors .
Here is a paradox : the European Union has funded a project whose products face serious marketing problems stemming from the customs regime of Ceuta .
Marketing aquaculture products from Ceuta can only be carried out in the European Union and , unless the customs regime for these products is changed , Community aid and investment will be money down the drain .
The proposal for a Council regulation has no other virtue than to strike a certain coherence between the Community 's structural policy and certain paradoxes inherent in the Customs Union .
However , there is a problem which lies in the fact that this is a static position and economic activity is not like that nor , by definition , can it be .
This is all the more so when an activity is being started up .
The rapporteur has found a worthy solution to this problem within the framework defined by the proposal for a Council regulation , increasing the quota for fresh or frozen sea bass and sea bream .
This will give the Ceutan aquaculture industry a breath of fresh air and at least help to start up the activity and seek markets with better future prospects .
But it must be taken into account that in the medium term this quota will have to be revised upwards .
Finally I should like to repeat my thanks to Mr Valdivielso de Cué for his report .
Mr President , Mr Valdivielso de Cué 's report on the tariff quotas for certain fishery products originating in Ceuta very clearly describes the current economic situation in Ceuta and the prospects of developing its aquaculture .
Ceuta is part of the national territory of Spain but not of the Community 's customs territory .
Protocol No 2 to the Act on the Accession of Spain and Portugal applies to trade between Ceuta and the Community .
The purpose of this proposed regulation is to extend the provisions applicable in the preceding year and to expand them by adding further fish varieties .
Let me give my position on the individual amendments . Amendment No 1 : since Ceuta is not listed in the declaration on the outermost Community regions annexed to the Treaty on European Union , it cannot be regarded as such a region in this regulation .
Amendment No 2 : the Commission can accept this additional recital .
Amendments Nos 3-5 : the purpose of these amendments is to increase the newly proposed tariff quota for sea bream and sea bass from 100 tonnes to 200 tonnes .
In view of the fact that production of these fish exists in the Community too and any increase in the proposed quotas would put the unanimous adoption of the regulation by the Council at risk , the Commission takes the view that the quotas should not be changed .
For if the Council did not adopt the regulation , that would mean that none of the proposed tariff quotas could be applied because the existing regulation has expired .
On the impact-assessment report you request , I wo